S/PV.8814

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8814th meeting

Thursday, 8 July 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De Rivière. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Mr. Abarry
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Roscoe
Mr. Mills
Mrs. Nguyen

Agenda
Peace consolidation in West Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (S/2021/612)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-18274 (E)
*2118274*

S/PV.8814

Peace consolidation in West Africa

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace consolidation in West Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel (S/2021/612)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Mr. Khatir Mahamat Saleh Annadif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel; and Ms. Chantal Ayemou, President of the
Réseau Ivoirien pour la Défense des Droits de l’Enfant
et de la Femme.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2021/612, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel.
I now give the floor to Mr. Annadif.
Mr. Annadif (spoke in French): It is an honour and
a pleasure for me to be here before the Council today
to present the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2021/612), on the activities of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), whose
activities I have been leading for almost two months.
The report is structured around the main challenges
facing the countries of the subregion, in particular
security challenges, challenges related to electoral
processes, challenges linked to the representation of
women and young people in decision-making bodies,
and challenges linked to climate change.
As soon as I took office, I undertook a regional tour
during which I have been able to meet with most of the
Heads of State of country members of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). That
tour, which I am about to conclude, allowed me to
collect their candid opinions and suggestions on how
we should work together to contribute to peace and
development in the subregion.
2/15

08/07/2021

Throughout these visits, I also met a range of
national interlocutors, as well as international partners
and United Nations country teams, to discuss the same
challenges. All interlocutors reaffirmed their continued
commitment to working closely with UNOWAS, which
is ready to coordinate its activities with regional and
subregional organizations, in particular the African
Union, ECOWAS, the Group of Five for the Sahel and
the Gulf of Guinea Commission.
The security challenges created by terrorist acts in
the Liptako-Gourma region and the Lake Chad basin, as
well as by crime along the coasts of the Gulf of Guinea,
must be addressed from a regional perspective because
the risks of a confluence between the threat coming
from the sea and that coming from the Sahel are real,
and the main victims are the civilian populations. The
Accra initiative, which brings together Benin, Burkina
Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana and Togo, is a laudable
example of anticipation of the regional approach.
In addition, there has been a marked improvement
in the coordination between the ECOWAS action plan,
the regional stabilization strategy for the Lake Chad
basin and the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel, in order to consolidate this comprehensive
approach and long-term stabilization.
The challenges linked to the electoral processes are
mainly the consequence of a lack of political dialogue
and above all the lack of consensus on the fundamental
principles of the various elections.
In this regard, and in coordination with the
ECOWAS Commission, UNOWAS is striving to
improve exchanges between ministers of justice, judicial
cooperation and the sharing of experiences among the
main actors responsible for promoting the rule of law in
the region, in accordance with the ECOWAS Protocol
on Democracy and Good Governance. In this regard,
the prospects for the forthcoming elections in Cabo
Verde and in The Gambia are looking more auspicious.
With regard to the issue of women, we note with
satisfaction the positive dynamics under way with
regard to the representation of women and young
people in decision-making bodies, and hope that
these efforts will continue. In this regard, progress in
national legislation, such as laws on quotas or on parity,
is encouraging.
21-18274

08/07/2021

Peace consolidation in West Africa

(spoke in English)
The United Nations system is fully mobilized to
ensure that development aid efficiently reaches the
people of the Sahel through inclusive, sustainable
and people-centred responses. We have increased the
empowerment of women and girls and the promotion
of gender equality, notably through the recently
established Group of Friends of Women in the Sahel. We
have also transformed our approach to engaging with
young people as agents of change and transformation,
and not only as beneficiaries.
In the face of persistent farmer-herder conflicts
across the region, UNOWAS continues to co-chair a
United Nations regional working group on farmerherder issues and conflict prevention. As follow-up to
the decision of the executive committee of the SecretaryGeneral on farmer-herder dynamics in West Africa and
Central Africa, UNOWAS is collaborating with the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and
the Special Coordinator for Development in the Sahel,
my brother Abdoulaye Mar Dieye, to identify priority
areas for scaled-up United Nations action this year.
Considering the importance and urgency of
addressing climate insecurity, UNOWAS, together
with some United Nations agencies, launched a United
Nations regional working group on climate change,
security, environment and development. With the
objective to promote United Nations synergy and a
harmonized approach to working with ECOWAS, the
working group will contribute to linkage of local efforts
with national and regional policy development.
(spoke in French)
On another topic, we note that on the whole, West
Africa and the Sahel have resisted the coronavirus
disease pandemic rather well, thanks to concerted
efforts at the national and regional levels.
The United Nations and bilateral and multilateral
partners must continue to encourage and support
countries and not relax their efforts, as the pandemic
continues to affect the security and socioeconomic
situation of populations.
In conclusion, I would like to commend the constant
support of the members of the Security Council for the
implementation of the UNOWAS mandate, as well as
to reiterate our commitment to continuing to support
national and regional actors in strengthening peace and
stability in West Africa and the Sahel.

S/PV. 8814

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Annadif for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Ayemou.
Ms. Ayemou (spoke in French): I thank the Security
Council for giving civil society this opportunity to
discuss with members the situation concerning the rights
of women and children in Côte d’Ivoire and West Africa
in the context of the Equality Generations campaign.
I am Chantal Ayemou, President of the Ivorian
Network for the Protection of Children’s and Women’s
Rights. My statement will set out the major advances
made since the Fourth World Conference on Women,
held in Beijing, priority challenges in realizing the
rights of girls and women in Côte d’Ivoire and West
Africa, as well and some recommendations for the
Council’s consideration.
Major advances have been made by the Ivorian
Government and several West African countries
since the Beijing Conference, mainly on the legal and
institutional framework. Among other things, that
includes the adoption of the law punishing female
genital mutilation; security reforms that made it possible
to open up the military technical preparatory school
and the gendarmerie to young girls; the establishment
of the National Equity and Gender Observatory; the
adoption of the compulsory school act to guarantee
access to school for all children aged 6 to 16; and the
adoption in Côte d’Ivoire of the law on the political
participation of women in assemblies, requiring 30 per
cent representation for women on electoral lists.
Despite those favourable steps on gender equality
in several countries of the region, inequalities persist.
In 2020, Côte d’Ivoire ranked 153 out of 162 countries
on the United Nations Development Programme Gender
Inequality Index. The following challenges persist in
most West African countries.
With regard to school access and academic retention
and completion for girls, only 39.42 per cent of girls in
primary school reach secondary school.
Maternity-related mortality stands at 239 deaths per
100,000 births, as compared to 12 deaths per 100,000
births in developed countries.
Access to land ownership for women remains
marginal; women in West Africa are less likely than
men to own land. Out of 1,730 land certificates issued

21-182743/15

S/PV.8814

Peace consolidation in West Africa

in Côte d’Ivoire in March 2016, only 159 were awarded
to women.
Although proscribed by law, female genital
mutilation and forced and early marriages persist.
About 60 per cent of women are victims of domestic
violence. When it comes to physical, moral and sexual
violence against girls and women domestic workers,
22 per cent are minors aged 10 to 17.
On women’s low representation in political
and decision-making spheres, out of 255 members
of Parliament in Côte d’Ivoire, only 11.37 per cent
are women.
Like several countries in West Africa and the Sahel,
Côte d’Ivoire faces security challenges in the northern
border areas, which impact agricultural activity, mainly
run by women.
Faced with that scenario, I would like to
propose the following recommendations for the
Council’s consideration.
In order to ensure girls’ right to education, holistic
support programmes should be put in place for girls to
be able to attend, stay in and complete school.
To combat women’s precarious health status and
maternity-related mortality, a multisectoral approach
should be adopted in resolving women’s health issues,
including by addressing the root causes of the main
health problems affecting women and by facilitating
access to care services specific to women. As well, we
should rethink the financing of health systems in order
to ensure quality care for women during pregnancy,
childbirth and the post-partum period.
To improve access to land ownership for women,
we recommend guaranteeing legal remedies for women
through better access to information and strengthened
legal support.
To combat gender-based violence, a specific law
should be adopted to punish violence against women,
including domestic violence, as well as a specific law
to punish as a crime the perpetrators and sponsors
of early and forced marriages. We call on West
African countries to ratify the relevant international
conventions, including those of the International
Labour Organization.
To
improve
women’s
representation
in
decision-making bodies, State institutions should be
4/15

08/07/2021

strengthened to promote female leadership in politics.
As well, women’s political representation should be
increased through specific laws.
Finally, for the safety of women in the face of
the effects of climate change, climate policies and
programmes in West Africa should be made gendersensitive. We should go beyond women’s numerical
representation in climate policy processes and create
dynamic mechanisms for taking initiatives and
influencing decisions.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Ayemou for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the three African members of the Security
Council — Kenya, the Niger and Tunisia — as well as
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1), I would like
to warmly welcome Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif in
his new role as Special Representative of the Secretary
General for West Africa and the Sahel. I also thank
him for his excellent briefing. We also followed with
close attention the briefing by Ms. Chantal Ayemou,
President of the Ivorian Network for the Protection of
Children’s and Women’s Rights.
We reiterate our support for the stabilization and
good offices efforts that the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General continues to deploy in the
subregion, with respect for national sovereignty and the
primary responsibility of States for peace and security.
We also welcome that a regional approach has
been adopted on the issue of the link between climate
and security, in particular through the launching
of the regional working group on climate change,
the environment, security and development in West
Africa. We believe that will help promote integrated
and harmonized solutions to climate-change risks.
This topic, which is gaining more and more support,
is followed with great commitment by the Niger and
Ireland, which we sincerely thank.
At the start of the second half of 2021, we would
like to make the following key observations on the
report under consideration (S/2021/612).
In terms of security, we must welcome the outstanding
progress made in the ongoing operationalization of the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
21-18274

08/07/2021

Peace consolidation in West Africa

Sahel), which has also been reinforced by a mechanism
for monitoring and analysing civil incidents. It is
important that predictable and durable support be given
to the Joint Force so that it can continue to effectively
fulfil its mandate, which is essential to maintaining
peace and security in the region — a global public good.
Despite national, regional and international efforts
to date to combat terrorism, it is regrettable to see
a deterioration in the security situation in region.
Likewise, the security situation, combined with
the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID19)
pandemic, exposes the countries of the region to a
particularly difficult socioeconomic situation. For the
A3+1, it is therefore necessary to assess the needs in
order to respond to the various threats; likewise it is
necessary to rationalize and harmonize strategies, both
in terms of security and development. The support of
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS) is crucial in that regard.

S/PV. 8814

some populations to receive the vaccine, are of great
concern. We would like to stress that timely delivery
of the vaccine is urgently needed, and we must ensure
that fair and equitable access to COVID-19 vaccines
remains a priority. In addition, the A3+1 stresses the
need to increase contributions to the humanitarian
response plans for the Sahel, which, as of mid-June, had
received only 16 per cent of the $2.7 billion needed for
its implementation.
Gender mainstreaming in the work of UNOWAS
and efforts to increase the full participation of women
in political and security processes are crucial and
should be further encouraged. We also believe that
better coordination and accelerated implementation
of the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel and the United Nations Support Plan for the
Sahel should be ensured, as well as harmonization of
actions with the Group of Five for the Sahel Priority
Investment Programme.

It is equally necessary to strengthen regional and
subregional partnerships to address cross-border and
cross-cutting threats to peace and security. In the same
vein, the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) action plan for the eradication of terrorism
for the period 2020 to 2024 should be further supported
in terms of funding.

With regard to the issue of internally displaced
persons and refugees, which is another challenge
facing the region, we welcome in particular the efforts
of the authorities of the Niger to create suitable and
sustainable conditions for their effective return to their
homes in the east of the country by December 2021,
using their own funds.

With regard to the phenomenon of drug trafficking,
it must be recognized from the outset that the West
African region is neither a producer nor a consumer of
these drugs. It is simply a victim of its fragile security
and border control, which makes it a transit zone.
Therefore, as long as the regions of origin and final
destination do not properly assume their responsibilities
to prevent production and find a sustainable solution to
the growing consumption of drugs, the efforts of the
United Nations and the countries of West Africa will
be wasted. In this regard, we welcome the significant
efforts of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime in strengthening the capacities of national and
subregional structures in charge of preventing and
combating these illicit activities.

In conclusion, the A3+1 welcomes the democratic
progress made in the region following the recent
elections. The successes achieved are the result of the
promotion of political dialogue and consensus-building
among political actors on national priorities, which
is essential for a sustainable peaceful coexistence
among the different national communities. In the same
vein, the A3+1 has welcomed the support provided by
the African Union to the region and appreciated the
very positive role played by ECOWAS in mediation,
particularly in Mali and other countries in the region,
as well as its significant efforts in promoting the rule of
law and good governance in West Africa.

On the humanitarian front, the effects of COVID-19
and food insecurity, high levels of displacement and
the adverse effects of climate change, which have
increased at an alarming rate, call for urgent solidarity
actions for the region. However, while vaccines have
gradually begun to reach the region, the slow pace and
limited quantities received, as well as the reluctance of

The Niger looks forward to preparing, with Ireland
as co-penholder, a presidential statement on the
situation in the West African region.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland) (spoke in French):
I would also like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Annadif for his briefing.
We are grateful for the essential role played by the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS) in conflict prevention in the region. I would

21-182745/15

S/PV.8814

Peace consolidation in West Africa

like to welcome Ms. Chantal Ayemou, President of the
Ivorian Network for the Protection of Children’s and
Women’s Rights, to the Security Council. It is crucial
that the voice of civil society, especially women-led civil
society in the region, be heard. I thank her very much.
Democratic governance is crucial for long-term
peace and stability in West Africa and the Sahel. We
welcome the recent democratic transitions in the Niger
and the sustained reconciliation efforts in Burkina
Faso, Côte d’Ivoire and Togo. At the same time, we
are concerned about the current trend of reversal of
democratic values in the region, in particular the recent
events in Mali.
Reports of widespread impunity for human
rights violations in relation to electoral processes are
extremely worrying. More than ever, the “good offices”
function of UNOWAS is crucial.
Strengthening the essential social contract between
the State and its citizens is key to restoring confidence
in democratic governance. This can be achieved through
the promotion of inclusive policies, the encouragement
of a vibrant civil society, and, of course, through
freedom of expression.
(spoke in English)
Engaging youth and providing access to quality
education, particularly for girls, are both critical. We
condemn the persistent attacks on schools, in particular
continued abductions in Nigeria, as we disturbingly
witnessed yet again this week. Schools must be
safeguarded throughout the region.
Without women’s participation, long-term stability
cannot be achieved. It is simple: women must be
supported, encouraged and protected in all political
processes. We welcome the increased political
representation of women in the region, but their absence
from Cabinet tables must be addressed.
It is particularly promising to see UNOWAS
support for women and peace and security. National
action plans have been adopted by all but one country in
the region, which is truly impressive at a regional level.
Ireland condemns the shocking violence we have
witnessed in attacks against civilians, particularly
in the Niger and Burkina Faso. Increased insecurity,
the exploitation by armed groups of intercommunal
tensions, and, particularly, an increase in attacks in
6/15

08/07/2021

West African coastal States, notably northern Côte
d’Ivoire, are particularly worrisome.
It is clear that climate change is one of the drivers
of conflict across the region. The Informal Expert
Group on Climate and Security has learned much from
the work of UNOWAS on climate-risk assessments, and
I commend efforts to deepen the mission’s integration
of climate-related security risks into its actions.
The deteriorating humanitarian situation, particularly
rising food insecurity in the Central Sahel and the
Lake Chad basin, is of deep concern. There is an
urgent need for a scaled-up response and assistance
to address this issue. We are alarmed by credible
reports of human rights violations and attacks against
humanitarian workers. Accountability must be ensured
for all violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law. It is also clear that the humanitarian
and socioeconomic consequences of the coronavirus
disease pandemic continue to exacerbate the already
challenging situation in the region.
Finally, we are convinced that a coordinated
regional response is critical to addressing regional
peace and security in West Africa and the Sahel. Piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea is another key challenge that
shows no respect for national borders and requires a
regional institutional response. UNOWAS continues to
play a vital role in promoting regional and subregional
cooperation. In particular, we commend the ongoing
partnership with the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States, the Group of
Five for the Sahel and the United Nations Special
Coordinator for development in the Sahel.
West Africa and the Sahel holds vast potential for
inclusive transformative growth due to its geographical,
economic and demographic prospects. We call on
all our regional partners to focus on their political
commitment to democratic governance, human rights
and regional cooperation in seeking lasting peace,
security and prosperity in the region.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
West Africa and the Sahel, and Ms. Chantal Ayemou,
President of the Ivorian Network for the Protection of
Children’s and Women’s Rights, for their briefings.
We share the concerns over dangerous challenges
that many countries in West Africa, and particularly
21-18274

08/07/2021

Peace consolidation in West Africa

S/PV. 8814

the Sahel, are facing. In this region, terrorist activity
continues to run rampant.

southern brother, the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa, is evident.

Over the first half of 2021, we received tragic
reports of the deaths of individuals as a result of
bloody terrorist attacks. We express our support to all
of those who are waging the difficult struggle against
terrorism in the region. Because of security problems
and the coronavirus disease pandemic, many social
institutions, schools and medical centres were not able
to open. Although the States of West Africa have been
able for the time being to hold back the spread of the
pandemic, it is clear that its consequences for economic
development will not go unnoticed.

After the closing of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, in 2020, the
monitoring of events in that country fell under the
purview of UNOWAS. In those conditions, we believe
that preserving Security Council sanctions against
Guinea-Bissau, in other words, measures under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations, which are
provided for only in the case of threats to international
peace and security, is absurd. We call for the steady
dismantling of those sanctions.

Despite the myriad difficulties faced by many
States in the region, they have nevertheless managed
to successfully go through the election cycle. We trust
that the elections planned for the second half of 2021 in
a number of countries in the region will also take place
in conditions of democracy, transparency, legitimacy
and law and order, with strict respect for national
sovereignty. There must be no interference in those
processes by outside players.
In the context of the situation, in Mali we expect
that all the obligations previously taken up concerning
the transitional period, including the conduct of a
constitutional referendum and general democratic
elections according to the pre-established timeline, will
be observed.
The United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel (UNOWAS) faces vast and difficult challenges:
supporting the resolution of regional crises, participating
in political mediation, providing assistance in the
strengthening of State institutions and implementing
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel,
as well as playing a coordinating role for other United
Nations presences on the ground. The effectiveness of
the Office’s efforts directly depends on how well it is
able to work with other regional organizations. Such as
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the Group of Five for the
Sahel and the Lake Chad Basin Commission.
We trust that in its work UNOWAS will take into
account the important decisions concerning economic
development and security in the region adopted at
the ECOWAS summit held in Accra on 19 June. On
some issues, including the fight against piracy and
the demarcation of the Cameroonian-Nigerian border,
the requirement of UNOWAS’s cooperation with its

Russia welcomes Mr. Annadif’s commitment and
efforts aimed at helping the countries of West Africa,
the Sahel and the Lake Chad Basin overcome the
current difficulties. We have no doubt that the results
of UNOWAS’s work will deserve the highest appraisal.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Annadif for his briefing. It is a pleasure to welcome
him back to the Security Council in his new role as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS). I also thank Ms. Ayemou for her remarks
and particularly for her recommendations to us on
how to empower women across West Africa. They are
useful and helpful, and my delegation takes serious
note of them.
To start, the United States Government applauds
the recent partnership between UNOWAS and others
to launch a regional working group that addresses the
critical issues of climate change, environment, security
and development in West Africa. Those are key issues
for the region, and we support so many important
groups coming together to take them on.
Today I should like to talk about three areas of focus
for UNOWAS: strengthening democracy, stopping
terrorism and supporting community-led solutions
to violence.
First, my delegation wants to recognize the hard
work that UNOWAS has done to support elections and
transitional Governments in the Sahel region. This
year, despite political instability and violent protests,
the Niger had its first-ever successful transfer of
power between Presidents, and that is a remarkable
achievement. The Constitutional Court’s confirmation
of President Bazoum’s victory highlighted how strong

21-182747/15

S/PV.8814

Peace consolidation in West Africa

institutional mechanisms really are key to healthy
democracies. We welcome President Bazoum’s
commitment to addressing security threats in the
region, and we celebrate his promise to prioritize
women’s inclusion and women’s mobility.
In Mali, unfortunately, we are seeing the opposite
trend. The United States stands with the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
international community in calling for Mali’s return
to constitutional rule through democratic elections in
February 2022. We condemn the detention of former
officials of Mali’s transitional Government, and we join
the world in calling for the immediate, unconditional
release of those still detained and under house arrest.
Their continued detention is a direct assault on the
country’s ongoing transition to the return of democracy.
Secondly, terrorist groups continue to perpetrate
far too much violence against civilians and United
Nations peacekeepers across the Sahel. We support all
efforts to counter violent extremist groups. We need to
protect civilians during armed conflict, and we need
to boost confidence in regional security forces and the
governing authorities. We also condemn the recent
attacks in Burkina Faso that killed 138 people, many
of them children. We particularly condemn the use of
child soldiers.
Thirdly and finally, given that intercommunal
violence, we deeply value the efforts of ECOWAS and
UNOWAS to promote long-term security and stability
across the Sahel. We strongly support and welcome
community-led projects to address those concerns.
After all, the communities affected by that violence
are best positioned to know how to stop it. That means
soliciting input from individuals and including civilsociety organizations in the process.
We therefore support UNOWAS and the
Governments in West Africa and the Sahel working
together, in partnership, to develop a civilian-led joint
project to address local conflicts. That project will be
critical, and, hopefully, it will help lead to long-term
peace, prosperity and security in the region.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): I, too, should like
to join others in welcoming Special Representative
Annadif back to the Chamber today, thank him for his
briefing and welcome him to his new role. We are very
grateful to him for the dynamic start that he has made
in the job since he began. The work that he has done
on his regional tour to meet Heads of State across the
8/15

08/07/2021

region is such a critical part of the role. I thank him for
that energy.
I should also like to thank Ms. Ayemou for her
commitments and all that she is doing in the fight for
women’s rights and for the children across her country.
The prognosis that she gave is one that we agree with
entirely, and, as my United States colleague just said,
we will do all we can to support her and all like her in
championing those causes.
It is clear from Mr. Annadif’s briefing that security,
particularly in the Sahel, continues to be the dominant
regional concern. We encourage Mr. Annadif’s Office
to focus on the steps that the United Nations can take in
a coordinated fashion to address the underlying drivers
of conflict and the work that Mr. Annadif personally
can undertake to encourage leaders across the region
to make the right choices. I was also very pleased to
hear about the regional working group that he set up to
address the impact of climate change on the security
situation in the region. I think that it is such a critical
area for the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel (UNOWAS) to be involved in.
We also note the references in the report (S/2021/612)
to insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea and the risk that
Mr. Annadif identified just now: that that threat could
be conflated with the land-based security risks. The
United Kingdom is committed to improving maritime
security in the Gulf of Guinea by supporting regional
African partners to find regionally led solutions,
and we are delivering support to the Gulf of Guinea
through the Group of Seven (G7) ++ Group of Friends
of the Gulf of Guinea, which the United Kingdom is
co-chairing with Senegal this year.
We also want to focus on the humanitarian
situation, which Mr. Annadif mentioned and as raised
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/612),
because the situation is clearly incredibly concerning
across the region. We are doing what we can; at the
Group of Seven Summit in May, the United Kingdom
brokered an action plan to help save millions of lives
from famine and humanitarian crises. That included
an initial pledge of £267 million in assistance for
communities in north-east Nigeria. We are particularly
concerned about the food security situation for those
whom humanitarian access is unable to reach. We hope
that Mr. Annadif can again use his role to work with
all parties to conflicts to ensure safe and unimpeded
access for humanitarian actors.
21-18274

08/07/2021

Peace consolidation in West Africa

Turning to elections, the United Kingdom welcomes
the largely peaceful elections in Côte d’Ivoire, the Niger
and Cabo Verde earlier this year. We are pleased to see
that preparations are under way for elections that will
take place later in the year, including in the Gambia
and Cabo Verde. However, we share Mr. Annadif’s
concerns about the violence and tensions that marked
the election periods in Benin and Guinea. Once again,
we think that is an area in which Mr. Annadif can add
particular value by encouraging all parties to continue
to use dialogue to resolve their political differences
and to continue to call for free and fair elections that
allow all parties to participate. Again, we believe that
Mr. Annadif’s role as an elder statesman in the region
will help States to think ahead on elections to ensure
independent preparations that lead to credible outcomes.
On human rights, and on gender in particular, we
are concerned by the level of impunity for human rights
violations and abuses across West Africa and the Sahel.
We call on Mr. Annadif and UNOWAS once again to
call for strengthened accountability from Governments
and improved compliance with international human
rights standards. We are also grateful to him for the
emphasis he has placed on women and the role of women
in political processes, and in politics more generally, as
well as the emphasis he has placed on young people
and their involvement. We know from listening to
Ms. Ayemou’s briefing how critical that is to progress.
In conclusion, there are four areas that we believe
require Mr. Annadif’s continued focus, namely,
defining what States and the United Nations can do in
a coordinated manner to address insecurity; pressing
States and parties to conflict to allow humanitarian
access; working with States to prepare for elections that
are independent and credible; and, finally, acting as a
champion for human rights and an equal role for women
across the region.
Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would
like to welcome Mr. Khatir Mahamat Saleh Annadif to
his first briefing at the Security Council. I thank him for
his comprehensive briefing and welcome Ms. Chantal
Ayemou to our meeting today.
There have been some positive developments in the
political situation in West Africa and the Sahel since
we last met in January (see S/2021/43). As stated in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/612), the region
has witnessed the formation of new Governments
and Parliaments in several countries. Those signs of

S/PV. 8814

reconciliation are greatly encouraging. However, there
has been election-related violence in association with
that process. Other corners of the region have also
encountered certain challenges that have hindered
election processes.
We therefore call on all stakeholders in those
countries to continue dialogue and consultation so
that consensus can replace differences on outstanding
issues, including the transition in Mali. We support
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel and the United Nations country teams for
their efforts in proactively engaging and working with
the parties concerned to maintain peace and security
and stability in the region. We emphasize the need to
increase the meaningful participation of women in
that process.
We share the assessment of the Secretary-General
on the security situation in the region. Many countries
have faced tremendous challenges, including high
levels of violence, increasing terrorism, intercommunal
conflicts, organized crime, trafficking, the coronavirus
disease pandemic and the threat from the sea, as
mentioned by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.
It is distressing to learn about the increase in
casualties, especially among civilians and peacekeepers,
due to violence and deadly terrorist attacks. We strongly
condemn those acts. Those responsible for such crimes
must be brought to justice. Against that backdrop, it is
crucial for all countries of the region to redouble their
efforts in combating terrorism and violence. In that
connection, we reiterate our call for adequate support
and resources for the region, especially the Group
of Five for the Sahel Joint Force, in order to address
the challenges I mentioned. It is crucial to increase
protection for, and ensure the safety of, peacekeepers
and personnel of United Nations missions in the region.
We are gravely concerned about the dire
humanitarian situation in the region, especially in
parts of the Central Sahel and Nigeria. According
to the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, more than 29 million people
are in need of assistance and protection in 2021. Under
those circumstances, we reiterate our call for additional
funding for humanitarian operations in West Africa
and the Sahel. We also urge the parties concerned to
remove barriers to humanitarian access and facilitate

21-182749/15

S/PV.8814

Peace consolidation in West Africa

the delivery of emergency assistance to populations in
need. In addition, we stress the need to comply with
international humanitarian law and ensure the legitimate
rights and interests of the people in the region.
Last but not least, we reiterate our support for
the Secretary-General’s call to the ECOWAS member
States and international partners to support holistic
and integrated approaches, including through the
implementation of the regional stabilization strategy,
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel and the United Nations Support Plan for the
Sahel. It is also important to integrate current and
projected climate-related threats into all conflict
prevention efforts.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Khatir Mahamat Saleh
Annadif, for his briefing and wish him every success
in his new role as Head of the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS). I also welcome
the presence of Ms. Chantal Ayemou, who reminds us
of the fundamental role played by women in responding
to the challenges facing West Africa and the Sahel.
As we heard, the region unfortunately continues to
suffer from the consequences of political instability and
inequality; the activity of terrorist organizations, mainly
in the Lake Chad basin and the Sahel; intercommunal
conflict; organized crime; and the effects of climate
change and the pandemic. At this difficult juncture, I
wish to highlight three issues.
First, Mexico believes that the combined result of
the challenges facing the region are having an inordinate
impact on the civilian population. My country is
concerned by the increasingly fatal attacks that have
occurred in recent months, such as those in Burkina
Faso and the Niger, to name but a few. Of equal concern
are the increasing clashes between terrorist groups and
the number of child abductions. Violence continues to
be the main reason that more than 29 million people
are currently in need of humanitarian aid in the region,
as well as why many others have been forced to leave
their homes. In the light of that alarming scenario,
the protection of the civilian population must be an
absolute priority for the States of the region and for the
international forces present in the area. That includes
the protection of civilian infrastructure, in particular
schools and hospitals.
10/15

08/07/2021

Secondly, the fight against terrorism in the region
must be conducted with full respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law. My country deplores
human rights violations perpetrated by national and
international actors. Such violations are inconsistent
with international law, create new grievances among
the communities affected and delegitimize institutions.
That is why we must investigate and duly punish them.
Thirdly, Mexico is of the view that comprehensive
strategies must be adopted to resolve the structural
socioeconomic issues that fuel violent extremism. We
believe that sustainable development and access to
basic services, such as education and health in West
Africa and the Sahel, must be a central part of measures
to strengthen and deploy State institutions. We firmly
believe that education is the main tool for combating
the radicalization of young people and the basis for
greater social mobility among future generations.
Health services are also crucial, especially in
an environment in which the coronavirus disease
has joined the ranks of other diseases with a
disproportionate effect on the most vulnerable and
that deepen inequalities that foster vicious circles. For
those reasons, Mexico believes that we must prioritize
measures to reopen the more than 5,000 schools and
numerous medical facilities that were closed due to
violence or the pandemic. We also call for the resources
of the international community, generally used to meet
the basic needs of the population, to be increased in
order to ensure a better balance in resources earmarked
for security cooperation.
Lastly, we reiterate our support for the work of
UNOWAS in responding to the three challenges I
mentioned through its implementation of the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel. Coordination
with other regional organizations, in particular the
Economic Community of West African States, is key to
addressing security challenges, improving governance
and building resilience in West Africa and the Sahel.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Let me begin by
thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Annadif for his briefing. I also thank civil
society representative Ms. Ayemou for her insights.
The United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel is a political mission with a mandate for preventive
diplomacy, political mediation and facilitation efforts.
It is important for the mission to remain focused on
its mandate and work with national Governments and
21-18274

08/07/2021

Peace consolidation in West Africa

regional organizations, particularly the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), and
assist them in their efforts to address the challenges
faced by the region. I will focus my comments today
on political, security and humanitarian developments
in the region.
West Africa and the Sahel, as illustrated in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/612), have
made notable progress on the path towards democracy
and good governance. The reporting period has
witnessed elections in Benin, Cabo Verde, Côte d’Ivoire
and the Niger. Those elections were held in a peaceful
environment, despite security-related challenges.
The new Governments have assumed charge in those
countries and in Ghana, which is a model of democracy
for the region. In the Niger, the democratic transfer of
power through elections was unprecedented. In Benin,
peaceful elections have taken place with the increasing
participation of its citizens in the election process.
The leadership in those countries has risen to meet the
hopes and expectations of the people. We extend our
felicitations to the elected leaders and their peoples.
The countries of the region have also made significant
progress towards reconciliation, constitutional reforms
and enhancing the participation of women in governance
structures. The political environment in West Africa is
more vibrant and inclusive than ever before. Those who
highlight the negative aspects of developments need to
keep in mind that until not so long ago, the Council
dealt with several country-specific agenda items. That
is not the case today. We believe that these positive
developments deserve the unequivocal appreciation of
the Council, although there may be a few aberrations
to the trend. With more elections scheduled in the
coming months, the countries in the region require
the continued support of bilateral partners and the
international community.
On the security front, the situation in the region
remains stable, except in the countries of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and Lake Chad basin.
Terrorist attacks in Burkina Faso, particularly in regions
bordering Mali and the Niger, have continued unabated.
Terrorism, drug trafficking and organized crime have
also increased. Those developments underscore the
urgent need to further intensify efforts to combat
terrorism, which spills over into other countries
and regions. The political instability and volatile
security situation in Mali is a cause for concern. All
stakeholders in Mali should renew their commitment

S/PV. 8814

to the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
and its implementation, and assume ownership of
the transition road map. The support and assistance
of bilateral and international partners to Mali,
including the United Nations, the African Union and
the ECOWAS, is critical during these difficult times.
We echo the call of the Secretary-General to ensure
predictable and sustainable funding to the Joint Force
of the G-5 Sahel. We also extend our appreciation to the
work of the Multinational Joint Task Force, which plays
an instrumental role in counter-insurgency operations.
On the piracy front, it is matter of concern that
the Gulf of Guinea remains a piracy hotspot, with as
many as 17 incidents having occurred over the past six
months. Several Indian sailors have also been victims
of piracy and kidnappings. There is an urgent need to
increase surveillance to ensure maritime security in the
area, through increased international collaboration.
The
Secretary-General’s
report
mentions
that 29 million people in the Sahel are in need of
humanitarian assistance this year. The coronavirus
disease pandemic has also increased the vulnerability
of the population. Moreover, several countries in the
region are among the youngest countries in the world.
Due to poverty and unemployment, many of them fall
victim to drug trafficking, leading, in turn, to a further
increase in criminality, kidnappings and banditry. It
is unfortunate that the humanitarian situation in the
region does not receive the requisite attention of the
international community. There is an urgent need to
scale up assistance, including by increasingly utilizing
African capacities, products and services.
Lastly, India attaches high importance to its
relations with West Africa. India has opened five new
diplomatic missions in the region in the past year and a
half and is in the process of opening another four by the
end of the year. To date, India has provided soft loans,
amounting to $3.3 billion, for projects in West Africa
in sectors such as agriculture, irrigation, water supply,
energy, solar and health. Under the ambit of the IndiaUnited Nations Development Partnership Fund, we are
also providing $9 million for livelihood projects in nine
West African countries. India also has a robust security
partnership with countries in the region. We have also
commenced counter-terrorism training in the region.
Under our Defence Indian Technical and Economic
Cooperation training programme, we currently provide
approximately 250 training slots to countries in the
region. We remain committed to supporting countries

21-1827411/15

S/PV.8814

Peace consolidation in West Africa

in West Africa through capacity-building and the
strengthening of democratic institutions.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Annadif for his briefing on the most recent developments
in West Africa and the Sahel. I would also like to thank
Ms. Ayemou for her briefing and for highlighting the
important aspects of the rights of women and children
in the region.
At the outset, allow me to express Estonia’s full
support for the work and good offices of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel, which
has remained very active during the reporting period.
We would also like to commend the Economic
Community of West African States for its active
engagement and role in facilitating dialogue with
various national stakeholders.
The past year and a half has been especially
significant in the democratic processes in West Africa
and the Sahel due to the number of elections held in
several of the region’s States. While a number of those
elections were held in a relatively peaceful environment,
we remain concerned about the reportedly growing
perception in the region of a shrinking political and
civic space. The sense among the population of a
democratic reversal should be treated as an important
early-warning sign that needs to be addressed
immediately. While the coronavirus disease pandemic
negatively affects the overall functioning of a society,
it must not be used as a pretext to curtail civil liberties.
In connection with the democratic processes, I
would like to also stress the importance of the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women in all aspects of
the political processes. While the strengthening of the
normative framework on women’s inclusion is positive,
the reality in terms of women’s representation in the
national Governments and Parliaments remains clearly
inadequate. Concrete steps are required from the States
of the region in order to create opportunities and a
safe space for women to participate in the political
processes as voters and candidates, as well as civil
society representatives.
Estonia remains alarmed by the deteriorating
security situation in West Africa and the Sahel
region. We are encouraged by some success in the
regional counter-terrorist efforts. We welcome the
strengthening of the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel and commend the States of the region
12/15

08/07/2021

on operating through joint operations, as well as the
Multinational Joint Task Force. However, the overall
situation remains extremely concerning, with mostly
the civilian population suffering from the ongoing
violence. It is essential that the States of the region
continue enhancing cooperation among themselves
and with the international community. Estonia, for
its part, will continue contributing through various
international efforts.
Nevertheless, a security-centred approach alone
will not suffice in bringing lasting peace and stability
to West Africa and the Sahel region. It is crucial to
address the root causes of conflict, take into account the
underlying grievances in the society and ensure access
to basic social services. In that connection it is very
concerning that a significant amount of schools across
the Sahel region remain closed or non-operational.
Ensuring children’s right to education and protecting
and empowering those most vulnerable in the society
is one of the key factors to the long-term stability of
the society.
Respect for human rights and the fight against
impunity are essential elements in achieving long-term
stability in the society. Accountability for human rights
abuses and violations of international humanitarian
law is essential in restoring the trust of the people and
supporting the reconciliation process.
Ms. Juul (Norway): We welcome Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Annadif back
in his new capacity, assure him of Norway’s full support
and thank him for his valuable briefing today. We also
welcome the insights shared by Ms. Ayemou. Women’s
rights to full, equal and meaningful participation and
leadership are essential in all aspects and phases of
peace and political processes. This is a fundamental
basis for achieving and sustaining peace.
Let me first take a moment to recognize a
positive development since we last met to discuss the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS). In April, the Niger celebrated its first
transfer of power from one democratically elected
President to another. We congratulate the Niger on that
historic and inspirational achievement. We were also
heartened to see how President Bazoum immediately
put youth, education and safe schools at the centre of
his agenda. As he stated during our recent open debate
on children and conflict (see S/2021/617), educated
children are the pillars on which strong nations are built.
21-18274

08/07/2021

Peace consolidation in West Africa

However, if we needed a reminder of the challenges
that continue to face children and civilians in the region
the Solhan massacre in Burkina Faso was it. Not only
were children among the more than 130 victims of the
attack. Children were also used by terrorist actors to
carry out the attack. We condemn that in the strongest
possible terms in addition to the continued targeting
of children as victims of abduction sexual and genderbased violence. The perpetrators of such crimes must be
held accountable in line with national and international
law. We also deplore the repeated abduction of school
children for ransom in Nigeria. As part of their efforts
to find solutions to that trend, we commend Nigeria for
hosting the fourth international Conference on the Safe
Schools Declaration, to be held in October.
The Council must remain vigilant and find ways
to support regional responses to terrorism, which is
worryingly spreading seawards. Action is also needed
in the Gulf of Guinea, which remains the world’s piracy
hotspot. Besides the threat posed to international
navigation, piracy also has detrimental effects on the
sustainable development of coastal States, as well as
countries further inland. In order to better understand
such effects, Norway is currently supporting a study
by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime on
the topic.
We also underscore the need for sustainable
ocean planning to build the foundations for a peaceful
and prosperous coastal economy. Last week, the
Peacebuilding Commission held a positive meeting
on the Gulf of Guinea. For us, that is a topic that the
Council should once again look into, particularly in
support of regional efforts.
Norway recently presented its new holistic Sahel
strategy. The strategy mirrors our overall priorities
on the Security Council — peace diplomacy, women’s
participation and rights, the protection of civilians,
climate and security. Norway appreciates and
encourages the continued engagement of UNOWAS
on all those issues. Our new strategy places enhanced
emphasis on the promotion of good governance and
inclusive political processes, as ways to prevent violent
conflict and the recruitment of armed groups.
The strategy also has a strong focus on dialogue
as a means of conflict resolution at the local, national
and regional levels. We are encouraged to see that that
thinking aligns with signals from the ordinary session
of the Authority of Heads of State of the Group of

S/PV. 8814

Five for the Sahel, held in N’Djamena in February, the
“nexus plus” vision of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel and the People’s Coalition for
the Sahel.
The proposed civilian joint project to address
intercommunal violence could be a good new
opportunity for UNOWAS to make a difference. The
project should also consider the effects of climate on
security, as well as women’s roles in peace and security.
On all those issues, it will be vital for UNOWAS to
work together with the African Union, ECOWAS, the
Group of Five for the Sahel and other regional actors to
unlock new potential.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome the appointment of Mr. Annadif as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWAS)
and the Sahel and his first briefing to the Security
Council in his new capacity. We expect Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Annadif at the
helm of UNOWAS to play a greater role in promoting
regional peace and development. I also listened closely
to the statement by Ms. Ayemou, the civil society
representative from Côte d’Ivoire.
Since the beginning of this year, the situation
in West African and the Sahel has in general been
stable. Burkina Faso, Ghana, the Niger and Benin
have successfully completed their general elections
and formed new Governments. Guinea, Côte d’Ivoire
and others have actively promoted political dialogue.
The Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) is active in maintaining regional peace and
stability by participating in mediation efforts in Mali.
China appreciates those developments.
The Gambia will hold general elections this year,
and Mali has reached a critical stage of political
transition. The international community should
encourage the relevant parties to resolve their
differences through dialogue and consultations and
encourage ECOWAS and the African Union to continue
to play a leading role, while respecting the sovereignty
and leadership of the countries of the region when
providing constructive support.
UNOWAS should render technical support for
the upcoming general elections and political dialogue
of relevant countries in the light of the regional
situation on the ground. The security situation in the
region remains fragile, with frequent terrorist attacks

21-1827413/15

S/PV.8814

Peace consolidation in West Africa

and violent incidents, resulting in a large number
of civilian casualties. In his report (S/2021/612), the
Secretary-General points out that the limitations of a
security approach require a response that integrates
development, governance and humanitarian dimensions
to address the root causes of the conflicts.
The international community should continue to
help the countries of the region to enhance capacities in
peacekeeping, counter-terrorism and the maintenance
of stability, and encourage them to strengthen security
cooperation by jointly addressing cross-border security
challenges, such as piracy and drug trafficking in the
Gulf of Guinea.
At the same time, it is necessary to adopt
integrated policies to treat both the symptoms and the
root causes and to tackle the problems at the source.
Under the current circumstances, it is important to help
relevant countries to restore State authority, improve
governance capacities and promote economic and social
development. Providing security guarantees to people
and allowing to share the fruits of poverty reduction and
development will help to fully counter the infiltration
and influence of extremism and terrorism.
Last month, ECOWAS held a summit during
which a series of important measures were announced
to advance regional economic integration, including
joining in the creation of an African continent free-trade
zone and working on a single currency for West Africa.
These are firm steps towards regional integration.
UNOWAS must support regional countries in promoting
friendship, deepening cooperation, advancing the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and closely
align regional cooperation priorities with national
development strategies in order to create synergies.
The efforts of the countries of the region to actively
fight the pandemic deserve our full recognition. At
present, the virus is still spreading in Africa, and efforts
towards regional prevention and control must not flag.
The international community should provide more
supplies, medicine, technology and funding to assist
in combating the pandemic, and should ensure that
vaccines are accessible and affordable. We must also
pay attention to the economic and social impact of the
pandemic on the countries of the region and coordinate
prevention and management efforts, as well as postpandemic reconstruction. Relevant developed countries
should fulfil their international responsibilities and
14/15

08/07/2021

take pragmatic measures debt relief and development
assistance measures. Further, they should support the
countries of the region in accelerating industrialization
and modernization and enhance Africa’s development
and innovation capacities.
Since the outbreak of the pandemic, China has
firmly stood with the countries of the region by sharing
experiences and providing much-needed coronavirus
vaccines and multiple shipments of supplies to combat
the pandemic. In addition, my country has supported
them in resuming work and production. In May,
China and African countries jointly, through the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development, launched an
initiative to that end. China welcomes more countries
and international organizations to join that initiative
and create synergies in support of Africa’s development.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.
I thank Mr. Annadif for his briefing and Ms. Ayemou
for hers. The emancipation and political participation
of women are priorities for France.
I would like to address two points.
The first is sustainable development and security.
Those two imperatives must go hand in hand as
insecurity spreads in the region. France was horrified
about the recent massacres in Burkina Faso. In that
country, as well as in Mali and the Niger, hundreds
of civilians and members of the defence and security
forces have been killed in recent months.
This situation requires a response. We must provide
the countries of the region with the resources they need
to combat terrorism. To that end, the Joint Force of
the Group of Five for the Sahel must be supported. We
are impatiently awaiting the report of the SecretaryGeneral in September, which will consider options for
improvements in that area. The International Academy
for Combating Terrorism, inaugurated in Côte d’Ivoire
in June and supported by France, is another essential
project for combating terrorism.
We also encourage the cooperation of coastal
countries with those of the Sahel. Joint operations
between Côte d’Ivoire, Burkina Faso and Mali are
promising initiatives. In order to prevent the spread
of insecurity, France encourages the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel and the United
Nations to conduct prevention activities in southern
21-18274

08/07/2021

Peace consolidation in West Africa

Mali, south-western Burkina Faso and northern Côte
d’Ivoire. The Peacebuilding Fund is a useful tool in
that regard.
It is also essential that confidence be restored
between States and their populations. France welcomes
the launching by United Nations Development
Programme of the Liptako-Gourma stabilization
facility, which is aimed at redeploying State authority
and providing services to populations living in remote
areas of the Sahel. Those objectives are in lock-step
with those of the civilian and political surge agreed
upon during the N’Djamena summit. We must also take
into account, in all of our actions, the fight against the
effects of climate change.
My second point concerns the political situations.
France encourages the consolidation of democratic
processes in West Africa and the Sahel. We welcome
the holding of legislative elections in Côte d’Ivoire
in March, and in Cabo Verde in April. We hope that

S/PV. 8814

the presidential elections in The Gambia, planned
for December, will take place in peaceful conditions.
Elections are an important step and, where necessary,
can be supplemented with political dialogue and
reconciliation efforts.
In Guinea, we take note of the announcement of
a new permanent framework for political and social
dialogue, and we call on all political actors to sincerely
engage in that process, which must include the
parliamentary and extraparliamentary opposition. We
support the good offices of the Special Representative
on this matter.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 11.15 a.m.

21-1827415/15
