S/2007/494

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 August 2007
English
Original: French

Letter dated 15 August 2007 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith the text of a communication dated
10 August 2007 which I received from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring this communication to the attention of
the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

07-46133 (E) 210807 210807

*0746133*

S/2007/494

Annex
Letter dated 10 August 2007 from the Secretary-General
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to the
Secretary-General
[Original: English]
In accordance with Security Council resolutions 1386 (2001) and 1510 (2003),
I attach a report on operations of the International Security Assistance Force
covering the period from February to April 2007 (see enclosure).
(Signed) Jaap de Hoop Scheffer

2

07-46133

S/2007/494

Enclosure
Quarterly report to the United Nations on the operations of the
International Security Assistance Force
Introduction
1.
By resolution 1510 (2003), the Security Council requested the leadership of
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) to provide reports on the
implementation of its mandate. This is the thirteenth such report by NATO and it
covers the period from February to April 2007.
2.
On 29 April 2007, ISAF had 34,348 personnel from 28 NATO countries and
1,445 from 11 non-NATO countries.
Operational review
3.
In this reporting period, ISAF has successfully pre-empted Taliban spring
offensive operations by disrupting insurgent activity and command and control. The
security situation has thus allowed continued maintenance and growth of projects,
such as the Kajaki Dam.
4.
Throughout the winter, Operation Oqab has continued along the Pakistan
border area in an attempt to deny insurgents safe havens and prevent them from
reconstituting operations and supply lines.
5.
Operation Nowruz began on 21 March 2007 on a nationwide scale. This is an
overarching framework operation, involving Afghan and ISAF forces building on
the success of Operation Oqab in setting conditions for economic recovery. It is
intended to extend the authority of the Government of Afghanistan, inhibit the
ability of opposing military forces to conduct operations, and provide the security
necessary to allow reconstruction and development.
6.
Operation Achilles in early March saw the Afghan National Security Forces
operate in the Sangin Valley and throughout Helmand province in order to improve
the security and stability in the southern part of Afghanistan. Setting conditions for
sustained economic development will include creating jobs and providing economic
development opportunities for Afghans, increasing hydroelectric output and
increasing irrigation. Despite high threat levels in the area, President Karzai visited
the area of operation in late March, demonstrating the Government’s commitment to
making Operation Achilles a success.
7.
Overall, the winter period saw the Afghan National Security Forces and ISAF
successfully conducting operations that prevented the Taliban from launching a
coordinated offensive over the spring. The momentum achieved will be maintained
in order to continue to push for establishment and consolidation of Afghan
development zones in the most volatile southern and eastern regions of the country.
Security situation
8.
Opposing militant forces activity was concentrated in the south and east during
the reporting period, with isolated attacks increasing as the weather improved over
spring. Opposing militant forces tactics are based on low risk, high impact
improvised explosive device attacks supported by robust propaganda efforts
designed to undermine the credibility of ISAF and the Government. Opposing

07-46133

3

S/2007/494

militant forces attack levels are roughly twice as high as over the same reporting
period in 2006. This increase is due to opposing militant forces initiative but also to the
higher level of Afghan National Security Forces-ISAF activity throughout the country.
9.
In the Regional Command Capital, for which Turkey took over command on
7 April, the decrease in attacks noted in the previous report continued in the early
part of this reporting period. The relative quiet continued until March when there were a
string of improvised explosive devices, including suicide attacks. Kabul remains the
centre of gravity of the Government of Afghanistan and the international community
and as such it is a prime target. Despite the low level of popular support for the
opposing militant forces in Kabul itself, attacks are likely to continue.
10. In Regional Command North, there has been an increase in attacks on the
Afghan National Security Forces and ISAF. Attacks on international organizations
and NGO personnel are also noted although rare. Most of these attacks are thought
to be criminally motivated, although opposing militant forces involvement is not
ruled out. Attacks focus on lines of communication.
11. In Regional Command West, the situation has been generally calm. Southern
Heart and Farah provinces remain the major security concerns. In Farah, the
opposing militant forces continued to conduct roadside attacks against Afghan
National Police (ANP) checkpoints over the reporting period. The opposing militant
forces focus here as well is against the lines of communication.
12. In Regional Command South, less affected by the weather, the situation
remained volatile during the entire winter. Opposing militant forces have maintained
varying, sometimes elevated, levels of attacks. Higher levels of attacks in this
region are attributable primarily to ISAF operations in the area, like Operation
Achilles, and the importance opposing militant forces place on retaining freedom of
movement in the region, defending strongholds and exploiting any tactical
opportunity. The opposing militant forces seemed to avoid direct engagements and
preferred indirect attacks. Additionally, the opposing militant forces strategy
included countering Government/ISAF reconstruction and development efforts, such
as the Kajaki Dam, in order to retain and expand their influence in the area.
13. In Regional Command East, the opposing militant forces attacks have
increased as the weather improved. Afghan National Security Forces, ISAF and
Operation Enduring Freedom forces conducted several combined operations in early
spring with little in the way of opposing militant forces response. Opposing militant
forces are most active in Kunar province, where they seek to retain their freedom of
movement and access to safe havens. In Nangahar province, popular support for the
Government and ISAF has been damaged by civilian casualties and poppy
eradication efforts. Some suicide attacks have taken place and small-scale
harassment is also noted. Opposing militant forces activity is also reported in
Ghazni, Logar and Laghman provinces along the main lines of communication.
Opposing militant forces are likely to continue their aggressive propaganda
campaign and intimidation of the local population.
Afghan National Army
14. Although lagging behind benchmarks towards the agreed 70,000 figure,
Afghan National Army assigned manpower continued to increase steadily as duty
presence increased by 20 per cent since the last reporting period. In terms of

4

07-46133

S/2007/494

equipment, the winterization programme implemented by the United States of
America Combined Security Transition Command Afghanistan also resulted in
steady growth. Afghan National Army training saw the implementation of the RedYellow-Green training and operation cycle, allowing for two thirds of the corps
soldiers to be available for operations. This cycle allows for down time for Afghan
National Army soldiers and provides focused training cycles for manoeuvre units.
Absence without leave levels are thus expected to be reduced. The Afghan National
Army air corps is conducting requalification training of pilots, with the support of
ISAF and the Combined Security Transition Command Afghanistan.
Afghan National Police
15. Afghan National Police development is lagging behind compared to the targets
presented to the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board. Greater international
assistance in this field is essential. The International Police Coordination Board
secretariat was established to provide such assistance in March 2007. The European
Union also launched the 195 personnel European Police Mission to Afghanistan in
June.
16. The Afghan National Auxiliary Police programme is nearing the end of its first
year of training in priority provinces. Significant irregularities in the vetting process
were revealed and need to be corrected. Overall, the programme is successfully
developing and as of 25 March, approximately 4,700 Afghan National Auxiliary
Police graduated and were deployed to facilitate Afghan National Police operations
as well as in support to the Afghan National Army.
17. The Afghan National Civil Order Police is a newly formed force that will
eventually grow to a total of 5,000. The Afghan National Civil Order Police is due
to replace the Afghan Standby Police and will act as a quick reaction force at the
provincial level. Finally, a Special Police Unit will be set up to focus on counterterrorism and organized crime.
Judicial reform and rule of law
18. From an ISAF perspective, there needs to be an enhanced coordination and
cohesion of international efforts in the areas of judicial reform and the rule of law.
Efforts are mainly concentrated in Kabul. In view of the lack of progress at the
regional level, ISAF is embedding rule of law and justice reform into its legal
architecture. ISAF has undertaken a nationwide survey of the situation, seeking data
in every area related to judicial reform.
19. The Attorney General’s anti-corruption efforts remain scattered and unfocused,
usually based on unsubstantiated allegations. Military-driven efforts have yielded
some achievements in terms of launching the survey. Regional Command East is
especially proactive in planning five provincial justice conferences. This local
approach will allow ISAF to continue its drive in partnership with Combined
Security Transition Command Afghanistan to promote coordination.
Counter narcotics
20. There have been modest improvements in the capacity of the Ministry of
Counter Narcotics to tackle the drugs trade. In particular, provincial capacity
remains weak, although the recent change in leadership at the Ministry may lead to

07-46133

5

S/2007/494

a revitalized and refocused Afghan counter-narcotics effort. However, endemic
corruption remains and this limits the effective implementation of the counternarcotics strategy. There is also much evidence to suggest interference in the
eradication process.
21. The Government of Afghanistan ruled out ground-based spraying for 2007 and
eradication was only conducted using manual and mechanical methods. The United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime reported an eradication total of 19,901 hectares
(ha) (as at 10 June), including an eradication of 3,000 ha conducted in Helmand by
the centrally directed Afghan Eradication Force. In most provinces where
eradication occurred, it was conducted by Governor-led programmes but with
varying degrees of success. The Governors of Kandahar and Nangahar have
achieved significant levels of eradication, while others have not. There have also
been allegations of corruption made against eradication forces and associated
officials again in 2007.
22. While ISAF is not directly involved in eradication operations, the security
threats presented by the drugs trade, including links between opposing militant
forces and the trade are evident. Consequently, ISAF is working to maximize its
support to counter-narcotics operations, in accordance with the provisions of the
Operational Plan.
Disbandment of illegal armed groups
23. The efforts at disbandment of illegal armed groups have seen disappointing
levels of weapons-collection activities. The lack of political and practical support
for the disbandment of illegal armed groups is the main factor for this trend. Also
one can attribute this to the increased level of insurgency and the Government’s
inability to demonstrate its resolve against uncooperative illegal armed groups.
Nonetheless, a number of positive results have been noted. Following the
President’s endorsement of the disbandment of illegal armed groups strategy review
in 2006, a revised action plan was approved in February 2006. This action plan
focuses on the strategic level and highlights a number of issues, such as Government
support, appropriate legislation and ministerial coordination, as well as the formal
establishment of an effective enforcement capability.
Peace and reconciliation programme
24. The peace strengthening and reconciliation programme (Takhim-e-Sol), led by
Professor Mujadeddi, is being maintained despite funding problems. It aims to
provide socio-economic support to reconciled individuals and is being developed in
cooperation with the international community and Government ministries and the
Combined Security Transition Command Afghanistan. Eleven field offices have now
been established of which three have been opened in the south. The number of
reconciled individuals had risen to approximately 3,300 by the end of March,
compared to 2,600 at the end of November 2006.
Neighbouring countries
25. ISAF has continued to work with the Government of Afghanistan in contacts
with neighbouring countries, primarily through the Tripartite Commission, which
aims to improve military cooperation on border security, intelligence sharing and
counter-improvised explosive device work.

6

07-46133

S/2007/494

26. Efforts to initiate collaborative planning between Afghan and Pakistan military
have been met with some promising success. On a number of occasions, military-tomilitary coordination has occurred on border issues. In addition, military structures
have been developed in Kabul, allowing Afghan and Pakistani officers to work
together on a daily basis.
27. In early 2007, the Presidents of Afghanistan and Pakistan met in Ankara, at the
invitation of the President of Turkey, to enhance various aspects of the cooperation
between their countries and consequently agreed on the Ankara Declaration.
Governance
28. Internal Government coordination remains relatively poor, with limited
consistency in messages from the Government and a lack of synchronization
between ministries. The recently established National Communications
Coordination Centre aims to improve this and weekly themes are being passed to
ministries through the Policy Action Group. However, much work needs to be done
so that consistent messages are sent by the Government to the population.
Development
29. Development within Afghanistan remains difficult to assess. While there is
substantial funding available, the inability of the provincial leadership to produce
development plans in accordance with the interim Afghan National Development
Strategy requirements remains a concern. ISAF continues to play a role through the
provincial reconstruction teams in providing support and advice at the local level.

07-46133

7
