GeMral Au,mbly-Twenty-seventh Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE FOURTH COMMITIEE
CONTENTS
R••ol11"'1tl
No.

2918 (XXVII)
2945 (XXVII)
2946 (XXVII)
2977 (XXVII)

Dat•of
1140,lioll

TUI•

Question of Territories under Portuguese administration (A/8889)
Question of Southern Rhodesia (A/8933) ................. .
Question of Southern Rhodesia (A/8933) ................... .
Papua New Guinea (A/8954) ........................... .

2978 (XXVII)

Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under
Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations (A/8956)
2979 (XXVII) Activ-ities of foreign economic and other interests which are
impeding the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in Southern Rhodesia, Namibia and Territories under PortuJUese
domination and in all other Territories under colonial domination and efforts to eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial
discrimination in southern Africa (A/8958) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2980 (XXVII) Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions associated with the
United Nations (A/8959) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Pa,•

65
66
66
13 and
22

14 November 1972
7 December 1972
7 December 1972
14 December 1972

15

63

14 December 1972

80

67

14 December 1972

80

68 and

14 December 1972

81

69

14 December 1972

83

70
22

14 December 1972

83

14 December 1972

84

22
22
22

14 December 1972
14 December 1972
14 December 1972

86
86

22

64
64

14 December 1972
18 December 1972
18 December 1972

87
87
88

22

18 December 1972

90

77
78
79

12
2981 (XXVIl)
2982 (XXVII)
2983 (XXVII)
2984 (XXVII)

2985 (XXVII)
2986 (XXVII)
2987 (XXVII)
3030 (XXVII)
3031 (XXVII)

United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern
Africa (A/8960) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories (A/8961) . . . . . .
Question of Spanish Sahara (A/8955) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Question of American Samoa, Bahamas, Bermuda, British Virgin
Islands, Brunei, Cayman Islands, Cocos (Keeling) Islands,
Gilbert and Ellice Islands, Guam, Montserrat, New Hebrides,
Pitcairn, St. Helena, Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Turks and
Caicos Islands and United States Virgin Islands (A/8955) . . . .
Question of the Seychelles (A/8955) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Question of Niue and the Tokelau Islands (A/89SS) . . . . . . . . . .
Question of Antigua, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts--NevisAnguilla, St. Lucia and St. Vincent (A/8955) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Nations Fund for Namibia (A/8957) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Question of Namibia (A/8957) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Other deci•lon,
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2918 (XXVII). Question of Territories under
Portuguese administration

85

Special Mission which visited the liberated areas of
Guinea (Bissau) in April 1972,1
Having examiMd the report of the Secretary-General concerning the present item,8
Having invited, in consultation with the Organization of African Unity and through it, representatives
of the !lational liberation movements of Angola, Guinea (Bissau) and Cape Verde and Mozambique to participate in an observer capacity in its consideration
of those Territories, and having heard the statements
of Mr. Amflcar Cabral, Secretary-General of the Partido Africano da Independbcia da Guin6 e Caho

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Territories under
Portuguese domination,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples,1 including in particular the report of the
1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/8723/Rev.1), chaps. II, III

2 Jhid., chap. X, para. 36,
a A/87.58 and Add.I.

and X.

75

76

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

Verde,4 and Mr. Marcelino dos Santos, Vice-President of the Frente de Liberta~ao de M~ambique, 5
Having heard the statements of the petitioners, 6
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration, as well as all other
resolutions relating to the question of Territories under
Portuguese administration adopted by the General Assembly, the Security Council and the Special Committee,
Condemning the persistent refusal of the Government of Portugal to comply with the relevant provisions of the aforementioned resolutions of the United
Nations and, in particular, the continuation by Portuguese military forces of the indiscriminate bombing
of civilians, the wholesale destruction of villages and
property and the ruthless use of napalm and chemical
substances in Angola, Guinea (Bissau) and Cape Verde
and Mozambique, as well as the continued violations
of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of independent African States neighbouring Angola, Guinea (Bissau) and Cape Verde and Mozambique, which seriously disturb international peace and security,
Condemning the continued collaboration of Portugal, South Africa and the illegal racist minority
regime in Southern Rhodesia, designed to perpetuate
colonialist and racialist domination in the region, and
the persistent intervention against the peoples of
the Territories concerned by police and armed forces,
as well as mercenaries from South Africa and Southern
Rhodesia,
Taking note with appreciation of the concrete programmes of assistance to the national liberation movements of those Territories initiated by several Governments and by organizations within the United Nations system as well as a number of non-governmental
organizations,
Noting with satisfaction the progress towards national independence and freedom made by the national
liberation movements in those Territories, both through
their struggle and through reconstruction programmes,
particularly in the liberated areas of Guinea (Bissau)
by the Partido Africano da Independencia da Guine
e Cabo Verde, the sole and authentic representative
of the people of Guinea (Bissau) and Cape Verde,
l . Reaffirms ·the inalienable right of the peoples
of Angola, Guinea (Bissau) and Cape Verde and
Mozambique and other Territories under Portuguese
domination to self-determination and independence, as
recognized by the General Assembly in its resolution
1514 (XV), and the legitimacy of their struggle to
achieve that right;
2. Affirms that the national liberation movements of
Angola, Guinea (Bissau) and Cape Verde and Mozambique are the authentic representatives of the true
aspirations of the peoples of those Territories and
recommends that, pending the accession of those Territories to independence, all Governments, the specialized agencies and other organizations within the
United Nations system and the United Nations bodies
4 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentyseventh Session, Fourth Committee, 1986th meeting.
5 Ibid., 1987th meeting.
!I Ibid., 1980th and 1992nd meetings.

concerned should, when dealing with matters pertaining to the Territories, ensure the representation of
those Territories by the liberation movements concerned in an appropriate capacity and in consultation
with the Organization of African Unity;
3. Deems it imperative that negotiations should be
initiated at an early date between the Government of
Portugal and the national liberation movements referred
to above with a view to the full and speedy implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples with respect
to Angola, Guinea (Bissau) and Cape Verde and Mozambique, particularly in order to bring about as a
matter of priority:
(a) The immediate cessation by Portugal of its
colonial wars and all acts of repression against the
peoples of Angola, Guinea (Bissau) and Cape Verde
and Mozambique, the withdrawal of its military and
other forces and the elimination of all practices which
violate the inalienable rights of those populations, including the eviction and regrouping of the African
populations and the settlement of foreign immigrants
in the Territories;
( b) The just treatment of the freedom fighters of
Angola, Guinea (Bissau) and Cape Verde and Mozambique captured during the struggle for freedom
as prisoners of war, in accordance with the principles
of the Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment
of Prisoners of War, of 12 August 1949,7 and in
compliance with the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949;8
4. Appeals to all Governments, the specialized
agencies and other organizations within the United
Nations system and non-governmental organizations
to render to the peoples of Angola, Guinea (Bissau)
and Cape Verde and Mozambique, in particular the
populations in the liberated areas of those Territories,
all the moral and material assistance necessary to
continue their struggle for the achievement of their
inalienable right to self-determination and independence;
5. Requests all Governments, particularly those
members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
which continue to render assistance to Portugal, to
withdraw any assistance that enables Portugal to prosecute the colonial war in Angola, Guinea (Bissau)
and Cape Verde and Mozambique, and to prevent
the sale or supply of weapons, military equipment and
material to the Government of Portugal, as well as
all supplies, equipment and material for the manufacture or maintenance of weapons and ammunition
that it uses to perpetuate its colonial domination in
Africa;
6. Calls upon all States to take forthwith all possible measures to put an end to any activities that
help to exploit the Territories under Portuguese domination and the peoples therein and to discourage their
nationals and bodies corporate under their jurisdiction from entering into any transactions or arrangements that contribute to Portugal's domination over
those Territories and impede the implementation of
the Deciaration with respect to them;
7. Recommends that, in the event of the non-compliance by the Government of Portugal with the pro7 United Nations, Treaty
8 Jbid., No. 973, p. 287.

Series, vol. 75, No. 972, p. 135.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

v1s10ns of paragraph 3 above, the Security Council
should urgently consider taking all effective s~eps with
a view to securing the full and speedy implementation
of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and of
the related decisions of the Council;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to follow the implementation of the present resolution, in particular
to provide such assistance as may be necessary with
respect to the negotiations referred to in paragraph
3 above, and to report thereon, as appropriate, to the
General Assembly and the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
9. Commends the Special Committee for the work
it has accomplished during the year, particularly
through the dispatch of the Special Mission to Guinea
(Bissau), and requests it to continue to seek the best
ways and means of effectively assisting in the achievement by the peoples of the Territories under Portuguese domination of the goals set forth in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples and the Charter of the United
Nations.
2084th plenary meeting
14 November 1972
2945 (XXVII).

Question of Southern Rhodesia

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe),
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 9
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General on this item, 10
Having invited, in consultation with the Organization of African Unity and through it, representatives
of the national liberation movements of Zimbabwe to
participate in an observer capacity in its consideration of the situation in the Territory, and having heard
the statements of the representatives of the Zimbabwe
African People's Union and the Zimbabwe African
National Union, 11
Having heard the statement of a petitioner, 12
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration, as well as all other
resolutions relating to the question of Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe) adopted by the General Assembly,
the Security Council and the Special Committee,
9 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/8723/Rev.1), chaps. II, m
and VIII.
10 A/8759 and Add.I.
11 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentyseventh Session, Fourth Committee, 1988th meeting.
12 Ibid., 1990th meeting.

77

Reaffirming the inalienable right of the people of
Zimbabwe to self-determination and independence in
accordance with resolution 1514 (XV) and the legitimacy of their struggle to secure the enjoyment of
their rights, as set forth in the Charter of the United
Nations and in conformity with the objectives of resolution 1514 (XV),
Bearing in mind that the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as
the administering Power, has the primary responsibility for putting an end to the illegal racist minority
regime and for transferring effective power to the people
of Zimbabwe on the basis of the principle of majority
rule,
Noting with satisfaction the rejection by the African
population of Zimbabwe of the "proposals for a settlement" agreed upon between the Government of the
United Kingdom and the illegal regime, 13 and mindful
that those "proposals for a settlement" had been negotiated without consulting the genuine political leaders
of the African population of Zimbabwe,
Reaffirming that any attempt to negotiate the future
of Zimbabwe with the illegal regime on the basis of
independence before majority rule would be in contravention of the inalienable rights of the people of
that Territory and contrary to the provisions of the
Charter and of resolution 1514 (XV),
Deeply deploring the arbitrary and unlawful imprisonment and detention of, and the denial of fundamental human rights to, political leaders and other
i~d!viduals of Zimbabwe by the illegal racist minority
regime,
Deploring the persistent refusal of the Government
of the United Kingdom to co-operate with the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in
the discharge of the mandate entrusted to it by the
General Assembly,
Deeply disturbed by the continued presence and
intervention of South African forces in the Territory,
which assists the racist minority regime and seriously
threatens the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
neighbouring African States,
Mindful of the conditions necessary to enable the
people of Zimbabwe to exercise freely and fully their
right to self-determination and independence,
1. Reaffirms the principle that there should be no
independence before majority rule in Zimbabwe, and
affirms that any settlement relating to the future of
the Territory must be worked out with the full participation of the genuine political leaders representing
the majority of the people of Zimbabwe and must
be endorsed freely and fully by the people;
2. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland not to
transfer or accord, under any circumstance, to the
illegal regime any of the powers or attributes ,if
sovereignty, and requests that Government to ensl)I,
the country's attainment of independence by a demo
cratic system of government in accordance w:11; Hw
true aspirations of the majority of the population;
13 See Official Records of the Security Council, Twe!l!y-sixtlz
Year, Supplement for October, November and Decl'mber 1971,
document SI 10405.
