United Nations

A/RES/56/93

General Assembly

Distr.: General
28 January 2002

Fifty-sixth session
Agenda item 174

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/56/599)]

56/93.

International convention against the reproductive cloning
of human beings

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Universal Declaration on the Human Genome and Human
Rights, 1 adopted by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization on 11 November 1997, in particular article 11
thereof, in which the Conference specified that practices which are contrary to
human dignity, such as reproductive cloning of human beings, shall not be permitted
and invited States and international organizations to cooperate in taking, at the
national or international level, the measures necessary in that regard,
Recalling also its resolution 53/152 of 9 December 1998, by which it endorsed
the Universal Declaration on the Human Genome and Human Rights,
Bearing in mind Commission on Human Rights resolution 2001/71 of 25 April
2001, entitled “Human rights and bioethics”, 2 adopted at the fifty-seventh session of
the Commission,
Noting the resolution on bioethics adopted by the General Conference of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization on 2 November
2001, 3 in which the Conference approved the recommendations by the
Intergovernmental Bioethics Committee towards the possible elaboration, within the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, of universal
norms on bioethics,
Aware that the rapid development of the life sciences opens up tremendous
prospects for the improvement of the health of individuals and mankind as a whole,
but also that certain practices pose potential dangers to the integrity and dignity of
the individual,

_______________
1

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General Conference,
Twenty-ninth Session, vol. I, Resolutions, resolution 16.
2
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2001, Supplement No. 3 (E/2001/23), chap. II.
sect. A.
3
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General Conference,
Thirty-first Session, vol. I, Resolutions, resolution 22.

01 47951

A/RES/56/93

Particularly concerned, in the context of practices which are contrary to
human dignity, at recently disclosed information on the research being conducted
with a view to the reproductive cloning of human beings,
Determined to prevent such an attack on the human dignity of the individual,
Aware of the need for a multidisciplinary approach to the elaboration by the
international community of an appropriate response to this problem,
1.
Decides to establish an Ad Hoc Committee, open to all States Members
of the United Nations or members of specialized agencies or of the International
Atomic Energy Agency, for the purpose of considering the elaboration of an
international convention against the reproductive cloning of human beings;
2.
Requests the Secretary-General to invite the specialized agencies that
work and have substantial interest in the field of bioethics, including, in particular,
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the World
Health Organization, to participate as observers in the work of the Ad Hoc
Committee;
3.
Decides that the Ad Hoc Committee shall meet from 25 February to
1 March 2002 to consider the elaboration of a mandate for the negotiation of such
an international convention, including a list of the existing international instruments
to be taken into consideration and a list of legal issues to be addressed in the
convention, with the understanding that the Ad Hoc Committee will open with an
exchange of information and technical assessments provided by experts on genetics
and bioethics, and recommends that the work continue during the fifty-seventh
session of the General Assembly from 23 to 27 September 2002, within the
framework of a working group of the Sixth Committee;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Ad Hoc Committee with
the necessary facilities for the performance of its work;
5.
Requests the Ad Hoc Committee to report on its work to the General
Assembly at its fifty-seventh session;
6.
Recommends that, upon the adoption of a negotiation mandate by the
General Assembly, it may decide, taking into account the acute nature of the
problem, to reconvene the Ad Hoc Committee, in order to open negotiations on the
international convention referred to in paragraph 1 above;
7.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-seventh session
the item entitled “International convention against the reproductive cloning of
human beings”.
85th plenary meeting
12 December 2001

2
