S/2021/776

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 September 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 3 September 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council
Ireland assumes the presidency of the Security Council on 1 September 2021 at
a time when restrictions imposed as a response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
continue to ease, including in New York City.
Against this background, Ireland plans to hold all meetings of the Council in
person in the Security Council Chamber at United Nations Headquarters. The conduct
of meetings of the Council at Headquarters will be guided by the health and safety
advice of the Secretariat. This includes the wearing of a mask at all times, except
while delivering remarks. Ireland strongly encourages the vaccination of delegates
and Secretariat staff attending meetings in the Chamber.
If the situation with regard to COVID-19 were to deteriorate during the month
of September, the Council would have the possibility of reverting to videoconferences.
In doing so, the Council would be guided by the working methods set out in the letter
dated 7 May 2020 from the President of the Security Council addressed to the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372).
Member States that are not members of the Council will continue to participate
in open debates through the submission of written statements. Member States that are
not members of the Council and have been invited to participate in public meetings
of the Council under rule 37 or rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure, or have
been invited by the President of the Council as agreed by the Council prior to the
meeting, will be allowed into the Chamber. Others will be able to observe the
meetings on United Nations Web TV.
The current working methods and guidelines are a response to exceptional and
unprecedented circumstances and will not set a precedent for the future. They may be
reviewed, adjusted or discontinued, subject to the agreement of all members of the
Council.
(Signed) Geraldine Byrne Nason
President of the Security Council

21-12335 (E)

080921

*2112335*
