S/2012/142

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 March 2012
Original: English

Letter dated 8 March 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith a letter dated 16 February 2012,
addressed to me from the Secretary General of the League of Arab States Mr. Nabil
al-Arabi, transmitting resolution 7446 of 12 February 2012, regarding the situation
in the Syrian Arab Republic, which was adopted at an extraordinary meeting at the
ministerial level of the Council of the League of Arab States.
I should be grateful if you could bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council (see annex).
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

12-25601 (E) 080312 090312

*1225601*

S/2012/142

Annex to the letter dated 8 March 2012 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
[Original: Arabic]
As part of our continuing consultation over developments in the situation in
Syria, I have the honour to transmit to you herewith resolution No. 7446 dated
12 February 2012, which was adopted at an extraordinary meeting of the Council of
the League of Arab States at the ministerial level, and to bring to your attention, in
particular, the following paragraphs of that resolution:
Paragraph 1 (a): It is essential that all acts of violence and all killing of Syrian
civilians which, as a response, are out of all proportion, should cease
immediately and completely. The Security Council is requested to adopt a
resolution on that matter.
Paragraph 5: To call upon the Security Council to adopt a resolution
concerning the formation of a joint Arab-United Nations peacekeeping force to
oversee implementation of a ceasefire [in Syria].
Paragraph 6: To request the United Nations Arab Group to present to the
General Assembly at the earliest opportunity a draft resolution that comprises
the Arab Initiative and the other League of Arab States resolutions relating to
the situation in Syria.
Paragraph 10: To make it possible for Arab and international relief
organizations, including, inter alia, the Arab Red Crescent Organization, the
Red Cross, the International Committee of the Red Cross, the Arab Doctors
Union and Médecins Sans Frontières to bring humanitarian and relief supplies
to citizens in need, deal with the deteriorating humanitarian situation and
alleviate suffering; and to call upon those organizations to shoulder their
humanitarian responsibilities. Should any obstacles be encountered in bringing
food and medicine to Syrian civilians, to call upon the United Nations Security
Council to assume its responsibilities.
In this context, I should like, yet again, to affirm the commitment of the
League of Arab States to the plan for a peaceful solution of the Syrian crisis that
was adopted by the Council of the League of Arab States at the ministerial level in
its resolution No. 7444 dated 22 January 2012.
I am sure that you agree with me on the need to prioritize urgent action to halt
the acts of violence and bloodshed and the violations perpetrated against Syrian
civilians, the frequency and brutality of which has escalated in recent days. To that
end, the adoption of a Security Council resolution is required, demanding an
immediate ceasefire and the adoption of the necessary monitoring and peacekeeping
mechanisms to oversee implementation of an immediate and comprehensive
ceasefire and the cessation of all acts of violence by any party.
Against that background, and further to our discussions over the suggestion
concerning the appointment of a joint representative of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and the Secretary General of the League of Arab States to follow up
efforts to implement the Arab plan for a peaceful solution of the Syrian crisis, I
believe that it is now essential to name that joint United Nations-League of Arab
States representative without delay.

2

12-25601

S/2012/142

Finally, I should like to affirm yet again my desire that coordination and
cooperation with you should continue, with a view to bringing an immediate end to
all the acts of violence that are escalating in Syria and beginning the political
process, while at the same time dealing with the ever-worsening crisis, which poses
such serious challenges to future security and stability in Syria and the region. I
hope that you will be kind enough to take the necessary action to circulate the
present letter and the annexed resolution to States members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Nabil al-Arabi
Secretary General

12-25601

3

S/2012/142

Enclosure
Follow-up to developments in the critical situation in Syria
The Council of the League of Arab States, meeting in Cairo on 12 February
2012 at the ministerial level in an extraordinary resumed session,
Having heard statements from the head of the Arab Ministerial Committee on
the Situation in Syria and the Secretary General of the League of Arab States on the
Arab political initiative and the Security Council deliberations on the grave
developments in Syria at the session held on 31 January 2012,
On the basis of the following resolutions adopted and statements made by the
Council of the League of Arab States at the ministerial level and the Arab
Ministerial Committee on the Situation in Syria: statement 148 (extraordinary
session of 27 August 2011); statement 152 (regular session 136 of 13 September
2011); resolution 7435 (extraordinary session of 16 October 2011); resolution 7436
(resumed extraordinary session of 2 November 2011); resolution 7437 (resumed
extraordinary session of 2 November 2011); resolution 7438 (resumed extraordinary
session of 12 November 2011); resolution 7439 (resumed extraordinary session of
16 November 2011, held in Rabat); resolution 7440 (resumed extraordinary session
of 16 November 2011, held in Rabat); resolution 7441 (resumed extraordinary
session of 24 November 2011), concerning developments in the situation in Syria;
resolution 1900 (extraordinary session of 26 November 2011), adopted by the
Economic and Social Council of the League of Arab States at the ministerial level;
statement 161 issued at an extraordinary session on 20 December 2011; resolution
7442 (resumed extraordinary session of 27 November 2011), concerning monitoring
of developments in the situation in Syria; resolutions 7444 and 7445 (resumed
extraordinary session of 22 January 2012), concerning monitoring of developments
in the situation in Syria and elements of the Arab plan to resolve the Syrian crisis;
the statements issued in Doha on 3 and 17 December 2011; and the statement issued
in Cairo on 8 January 2012,
Expressing its rejection and condemnation of continuing acts of violence and
killing in Syria; the continued escalation by the Syrian Government and continued
adoption of the military option, together with the use of heavy weapons to bombard
besieged neighbourhoods and villages, in contravention of its undertakings under
resolutions adopted by the Council of the League of Arab States and the Arab peace
plan,
Strongly condemning such military operations, which have dangerously
exacerbated the situation in Syria and the suffering of civilians,
Expressing its appreciation of the group of Security Council member States
that on 31 January 2012 voted in favour of the draft resolution on the situation in
Syria, and its extreme disappointment with regard to the position of the Russian
Federation and the People’s Republic of China in opposition to that draft, which was
exploited by the Government of Syria and allowed it to increase its violence against
and suppression of the fraternal Syrian people,
Conscious of the desperate need to address the urgent humanitarian crisis
involving Syrian civilians in a number of governorates as a result of the escalation
in violence and the need for basic food, medicine and fuel requisites,

4

12-25601

S/2012/142

Confirming its determination to continue Arab efforts to find a peaceful
solution that will deliver Syria from its crushing crisis, achieve the aspirations of the
Syrian people for reform, change and a peaceful transition to a peaceful democratic
life and preserve the unity, stability and territorial sovereignty of Syria, while
avoiding any military intervention,
Decides
1.

The following measures and arrangements:

(a) It is essential that all acts of violence and all killing of Syrian civilians
which, as a response, are out of all proportion, should cease immediately and
completely. The Security Council is requested to adopt a resolution on that matter.
(b) To call upon the Syrian armed forces to immediately lift the military
siege that has been imposed on residential neighbourhoods and villages and to
refrain from bombarding and raiding residential areas; the army and military
equipment should return to barracks and original positions; and the Syrian
authorities should shoulder their responsibility to protect civilians.
(c) To affirm the obligation to implement in full all the resolutions of the
Council of the League that were referred to above, the most recent of which was
resolution 7444 of 22 January 2012, concerning the plan to peacefully resolve the
Syrian crisis, and to urge the Syrian Government to honour its obligations and
respond genuinely and rapidly to Arab efforts to find a peaceful way out of the crisis
in Syria, thereby avoiding military intervention, as has been repeatedly affirmed by
the Council.
(d) To halt all forms of diplomatic cooperation with the representatives of
the Syrian regime in international organizations and conferences and in States, and
to call upon all States that are concerned for the Syrian people to keep pace with
Arab measures in that regard.
2.
The use of such extreme force against Syrian civilians and the targeting
of women and children is an offence under international criminal law and those who
use it must be held responsible.
3.
To affirm the validity of the economic embargo and that all commercial
operations with the Syrian regime must cease, with the exception of those which
have a direct impact on Syrian civilians, in accordance with the resolutions adopted
by the Council of the League in that regard.
4.
To terminate the responsibilities of the League of Arab States observer
mission that was formed pursuant to the protocol signed on 19 December 2011 by
the Government of Syria and the General Secretariat of the League.
5.
To call upon the Security Council to adopt a resolution concerning the
formation of a joint Arab-United Nations peacekeeping force to oversee
implementation of a ceasefire.
6.
To request the United Nations Arab Group to present to the General
Assembly at the earliest opportunity a draft resolution that comprises the Arab
Initiative and the other relevant League of Arab States resolutions.
7.
To request the Secretary General to name a special delegation to follow
up the proposed political process as part of the Arab initiative, in accordance with

12-25601

5

S/2012/142

paragraph 5 of resolution 7444, which was adopted by the Council of the League at
its resumed extraordinary session of 22 January 2012.
8.
To welcome the invitation by the Tunisian Republic to host the Friends of
Syria conference that is planned for 24 February 2012 and stress the importance of
participation by Arab States in that conference, as did the head of the Tunisian
delegation in his statement to the Council.
9.
To open channels of communication with the Syrian opposition and
provide it with all forms of political and material support; to call upon it to close its
ranks and, before the Tunis conference, enter into serious dialogue that will
maintain its cohesion and effectiveness.
10. To make it possible for Arab and international relief organizations,
including, inter alia, the Arab Red Crescent Organization, the Red Cross, the
International Committee of the Red Cross, the Arab Doctors Union and Médecins
Sans Frontières, to bring humanitarian and relief supplies to citizens in need, deal
with the deteriorating humanitarian situation and alleviate suffering; and to call
upon those organizations to shoulder their humanitarian responsibilities. Should any
obstacles be encountered in bringing food and medicine to Syrian civilians, to call
upon the United Nations Security Council to assume its responsibilities.
11. To call for the organization of popular contribution campaigns aimed at
assisting the fraternal Syrian people and alleviating their suffering.
12. To devise an Arab-international strategy for the provision of support and
humanitarian assistance to the fraternal Syrian people.
13. To call upon the Islamic Cooperation Organization to support
international efforts with regard to Syria and to shoulder its responsibilities in that
respect.
14. To remain in permanent session in order to follow up developments in
the situation in Syria.
Resolution 7446, resumed extraordinary session of 12 February 2012.
• Lebanon has reservations with regard to this resolution.
• Algeria has reservations with regard to paragraphs 5 and 6, on the basis of its
reservation to paragraph 7 of resolution 7444 of 22 January 2012.

6

12-25601
