S/2006/131

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 February 2006
Original: English

Letter dated 24 February 2006 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the decision of the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union adopted at its 40th meeting, held in Addis Ababa on 6 October
2005, and to Security Council resolution 1633 (2005) of 21 October 2005, under
which an International Working Group was created to assist the Government of Côte
d’Ivoire in the implementation of its programme and to consolidate and strengthen
existing follow-up mechanisms. The International Working Group held its fourth
meeting in Abidjan on 17 February 2006 and issued the attached communiqué (see
annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring this communiqué to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

06-25468 (E) 2870206

*0625468*

S/2006/131

Annex
[Original: English and French]

Fourth ministerial meeting of the International
Working Group on Côte d’Ivoire
Final communiqué
1.
The fourth ministerial level meeting of the International Working Group was
held in Abidjan on 17 February 2006, under the co-chairmanship of H.E.
Mr. Rodolphe Adada, Minister of State, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Francophonie of the Congo, and Mr. Pierre Schori, Special Representative of the
United Nations for Côte d’Ivoire. In attendance were Ministers of France, Ghana,
Guinea, the Niger, Nigeria and South Africa, as well as the High Representative for
the elections in Côte d’Ivoire, the ECOWAS Executive Secretary, and
representatives of the United States of America, Benin, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the African Union, the European Union, the
Organisation internationale de la Francophonie and the World Bank.
2.
The Prime Minister briefed the Group on the conclusions of the seminar on the
road map organized by the Government in Yamoussoukro from 9 to 11 February
2006, as well as measures he intends to take to expedite the effective
implementation of the road map, especially with regard to identification and
disarmament. The Group congratulates the Prime Minister for taking the initiative to
convene the seminar, and for the conclusions reached. The Group salutes the
inclusive spirit of the Prime Minister, which encourages dialogue among all the
Ivorian political actors. In this context, it also welcomes the cooperation between
the President and the Prime Minister.
3.
The Group asks all the Ivorian parties to proceed without delay with the
disarmament operations and the process of identification of the population.
4.
In order to create a social and political climate conducive to facilitating
significant progress in the implementation of the road map, the Group exhorts all the
parties, especially the media, whose repeated hate messages constitute an
obstruction to the peace and reconciliation process, to desist from such acts.
5.
The parties should commit themselves to strictly complying with the ban on
public demonstrations as stipulated in the presidential decree of 12 December 2005.
The parties should also commit themselves to convincing their followers to refrain
from inflammatory statements or from any action likely to exacerbate political and
social tensions.
6.
The Group strongly condemns the recent violence, including against the staff
and property of the United Nations and humanitarian organizations, notably in the
western part of the country. The Group deplores the human losses. The Group
reminds the national authorities of their obligation to provide security for persons
and their property, in accordance with the international norms and conventions
subscribed to by the Government of Côte d’Ivoire. In this regard, the Group recalls
the Secretary-General’s statement of 1 February 2006 and urges the State authorities
to ensure strict compliance with the principles governing the activities of

2

S/2006/131

humanitarian agencies with a view to facilitating their return, assistance to and
protection of needy populations.
7.
The Group reiterates that whoever obstructs the good functioning of the peace
and reconciliation process is liable to sanctions by the Security Council.
8.
With regard to the National Assembly, the Group recalls the SecretaryGeneral’s statement of 29 January 2006, which stresses the need to avoid any
unilateral action, and recalls that all parties must strictly adhere to the provisions of
Security Council resolution 1633 (2005), while emphasizing the importance of the
decisions of the African Union. The Group notes that the Secretary-General intends
to remain in touch with the parties concerned in order to achieve the implementation
of resolution 1633 (2005) and the decisions of the International Working Group.
9.
The Group underlines the imperative to enhance the security of the personnel
and equipment of the Radio Télévision ivoirienne in order to ensure its
independence and to guarantee unhindered and equitable access by all the Ivorian
parties. The Group invites the Prime Minister to take the necessary security
measures to allow the Radio Télévision ivoirienne to fulfil its mission.
10. The Group takes note of the extensive consultations carried out by the High
Representative for the elections with the signatories to the peace agreements,
notably the Pretoria Agreement. The Group endorses the arbitration by the High
Representative issued in his communiqué of 16 February, according to which the
election of the Bureau of the Independent Electoral Commission is in compliance
with the Pretoria Agreement. The Group also endorses the recommendation of the
High Representative for the elections to invite the Head of State, the Prime Minister
and the political parties to reach, as soon as possible, a political understanding to
ensure the effective functioning of the Independent Electoral Commission before the
beginning of March.
11. The Group calls on all the Ivorian parties to cooperate closely with the
International Working Group with a view to facilitating the peace process and to
renounce violence and resort to dialogue and consultation to resolve any
disagreement.
12.

The Group will hold its next meeting on 17 March 2006 in Côte d’Ivoire.

3
