S/PRST/2001/33

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 November 2001
Original: English and French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4408th meeting of the Security Council, held on 8 November 2001, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Burundi”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the 1 November 2001 inauguration of
Burundi’s Transitional Government, and calls on all Burundians to support it
and work together to ensure the success of this broad-based and inclusive
government’s fulfilling its functions in accordance with the agreements that led
to its establishment.
“The Security Council welcomes the continued engagement of the
Regional Initiative and, in this regard, also welcomes the deployment of the
first elements of the multinational security presence tasked with the protection
of returning political leaders. The Council calls on all the Burundian parties to
support this undertaking, and expresses its gratitude to the Government of
South Africa for its contribution to the cause of peace in Burundi.
“The Security Council expresses its deep appreciation to former
President Nelson Mandela for his dedicated service as Facilitator of the Arusha
Peace Process, and reiterates its hope that the region and the international
community may continue to rely on his moral leadership. The Council
welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special Representative
for the Great Lakes, through the Implementation Monitoring Committee.
“The Security Council condemns the recent attacks by the FDD and FNL
on civilians, and is gravely concerned that the frequency of such attacks has
increased. The Council once again states that the installation of a broad-based
government in accordance with an internationally supported peace process
makes armed rebellion an unacceptable means of political expression.
“The Security Council reiterates its call for an immediate suspension of
hostilities in Burundi and for the armed groups to enter into negotiations to
reach a definitive ceasefire, which is the priority issue. In this regard, the
Council welcomes the involvement of President Bongo of Gabon and Deputy
President Zuma of South Africa and expresses its full support for their efforts.
“The Security Council expresses its concern at the human rights and
humanitarian situation in Burundi and once again calls on the responsible
parties to ensure full compliance with the relevant international conventions.
01-62851 (E) 081101

*0162851*

S/PRST/2001/33

“The Security Council calls on the international community to increase
its humanitarian assistance, as well as to assist in Burundi’s economic recovery
and development through, inter alia, honouring the pledges made at the Paris
donors’ conference.”

2
