UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTIETH

YEAR

FE0 2 9 1984

856

th

MEETING:

&4/sA
1975

30 NOVEMBER

t3lzxLECVI~ON

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/ 1856)

l

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (S/l 1883 and Add.1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SjPV.1856

.‘,

;,

*;

,: : ! F;'

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures:Mention
of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents‘of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council; The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which infor-.
mation about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new ‘system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

‘.

1856th MEETING
Held in New York on Sunday, 30 November
President: Mr. Yakov A. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China, Costa
Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Mauritania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland,
United Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of
Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l856)

1.

Adoption

2.

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General
on the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (S/l 1883
and Add. 1)
The meeting

of the agenda

was called to order at 6.25 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (S/ 11883 and Add. 1)
Add.1)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Russian):
As members of the Security Council know, the
Secretary-General has submitted a report on the United
Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF)
for the period 22 May to 24 November 1975. I should
like to draw the attention of members of the Council
to the fact that in paragraph 14 of the addendum
to his report the Secretary-General
proposes to renew
the mandate of UNDOF for a further period of six
months.
2. This question was discussed in some detail by
members of the Council in the course of consultations
held at unofftcial meetings which have lasted two
days, and taken up many hours. Members of the Council heard the detailed information
given by the
Secretary-General
in connexion with his visit to the
Near East. If the Secretary-General
wishes to speak
here he will, of course, be given the floor. If not, we
shall proceed to the next stage of our work, namely

1975, at 6 p.m.

the Council’s consideration
of the draft resolution
before it, contained in document S/11888, submitted
by the following co-sponsors: Guyana, Mauritania,
United Republic of Cameroon and United Republic
of Tanzania.
3. This draft resolution
has been presented in
accordance with an agreement by members of the
Council that it should be put to a vote at the very
beginning of this meeting. This draft resolution is also
directly related to the draft statement by the President
which appears in Security Council document S/l 1889,
and has also been submitted by the four countries
which I have mentioned. As was agreed in the informal
consultations among members of the Security Council
on 29 and 30 November, this statement will be made
by the President in oral form, without any vote being
taken on it, and will be inclused in the records of
the Council.
4. The representative
of the United
States has
expressed a desire to speak before the vote. The
representative of Guyana has also asked to be allowed
to speak-obviously
to introduce formally the fourPower draft resolution.
The question is on whom
should I call first, the representative
of the United
States, or the representative of Guyana who wishes
to speak on behalf of the sponsors of the draft resolution. With the kind permission of the representative
of the United States, I shall call first on the representative of Guyana.
5. Mr. JACKSON
(Guyana): Mr. President, as you
so correctly stated, the members of the Council have
been involved in long, intensive and arduous consultations in an effort which I believe to be sincere
and genuine to find common ground for a solution
to the problem with which the Council is now faced.
Every member of the Council has been involved in
those consultations.
6. My delegation,
along with the delegations
of
Mauritania,
the United Republic of Cameroon and the
United Republic of Tanzania, has taken some initiatives which we believe can command
unanimous
support in the Council. We have taken other initiatives
which we believe and hope can command majority
support in the Council.
7. As a result of those efforts, the members of the
Council now have before them two documents. The

first [S/Z18881 contains the text of a draft resolution
which, in the opinion of its sponsors, reflects to a large
extent the need for Security Council action on this
matter. But the draft resolution does something else as
well: it attempts to take account of the differing views
of various delegations expressed during our informal
consultations.
The second [s/11889] contains a draft
statement by the President of the Council, simple, in
its language and clear in its terms.

attempted to accommodate the views of every member
of the Council in arriving at that formulation.
13. Subparagraph (b) of the operative section deals
with the most important
element of renewing the
mandate of UNDOF for a further period of six months.
We know that this is something that will be welcomed
by the international
community.
14. Subparagraph (c) requests the Secretary-General
to keep the Council informed on further developments.

8. It is, I believe, necessary to say that, for the
non-aligned countries, several factors and elements
are of extreme importance. The first and most obvious
one is that the troops that make up UNDOF are on
Syrian territory. I do not believe that that observation needs any further elaboration.

15. I would like to take this opportunity
to express
publicly to the Secretary-General,
on behalf of the
sponsors of the draft resolution, our deep appreciation
of his untiring and constructive efforts, generally in
the cause of peace throughout the world, specifically
in the search for a just solution to the Middle East
situation, including the Palestinian question and for
his continued devotion to the work of the Council
in this exercise.

9. The second element is the shared and, I think,
universal understanding of the Council that at this stage
it is vitally necessary that we take action which will
avoid creating an impression that the Security Council
views the renewal of UNDOF’s
mandate as an
automatic exercise. Correlative to this element would
be the absolute necessity for the Council to take
action in the near future-indeed,
as early as possiblethat will give impetus to the processes for the collective search in which the members of the Council
and indeed the generality of the membership of the
United Nations are now engaged for a just and lasting
solution to the problem of the Middle East in which
the Palestinian question is central.

16. I believe that the draft statement speaks for itself
and, therefore, does not need any lengthy introduction.
I would therefore end by commending to the members
of the Council the adoption of the draft resolution
and the draft statement.
17. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian):
I call ,on the representative of the United States for
an explanation of vote before the vote.
18. Mr. MOYNIHAN
(United States of America):
Mr. President, I should like to express my gratitude
to you for the opportunity
I now have. to be the
first of what I am sure will prove to be all of the other
members of the Council to express their appreciation
to my brother from Guyana and his colleagues from
Mauritania,
the United Republic of Tanzania and
the United Republic of Cameroon, for the valiant
efforts which they have made to bring about this result.
It required a great deal of them and was an expression of their commitment
to the work of the Council,
which we all share, and their performance
these
past three days we certainly admire.

10. The last and by no means the least element is
the need for the Council, in recognition-of the widelyexpressed views of the international
community,
both in the United Nations and outside of it, to
recognize that in pursuing that search for a just and
lasting peace the representatives
of the Palestinians
should participate actively in those processes.
11. The draft that we have proposed reflects, I
think, sentiments that the Secretary-General
expressed
in his recent report, that it is essential not only
to maintain the quiet in the Israel-Syria
sector, but
also to provide an atmosphere conducive to further
peace efforts and to assist in such efforts if required.

19. With respect to the draft resolution before us,
the .United States wishes to make clear that we are
not agreeing to this draft resolution, which includes a
provision calling for a Security Council debate on the
situation in the Middle East, out of any desire for
such a debate in this setting, much less out of any
intention, howsoever remote, of seeing a transfer of the
negotiations between the two parties to the UNDOF
arrangement to the Council. We are agreeing solely
out of deference to the right of the Council to take
up any matter it desires to take up.

12. The draft resolution in its operative paragraphs
is simple. Subparagraph (a) expresses a desire for the
Council to resume consideration
on a specific date,
indeed a date that takes account of the time-table
of action of the Council-12
January 1976; and it
decides that that debate should be on the Middle
East problem,
including
the Palestinian
question,
and that in that debate account should be taken of
all the relevant United Nations resolutions.
The
formula that has been reflected in that paragraph
does not reflect fully the position of the non-aligned
countries; but we have included it in the spirit of
compromise
which has characterized
many of the
deliberations
of the Organization
since the seventh
special session. We have honestly and sincerely

20. We consider that this draft resolution is taken
without prejudice whatsoever to the Geneva formula
or to the negotiations
by the parties through intermediaries.
2

21. With respect to the matter of relevant United
Nations resolutions, the United States considers that
only Security Council resolutions
242 (1%7) and
338 (1973) are in fact relevant to the situation in the
Middle East.

28. I shall of course immediately
take the necessary
measures for the continued functioning of UNDOF.
I shall also continue my efforts, in co-operation with
the parties, to assist in the search for a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East.

22. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Russian):
One of the members of the Council has requested
that the draft resolution submitted by four sponsors
be put to the vote. Therefore the draft resolution
S/ 11888 will now be put to the vote.

29. Mr. LA1 Ya-li (China) (translation from Chinese):
The Chinese Government’s
position on the Middle
East question was stated in a comprehensive
way in
the speech of the Chairman of the Chinese delegation
during the general debate* and in the speech of the
Vice-Chairman
of the Chinese delegation during the
debate on the Palestinian question3 at the current session of the General Assembly. We are in favour of
We+b+hwW
and some non-aligned States for a Security Council
debate on the Middle East problem, including the
Palestinian question in January 1976, and we are in
favour of inviting the representatives
of the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO) to participate in
this debate.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft
none. *

rewlutim

WCIS rrppv

to

Two members (China and Iraq) did not participate
in the voting.

23. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian):
Now, in accordance with the agreement reached at
the consultations
between members of the Council,
I shall make a statement on behalf of the majority of
its members. As I said in my prefatory comments,
the text of the statement is to be found in document
S/11889. It reads as follows:

30. With respect to the reference to “all relevant
United Nations resolutions”
contained in subparagraph (a) of the draft resolution, the Chinese delegation has stated its position on certain of these
resolutions on a number of occasions in the past, which
is a matter of record. I am not going to repeat it
here.

“It is the understanding
of the majority of the
Security
Council that when it reconvenes
on
12 January 1976 in accordance with paragraph (a)
of resolution 381 (1975) the representatives
of the
Palestine Liberation Organization will be invited to
participate in the debate.”
24.

3 1. With regard to the question of UNDOF, we have
always held a different position in principle. Based on
the above position, the Chinese delegation did not participate in the vote on the draft resolution.

I call on the Secretary-General.
32.

KANE
(Mauritania)
(interpretation from
Mr. President, my first words will be to
convey to both you and the Secretary-General
the
warm and sincere congratulations
of my delegation for
the unremitting
efforts you have made over the last
three days to find’ a solution to the problem now
before the Security Council. Thanks to your wise
mediation and the positive attitude of members of the
Council, the latter has just adopted the draft resolution renewing the mandate of UNDOF.

25. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have taken
note with great satisfaction of the decision of the
Council to prolong the mandate of UNDOF
for a
further six-month period.

Mr.

French):

26. As I have stated in my report, it is my considered view that UNDOF continues to be essential not
only to maintain quiet in the Israel-Syria sector but
also to provide an atmosphere conducive to further
negotiating efforts. It was in this spirit that I undertook
a journey to the area just prior to the Council’s debate.
It is, I believe, also in this spirit that the members
of the Council have persevered through three long
days and nights of. consultations
in an effort to find
a means of prolonging the mandate. That effort has
now been crowned with success.

33. The number of meetings’ devoted to studying
this question indicates the serious and potentially
dangerous nature of the situation prevailing in the
Middle East, which requires swift and positive action
on the part of the Council in seeking a just and lasting
solution to the problem in the region. The reason it
has been possible to adopt this resolution
is the
understanding and the wisdom evinced by the people
and Government
of Syria. Such a renewal of the
mandate, while indeed necessary in a continued effort
to find a just and lasting solution to the Middle East
problem should not be a means of allowing Israel to
maintain a status quo which enables it illegally to
continue to occupy part of Syrian territory.

27. I wish to take this opportunity
to express my
sincere gratitude to all members of the Council, and
especially to the sponsors of the resolution,
for
their tireless efforts which finally led to this positive
result. The failure of those efforts would in my view
have been a most serious development
not only
for peace in the Middle East but also for the United
Nations.
3

34. The Security Council cannot renew the mandate
indefinitely
if the Israeli Government does not intend
to avail itself of these renewals to work towards
justice and right. The fact that under the terms of the
present resolution the Council has decided to meet
again on 12 January 1976 and has requested representatives of the PLO to participate in that debate is
an important
step which supplements the decision
taken by the General Assembly in resolution 3375
(XXX).
It would be illusory to try to settle the
Middle East problem without the participation
of the
legitimate representatives
of the Palestinian
people.
Indeed, one cannot cure a tree by killing its roots.
The crisis that the Middle East has been experiencing
for almost 28 years now would not have had any
raison d’2tre if the Palestinian people had not been
illegally chased out of their homeland.

39. That is an important decision which falls within
the framework of the major concerns of the Council
-that
is, the need to seek ways and means for
finding an over-all, just and lasting solution to the
Middle East crisis and to give a new thrust to that
search.
40. It has become a truism-but
a tragic and painful
truismthat the Middle East crisis causes a constant
state of dangerous pressure and tension that threatens
international
peace and security. Indeed, despite the
agreement between Egypt and Israel on the Sinai
concluded on 4 September 1975 [.S/11818/Add.I to 51,
which my delegation regards as an important
step
on the thorny road towards peace in that region,
the situation on the Golan Heights remains unstable
and can at any time place in jeopardy all the efforts
and all the progress made so far.

35. The firm and logical attitude adopted by the
Government of Syria, which linked the renewal of the
mandate of UNDOF to the convening of the Council
in January 1976, with the effective participation of the
representatives of the Palestinian people, is eloquent
proof of the solidarity of all the Arab countries concerning the national liberation struggle being waged
by the Palestinian people under the direction of the
PLO.

41. It is true, as the excellent report by the SecretaryGeneral brings out, that the situation in UNDOF’s
zone of operation has remained calm, since Syria and
Israel have continued to respect the cease-fire as
well as the agreement on Disengagement
between
Israeli and Syrian Forces of 31 May 1974 [S/11302/
Add.11.
42. But we agree with the Secretary-General
that it
is a precarious calm because the Disengagement
Agreement is not a peace agreement: it is only a step
towards a just and lasting peace, on the basis of
Security Council resolution 338 (1973). It was precisely to consolidate
that step and continue that
movement towards peace that UNDOF
was established. Its role is to maintain calm on the Golan
Heights in order that an atmosphere propitious to the
opening of negotiations may be created. UNDOF is a
catalyst for peace efforts, but it cannot become a
substitute for such efforts, nor can it serve as an
alibi or a pretext for Israel to perpetuate its illegal
occupation of territory of the Syrian State.

36. Resolution 3375 (XXX), adopted with the votes of
an overwhelming .majority of the General Assembly,
on the proposal of the President of the Arab Republic of Egypt, is striking proof of the fact that all the Arab
countries and the international
community
share the
view that it is necessary for the Palestinian people to
participate in all efforts designed to find a just and
lasting solution to the Middle East problem.
To
attempt to ignore that evident fact is certainly to seek
to defy the United Nations and the international
community. The peoples that love justice, freedom and
peace can no longer accept a situation in which a
minority,
because it regards itself as sufficiently
powerful, can seek to impose the law of the jungle
on the rest of the international
community.
Such an
attitude cannot be accepted by the United Nations,
which draws its strength from the defence of justice
and right.

43. We are therefore opposed to a mere automatic
renewal of UNDOF’s
mandate. In the circumstances,
such an automatic renewal would serve Israel’s interests and would delay indefinitely
the satisfaction of
Syria’s just claims, while at the same time aggravating
the feeling of frustration in the region.

37. Before concluding, I should like once again to
express my delegation’s warm congratulations
to the
Secretary-General,
who, throughout
these past few
days, has spared no effort to bring the parties to
the conflict to a measure of agreement satisfying
the entire international
community.

44. That is why my delegation is pleased that the
Security Council, while agreeing once again to renew
UNDOF’s
mandate for six months, has provided
that during that same period it will examine the Middle East question, including the Palestinian problem,
in substance.

38. Mr. OYONO
(United- Republic of Cameroon)
(interpretation
from French): As one of the sponsors
of the draft resolution which the Security Council has
just adopted, with almost all of its members voting
in favour, the delegation of the United Republic of
Cameroon was pleased to be able to reafftrm its
position by casting an affirmative vote on the draft
resolution, concerning the renewal of the mandate of
UNDOF for another period of six months.

45. In that respect, we repeat that there can be no
lasting solution of the Middle East problem without
the participation
of the PLO, which has been overwhelmingly recognized by the members of the international community as the authentic representative of
the Palestinian people. To deny that necessary condi4

Heights in order to evacuate them or to create
a situation in which these settlements would not
be part of the Jewish State’. According to the same
report Mr. Admoni,
Director of the Settlement
Department of the Zionist Federation,
stated that
f1 250 million had been spent so far on the ‘nonmilitary infrastructure in the Golan Heights’.“’

tion is to demonstrate
a lack of political realism.
The Palestinian people must be enabled to return to
its homeland, Palestine, and to recover its property; it
must be allowed to exercise its right to self-determination without foreign interference; it must be allowed
to exercise its right to sovereignty over its territory.
46. That is why my delegation fully approves of
the statement you have just made, Mr. President, on
behalf of the Security
Council,
regarding
the
meaning of subparagraph (a) of the operative part of the
draft resolution the Council adopted earlier in this
meeting-that
is, that the representatives
of the
PLO will effectively
participate
in the Council’s
discussions of the Palestinian
problem in January
1976, in the spirit of General Assembly resolution
3375 (XXX), to which my delegation gave its full
support.

My delegation
continues to find it inconceivable
that the Council, while renewing the mandates of the
Force in the area, should take no action whatsoever
to prevent Israel from pursuing its flagrant and totally
illegal policies of the settlement and annexation of the
occupied territories.
50. If the Council truly expects a just and lasting
peace to be established in the area, it must surely
realize the consequences of the Israeli policy of
expansionism.
Realizing
these consequences,
the
Council must surely also, in the primary interest
of maintaining
peace and security, take clear and
unequivocal
measures to put an end to the Zionist
policies of expansion.

47. In conclusion, I should like to take this opportunity to express my delegation’s deep gratitude to the
Secretary-General
for the untiring efforts he has
constantly made for the establishment
of a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East. We wish to pay a
tribute too to his distinguished
assistants, including
Major-General
Hannes Philipp.

51. The Council, in our view, has again failed to
do so on the occasion of yet another extension of
the presence of UNDOF.
My delegation has therefore again abstained from participating
in the voting
which just took place on the adoption of the draft
resolution.

48. Mr. ZAHAWIE
(Iraq): The Security Council
has just decided to renew for the third time the
mandate of UNDOF.
The occupation of the Arab
territories, meanwhile, by the Israel forces of aggression continues well into its eighth year. Israel continues to implement
its policy of colonization
of the
occupied territories
by the establishment
of new
settlements and townships, changing the geographic
features and the demographic
composition
of those
territories.

52. Having said that, we take note, however, of the
fact that for the first time in renewing the mandate
of a Force in the area, the Council has given some
indication
that it intends to concern itself in the
near future with the substance and with the root
cause of the problem, namely, the so-called situation
in the Middle East and the question of Palestine,
which is indeed the real and primary problem. My
delegation
devoutly hopes that the Council would
seize that opportunity
in dealing with the problem to
redress the neglect it has shown towards the question
of Palestine and the great injustice in had dealt to
the people of Palestine in reducing them and their
national cause to nothing more than a problem of
refugees, nameless refugees at that, for such was the
deplorable stand taken by the Council in its iniquitous
resolution 242 (1967).

49. The extent and evidence of this policy of settlement and annexation are amply documented in the
last report presented by the Special Committee
to
Investigate
Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Population
of the Occupied Territories. That report, as I said, contains ample evidence
concerning all the occupied territories.
I shall limit
myself to citing quotations from that report which
deal with the Golan Heights. I shall quote from the
report, which in turn quotes Israeli sources.

53. The General Assembly, however, has shown
that the world has awakened to the real issue. It has
adopted resolutions which would redress the injustice
and the wrongs inflicted upon the Palestinians since
the partition of Palestine. It is for the Council now
to take note of those General Assembly resolutions
and to act upon them as the basis for the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the area.

“On 26 August, the Jerusalem Post reported
that there were now 20 settlements in the Golan
Heights. On the same day Ma’ariv
reported a
statement by Mr. I. Galili, Minister without Port-folio, reassuring representatives of the settlers in the
Golan Heights that the Government
of Israel had
not changed its attitude and that it was ‘determined
that no settlement be removed’.“4

54. Mr. SALAZAR
(Costa Rica) (interpretation
from Spanish): Only after extremely
lengthy and
delicate informal consultations
has it been possible
for the Security Council to agree on the text of the
draft resolution which has just been adopted.

“On 18 February, the Jerusalem Post reported
a statement by the Prime Minister,
Mr. Rabin,
during a visit to the Golan Heights, to the effect that
‘Israel did not build settlements
in the Golan
5

55. My delegation would not like to let this opportunity pass without expressing admiration
to the
Secretary-General
for his efforts in the negotiations
which culminated in the adoption of the draft resolution. Of extreme importance were the direct contacts that he had with the interested parties r his
recent visit to the Middle East and also the mate ‘al
that he made available
to the members of\ the
Security Council in his oral reports and in the written
report which we have before us.

\ “Israel and Syria will support a resolution of
the\ United Nations Security Council which will
prolide
for the UNDOF
contemplated
by the
agre ment. The initial authorization
will be for six
mon s subject to renewal by further resolution of
the b ecurity Council.”
Thd implies that since the Disengagement Agreement
was not conditioned by any given deadline, the renewal
of the mandate of UNDOF is something to which the
Security Council must agree whenever it expires,
although such decisions cannot jeopardize the Agreement nor subject it to conditions. This emerges clearly
from the very text of the Agreement.

56. In order to reach agreement on a draft resolution that would be acceptable to the members of the
Council, in the course of the informal consultations
that took place, difficult and complex matters arose
with respect to which there was a degree of discrepancy. In view of the complexity
of the problem
of the Middle East, it is not unusual that such
discrepancies did exist. The entire situation cannot
only produce controversies among the parties directly
concerned, but also among those which view the
problem from afar.

60. My delegation, in casting a favourale vote for
the draft resolution which has just been adopted, did
so because it felt that the Force should be maintained
as an important factor which can create conditions
-if I may use the same words which the SecretaryGeneral used in paragraph 33 of his report, “towards
a just and durable peace on the basis of resolution
338 (1973)“.

57. What is important
for us-as members of the
Security Council, the body called upon, by its very
nature, to play an important
role in the Middle
East-is the fact that despite the different approaches
that each may have to the question, it is still possible
to find broad areas of understanding
which allow
for the adoption of sensible resolutions in order that
the action of the Council may, as it should, lead to
responsible and well-balahced initiatives.

61. My delegation has also supported the decision
to have the Security Council, as an expression of its
concern with the problem of the Middle East, reconvene on 12 January 1976. My delegation attaches particular importance
to the reference which has been
made to the fact that at that meeting the Council will
take into account all relevant United Nations resolutions. And as a body which is not a subsidiary of any
other body in the Organization,
it is clear that the
frame of reference to be taken into account in such
debates should emerge from the past decisions of the
Council itself, which were based on a desire to find a
just settlement for the controversies in the region. No
one can deny the fact that the main resolutions
adopted by the Council in its sincere desire to find
a settlement
in the Middle
East are resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

58. Therefore, when controversial
points arise in
the discussions of the Council, an attempt must be
made to determine their proper role in the context of
the problem of the Middle East. In the matter which
is directly before us now, which deals with the renewal
of the mandate of UNDOF for an additional period
of six months, we should perhaps remember the role
that the Council itself has to play, because after
all, and indeed above all, the Council on this occasion
is performing
an act which generates certain consequences, an act which is related to other acts of
the same nature, that it has taken in the past, an
act which should be in accordance with its earlier
action.

62. Although my delegation will no longer have a
seat on the Council when the debate on the Middle
East envisaged in the resolution
is resumed, we
hope that this opportunity
will be used to the full,
and that the Council, guided by its resolutions, and
with its best efforts, will help to create a climate
conducive to the achievement of the deeply desired
and sought-after peace for that region.

59. This comment
leads us to examine the true
nature of the action deriving from the Council’s
latest resolution. The action that it has taken today
cannot be separated from the background
which
caused it to be taken. It stems unequivocally
from
the Agreement on Disengagement between Israeli and
Syrian Forces [ibid.]. The Agreement itself, which is
not restricted by any deadline, was the result of the
sovereign will of the two signatory parties and
represents a commitment
to be observed by both
parties. In this connexion,
let us recall the final
paragraph of the Protocol to the Agreement [ibid.],
which reads:

63. In conclusion Mr. President, with regard to the
statement which you yourself made [see paru. 23
above], my delegation would like to state for the record
that it did not join the majority which you mentioned.
64. Mr. SAITO (Japan): My delegation voted in
favour of the draft resolution
which extends the
mandate of UNDOF for a further six months.
65. First, we wish to express our appreciation
to
the Secretary-General
for helping to obtain the consent
6

P

of the two Governments
concerned to this welcome
action. The Secretary-General’s
visit to the Middle
East played an important part in making possible the
extension of UNDOF,
and encourages us to believe
that the additional time thus provided for negotiations
will facilitate progress towards a just and lasting
settlement. At the same time, my delegation wishes
to express its profound gratitude at the incessant
efforts made by the Secretary-General
for having
brought about the agreement since his return from an
intensive and extensive negotiations tour in the Middle East.

referred to in the present resolution as the basis for
the Council’s debate, but it did not insist on this point
in order that a general agreement on the resolution
could be reached. We hope that the discussions
in the Council in January will be conducted in a
constructive
and conciliatory
manner, which is the
only means by which a just and lasting settlement will
be achieved.
71. In conclusion, we wish to express our appreciation to the Secretary-General
and his advisers for the
successful operation of UNDOF, to the Governments
which have contributed the contingents, to the military
observers of the ,United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization
assigned to the Force, to the Chief
Co-ordinator
of the United Nations Peace-keeping
Missions in the Middle East, General Siilasvuo, to
the Force Commander, Major-General
Philipp, and to
the officers and men who have effectively performed
their important and difficult task.

66. On this occasion I should also like to pay our
high respects and express deep appreciation
for the
painstaking efforts made by the non-aligned members
of the Council during the informal
consultations
which greatly contributed
to give us this resolution,
and also to the efforts made by Mr. Moynihan and
his colleagues of the United States of America, to
try to come to a general agreement by overcoming
the difficulties they faced.

72. Mr. de .GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpretation
fro’m French): First and foremost I should like to
express to the Secretary-General
my delegation’s
gratitude. The efforts which he made during his brief
but difficult mission in the Near East has made it
possible for us to round a difficult corner today. No
one could know what would have happened if the
authority,
conviction
and talent of the SecretaryGeneral had not been brought to bear on the spot up
to recent days, and if since his return here he had
not renewed his efforts with his customary tireless
patience in order to help us find the formulas on which
the text we have just adopted is based. It is only
fitting that a tribute should be paid to the exceptional
devotion of the Secretary-General.

67. As we have stated on a number of occasions
when the mandates of UNDOF and the United Nations
Emergency Force (UNEF) have been extended, my
delegation is convinced that the extra time gained
must not be wasted, and further negotiating efforts
should be made. We are in full agreement, therefore, with the Secretary-General’s
view, as stated in
paragraph 33 of his report, that these extensions are
only “a step towards a just and durable peace on the
basis of resolution 338 (1973). Unless further progress
can be made towards the objective set forth in that
resolution, the situation in the area will be unstable
and, with the passage of time, increasingly dangerous”.
Thus, the Government
of Japan has consistently
taken the position that a just and lasting peace should
be achieved in the Middle East as soon as possible,
through the speedy and complete implementation
of
Security Council resolution 338 (1973).

73. I should also like to take this opportunity
to
address our thanks to the assistants of the SecretaryGeneral, both near and far; I am referring to those
in the thirty-eighth floor and to those who, on the spot,
command
UNDOF
as well as the contingents
belonging to that Force which, very often under trying
circumstances,
is pursuing the noble mission of
preventing the ever-present possibility of ,a renewal of
hostilities.

68. It is also the considered view of my Government
that recognition
of and respect for the legitimate
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination,
on the basis of equality with their neighbours and in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
are essential for the achievement
of peace in the
Middle East.

74. On each occasion when the mandate of UNDOF
and UNEF has been renewed, my delegation has
emphasized that the positive decision taken by the
Council was far from being an end in itself. For a
few months it removed the most immediate danger, but
it did not go to the substance of the problem. The
presence of the Force is essential to maintain calm and
to create an atmosphere favourable to efforts towards
peace, and its withdrawal because the Council was
unable to renew its mandate would be disastrous. But
its presence is not in itself a prime factor in the
process of negotiation.
Therefore, my delegation is
hardly surprised when it sees an increasing loss of
patience aroused by the slowing down of the peace
impetus that we hoped had been set in motion almost
two years ago now.

69. My delegation wishes to emphasize, therefore,
its hope that the momentum
will be retained for the
achievement of an over-all settlement in the Middle
East, and that the negotiating
process will show
definite progress during the coming six months.
70. T$day the Council has taken its decision to
reconvene on 12 January 1976 to continue the discussions in depth on the Middle East problem, including
the Palestinian question. In this connexion I wish to
put on record that my delegation was of the opinion
that Council resolution 338 (1973) should have been
7

75. Undoubtedly,
in the course of the intervening
period some very praiseworthy efforts have been made,
either individually
or jointly, in order to keep up this
momentum.
Furthermore,
results have been obtained
through the disengagement
agreements, notably the
establishment
of UNDOF.
But it must be recognized
that despite these interim measures, fully justified by
the circumstances,
the gap between the accepted
principles underlying a settlement and their application
has not yet perceptibly decreased. Therefore we can
only regret that the provisions of United Nations
resolutions relating to the settlement of the Middle
East problem have not yet been implemented.
We
must express the hope that genuine negotiation,
whatever procedures or stages this involves, should
progress as rapidly as possible.

80. By approving renewal of the mandate of UNDOF
for an additional period of six months, our intention
is obviously not to perpetuate the status quo, but to
ensure that the peace momentum
does not, in the
present circumstances,
come up against obstacles
whose consequences none could foresee. As the
French Minister for Foreign Affairs said a short time
ago, time is not on the side of peace. Syria has invited
us to meet again very shortly. Let us be ready
at that time to respond to the requirements of a situation
which is and will remain explosive, as long as we fail
to deal with the real substance of the problem.
8 1. Mr. MURRAY
(United Kingdom): My delegation
is very pleased that it has proved possible to reach
agreement in the Council on the resolution which we
have just adopted. Our non-aligned colleagues did
indeed labour diligently.

76. We accordingly find it easy to understand why
Syria, although agreeing with the renewal of the
mandate of UNDOF,
thought it necessary to make
sure that we did not lose sight of the reason for the
existence of the Force. In fact all we are being asked
to do, in view of the slowing down to which I just
referred, is to take up the whole question again
shortly to see where we stand and to give fresh
impetus to peace efforts. Furthermore,
it must be
admitted that to turn to the Security Council to prevent
stagnation is the most reasonable way in which Syria
could have expressed its impatience.
In this connexion, the draft resolution
which we have just
adopted, and which my delegation helped to draft,
appears to meet Syrian aspirations.

82. My delegation voted for the draft resolution to
renew the mandate of UNDOF for a further six months
because we consider that the presence of the Force
remains crucial at the present time, especially in view
of the very delicate situation in the area.
83. At the same time we fully understand and indeed
share the views of those who have pointed out. that
the presence of the Force in the Middle East should
not be considered, or be allowed to become, an end
in itself. In our view, the purpose of the Force is, first,
to help maintain quiet in the Israel-Syria sector; and,
second, to provide an atmosphere conducive to further
peace efforts. In brief, it is not to provide a substitute
for the just and lasting peace which we all seek, but
to provide the conditions essential to achieving a settlement through negotiation leading to such a peace.

77. In this exercise which we have been invited to
undertake, we will naturally have to consider all the
aspects of the question in the light of the purposes of
the settlement. Most of these objectives have, in fact,
already been embodied by the Council in resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973). Others, which have been
gradually identified in the course of recent years,
have not yet been formulated in a way which would
make them acceptable to all the parties concerned and
thus include them among the acceptable bases for a
settlement. All this could be taken into account by
the Council without there being any need for us now to
prejudge the direction it will wish to give to its work.

84. UNDOF has now been in place in the Golan for
18 months. Throughout
this time it has played an
essential role in reducing tensions in the area and thus
providing the atmosphere conducive to further progress. In the last few months a certain amount of
progress towards a settlement in the Middle East
has indeed been made. It is vitally important, however,
that this should now be followed up by further negotiations and that the time provided by the extension
of the mandate should be used to good effect.

78. My delegation expressed no objection to the statement which the President of the Council read out after
the resolution was voted upon. However, we continue
to believe that this is a procedural step which could
have been settled, in accordance with normal practice,
when the debate planned for January is taken up.

85. The draft resolution which we have just adopted
also provides that the Security Council should meet on
12 January next year to continue its discussions on the
Middle East question. We are ready to play our part
in those discussions. We very much hope that the outcome of that meeting, or series of meetings, will
be to provide a renewed impetus for negotiations
towards an over-all settlement which we, for our part,
believe must be achieved on the basis of resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

79. France, as it repeatedly stated, considers that the
settlement should be based, firstly, on the withdrawal
by Israel from the territories it occupied in 1967;
secondly, on recognition of the right of the Palestinians to a homeland; and thirdly, acknowledgement
of the right of everystate in the area to live in peace
within secure, recogrrized and guaranteed boundaries.

86. We do not think that it would be right at this
stage for the Council to bind itself on precisely how
its discussions can best be carried forward. What
8

is important in the view of my delegation is that. the
discussions shall be carried on in whatever way
seems most likely to advance the negotiations themselves.

93. I should like to pay tribute at the same time to
the four sponsors of the drat resolution who took the
first initiative two days ago and who since then have
used their good offices in order to achieve this result.
The patience and understanding shown for the views
put forward by the other members of the Council,
including my own delegation, all along has been beyond
praise. We have done our best to reciprocate in
courtesy and friendship.

87. With regard to the statement made by yourself,
Mr. President, at the beginning of this meeting, my
delegation
considers that in accordance with the
established procedures and rules of the Council the
question of participation
in any meetings of the Council is a matter which has to be decided at the time
of those meetings themselves.

94. UNDOF has indeed commendably carried out its
functions and met our expectations and we wish to
acknowledge
with gratitude
and appreciation
the
splendid services which the United Nations observers
have rendered in the area of Golan under the command
of Major-General
Hannes Philipp. The renewal of its
mandate now decided, should not, however, and does
not lead us to believe that UNDOF has in itself the
power of perpetuate in the area the calm that it has so
far successfully protected, We did, in fact, and always
do, bear in mind, that the near future could become
crucial unless some progress is achieved in the meantime on the substance of the problem. My delegation
is convinced indeed that the aim of UNDOF as well
as the aim of other peace-keeping forces is not to keep
and protract the present situation further than necessary but rather to help to bring the parties concerned
closer together and to promote the climate and conditions best suited to allow them and encourage them
to proceed with goodwill and more determination
along
the road to peace.

88. In conclusion, I should like once again to pay
tribute to the Secretary-General
for the decisive
contribution which he has made to the agreement which
we have reached today and to the role which he has
played and will, we hope, continue to play in advancing
the cause of peace in the Middle East as a whole.
89. I should also like to offer our congratulations
to the Commander and men of UNDOF as well as to
those who back them up here in the Secretariat. The
way in which they have continued to carry out their
tasks during the last six months of the mandate does
enormous credit to the Organization.
90. Mr. VINCI
(Italy):
In the present situation
and circumstances obtaining in the Middle East area
there was no doubt in our mind, as well as in the minds
of others, as emerged during our informal consultations, that UNDOF has an important role to play.
The extension of its mandate, therefore, was more
than advisable, it is still necessary.

95. This is an urgent matter on which I believe the
Security Council is entitled, after all the attempts made
through the years, to request a better understanding
from the main parties concerned of the feelings and
expectations
of the international
community
as a
whole, which I would translate in three words-peace
with justice.

91. In paragraph 14 of the addendum to his last
report on the Force, which we have carefully studied,
the Secretary-General
stressed this point. In fact, in
the conclusion to that report he starts by stating: “It
remains my considered opinion that the presence of
UNDOF
is essential not only to maintain quiet in
the Israel-Syria sector but also to provide an atmosphere conducive
to further negotiating
efforts”.
That is why-my delegation from the beginning of our
consultations was in favour of the proposal made by
the Secretary-General
to extend the mandate of
UNDOF
for a further period of six months. We
welcome, therefore, and fully support the decision
taken today in this regard by the Council and we consider it, in the light of the intensive consultations
we had here and the contacts with and between different capitals, to be a positive result.

96. My delegation has had the opportunity to stress
on several occasions in the Council, Italy’s concern
about the uneasy and precarious state of affairs
existing in the Middle East area. Such circumstances
have led the Italian Government to believe that any
kind of international effort to promote peace in the area
is to be appreciated and supported. I have in mind the
machinery set up in order to implement
the disengagement agreements, the efforts aimed at reconvening
the Geneva Conference and whatever efforts are made
to combine both undertakings.

92. I believe that most of the credit for this positive
result must be duly given to the Secretary-General.
His relentless efforts in this case, as in other cases,
has increased our respect and gratitude to him personally. The mission he has undertaken in the Middle
East with his usual dedication to the cause of peace,
has been timely and successful. We consider that his
personal action during that tour and afterwards here
at Headquarters, has played a major role in obtaining
the renewal of the mandate of UNDOF.

97. To sum up the views of my delegation, our task
as members of the Council is faithfully reflected in
the statement recently made by the Italian Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Rumor, to the Foreign
Affairs Committee of the Senate. He said:
“We feel that all efforts should be made to
encourage and help the parties directly involved
to overcome with courage and foresight the contradictions which have crystallized
for too long a
9

.

., -’

.a-

,,

:

situation which primarily
basic interests.”

is contrary

which belongs to the Council to take when it meets on
12 January 1976, the more so since from 1 January
its composition will not be the same as at present.

to their own

In other words, they should think more of the common
interests of the people involved, excluding none, rather
than be tempted too often, however understandable
their reasons may be, to score temporary points on the
othersideanii
one’s own side. Thts is, III my vtew,
fundamentally
wrong since however satisfactory’ on
the tactical plane, it is of no avail on the strategic
plane. Italy will, for its part, continue to work, as it
has always done, in favour of all actions leading to a
comprehensive settlement.

101. Turning
to the decision
taken to extend
UNDOF’s
mandate for a further six-month period, I
wish to conclude by saying that, fortunately, as far as
we can understana none -seems
to want
to break off the search for a peaceful solution, and
they have somehow indicated their willingness to avoid
a direct confrontation
and to work for peace. We welcome those purposes since they provide good grounds
for hope.
102. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Russian): I should like to make a clarification.
A decision
taken by one membership of the Council is binding
upon the next membership of the Council.

98. May I say that the Council by adopting today’s
draft resolution has shown that its members share
the same feelings and favour the same strategic
approach. We sense a general sentiment and wish for
progress towards -a global, peaceful and over-all
solution of the Middle East conflict, knowing fully that
detente and international
co-operation are indivisible.
In, our delegation’s
view, that’ is the meaning we
give to-paragraph (a) of the resolution we have just
adopted. We welcome the .possibility
of a general
debate on all ,aspects of the Middle East situation if
a general review can give, as we hope, new momentum
to the.process of peace.

103. Mr. TCHERNOUCHTCHENKO
(Byelorussian
Soviet
Socialist
Republic)
(interpretation
from
Russian): The delegation of the Byelorussian
SSR
voted in favour of the draft resolution of the nonaligned countries members of the Security Council. We
share the opinion of the sponsors that it is the very
minimum that it was possible to obtain owing to the
specific situation obtaining. And, as has already been
pointed out, it was also possible to achieve this as a
result of the constructive
position taken by Syria,
dictated by its concern for peace and to take further
strides forward to reach a settlement of the Middle
East problem.

99. My delegation, .of course, would have preferred
the specific mention in that same paragraph of Council
resolution 338 (1973), which was contained in resolution 369 (1973) on the question of UNDOF.
Resolution 338 (1973), ,coupled with resolution 242 (1967),
still remains, in .our view, the main basis for a just
and durable peaceful settlement of the problem, as
specified in the statement
on the Middle
East
[s/l/U811 adopted by the nine Governments ‘of the
European
Economic
Community
on 6 November
1973, a position’.that
was confirmed by the current
Chairman of the nine members of the Community.
When speaking on their behalf in the General Assembly
on the question of Palestine, I indicated the four
principles which we believe should be the essential
basis for a comprehensive
settlement, including the
recognition
of the right of the Palestinian
people
to their national identity.

104. At the same time, we should like to express
our profound thanks to the Secretary-General,
for his
efforts during the discussions in the Council of the
situation in the Middle East in connexion with the
extension of UNDOF’s
mandate,
105. The Byelorussian SSR delegation also supports
the statement read out by the President of the Council.
Our delegation is among that majority of the members of the Council which hold the view that the PLO
should participate in the Security Council’s consideration, during January 1976, of the Middle
East
problem, including the Palestinian problem.
106. The delegation of the Byelorussian SSR would
also like to make the following statement on the item
which is being discussed in the Council. The existing
situation in the Middle East and the absence of any
genuine progress in the settlement of the Middle East
problem are matters for serious concern, a concern
that was clearly revealed in the statements made by
most delegations here in the Council during today’s
meeting. The seriousness of the situation in the Middle
East as a whole and in the Israeli-Syrian
sector in
particular is borne out by the reports of the SecretaryGeneral and his contacts with interested parties in
the Middle East.

100. The Italian delegation
cannot, however, be
considered as part of the majority
supporting the
statement made in their behalf by you, Mr. President.
Our objections and reservations are based, we believe,
on strong grounds of principle. In fact, apart from all
considerations
of substance, my delegation does not
believe it is right to determine or prejudge in any way,
even if not intentionally,
a debate that will take place
six weeks from now under conditions that none of us
can predict with certainty. We do not even know at
present who wishes to -participate in that debate,
although we can easily assume who will ask to be
allowed to do so. And, from a formal point of view,
we believe it is not in conformity
with the rules of
procedure and normal practice to anticipate a decision

107. The delegation of the Byelorussian SSR would
also like to point out that there continues to prevail
‘10

b

L

people of Palesune~ has considered,
consider, that the only legitimate
of that people are the PLO.

an explosive situation in the Middle East. Israel continues to hold on to the Arab territories it has seized
and continues to overlook the legitimate rights of the
Arab people of Palestine; thus, the root causes of the
conflict in the Middle East have as yet not been
removed. It must be emphasized that it will be impossible to find ways and means of settling the Middle
East problem, that is, establishing a durable peace,
without solving the basic issues: withdrawal of all
Israeli troops from all the Arab territories occupied in
1967; guaranteeing the lawful national rights of the
Arab people of Palestine, including their right to create
their own State; and guaranteeing the secure existence
and development
of all States and peoples of that
region. Interim or-p~parnal-notlead to the implementation
of those main requirements.

and continues to
representatives

112. Our delegation has always held the view that
United Nations forces in the Mid&
East, including
those in the Israeli-Syrian
sector, arr there in order to
promote the implementation
of the main purposes
-that
is, a political settlement o# the Middle East
problem on the basis of the relevant decisions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly.
113. We cannot divorce the renewal of the mandate
of UNDOF from the problem . of settlement.
.
i We
. cannot
-t%lil-MllntnfthPfctllntlnn
up around this problem.
Perhaps some might like
to turn the renewal of the mandate of the Force
into a pure formality and, by this very token, to use
this Force in order to perpetuate the Israeli occupation
of Arab lands. We, are definitely against any such
approach and we consider it extremely dangerous.
Quite to the contrary, we should like- to support
what was said just now by the representative
of
Guyana here, that we should not give the impression
that the Council regards the renewal of the mandate of
UNDOF as a sort of automatic act. The Council is
entitled to do as it has’done before, that is, in addition
to taking a decision to renew the mandate of the
Force, to speed up the process of the comprehensive
settlement of the Middle East problem. This is not only
the right but indeed the duty of the Council.

108. The time has now come to undertake a comprehensive political
settlement of the Middle East
problem by means of finding a solution to key issues,
with the participation
of all directly interested parties.
The foundation for such a settlement can be found in
Security Council resolution 338 (1973) and General
Assembly resolution 3236 (XXIX). To meet those aims,
there is also a relevant international machinery, that is,
the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East. It
is essential that the Conference should have its work
fully reactivated in the near future. Our delegation
is gratified to note that the Soviet Union, as one of
the co-chairmen of that Conference, has already taken
an initiative along those lines.
109. With reference to the participants in the Conference, the delegation of the Byelorussian SSR would
like to stress that no just or durable settlement in the
Middle East is possible unless it involves the participation of the representatives
of the Arab people of
Palestine in the person of the PLO as a directly
interested party; and the PLO should participate in
the work of the Geneva Conference from the very
outset of its resumed session. This is something which
should be clearly and quickly appreciated by all those
who continue to resist the recognition of this reality.

114. Thus, we agree with the opinion ofthe SecretaryGeneral, which appears in paragraph 33 of his report,
when he says that the Agreement on Disengagement
between Israeli and Syrian Forces is not a peace
agreement but only a step towards a just and durable
peace; and that unless further progress can be made in
reaching a settlement in the Middle East, &he situation
in that area will continue to be unstable.
115. In view of the facts which are outlined in paragraph 18 of the Secretary-General’s
report, the delegation of the Byelerussian
SSR would like to draw
the attention of the Council to the fact that the continuing restriction by Israel of the freedom of movement of certain contingents belonging to UNDOF is
inadmissible. This is in violation of the decisions of the
Council, and in violation of the conditions which are
stipulated in the Disengagement
Agreement
signed
by Israel itself. This is essentially one of the manifestations of Israel’s aggressive policies and it is essential
that an end be put to this practice.

110. The legitimate
right of the Arab people of
Palestine as a party directly concerned in the Middle
East conflict has been acknowledged and frequently
reconfirmed by the United Nations. As members know,
the General Assembly, in its resolution 3236 (XXIX),
has emphasized
that the Palestinian
people is a
principal party in the establishment
of a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East.
111. At its thirtieth session, the General Assembly
once again confirmed this legitimate right, in its resolution 3375 (XXX), and proposed that the PLO be
invited,
as the representatives
of the Palestinian
people, to participate in all the peace efforts being
made in connexion with the Middle East on an equal
footing with other participants.
The delegation of the
Byelorussian SSR has always unswervingly supported,
and continues to support, the rights of the Arab

116. In accordance with the Charter, the Security
Council bears very weighty responsibilities
for maintaining peace and security for all peoples. One of the
sources of very dangerous tension continues to be
the area of the Middle East, and’it is the duty of the
Council to promote a political settlement of the Middle
East problem, and to establish a durable peace in that
area.
11

117. Mr. MOYNIHAN
(United States of America):
I am sure you would agree, Sir, that the only words
which would truly serve to express the admiration
and the gratitude and the respect which we all have for
the Secretary-General
at this moment would be brief
words. His labours have been Herculean,
and I
assume, if today is no different from other days,
they are not yet concluded. My Government
would
join wholly in the tributes paid to him.

123. I would also like to express the sincere appreciation of my delegation to the sponsors of the draft
resolution just adopted for their no less persistent
efforts, which in the end were crowned with success.
124. In his report, the Secretary-General
notes that
the situation on the border between Israel and Syria,
though at the present quiet, remains fundamentally
unstable and precarious. In fact, with the passage of
may become
increasingly
time,
this situation
dangerous. The Secretary-General
thus concludes that
the presence of UNDOF
continues to be of vital
importance
in promoting
an atmosphere conducive
to further peace efforts and in assisting in such efforts.

118. My delegation wishes also to make clear that the
United States does not support the statement made
by you, Mr. President, indicating that the PLO will be
invited to participate
in the January session. This
statement, in any event, did not report a decision but
was merely a summation of the views of some members
of the Council. We do not consider that the extraneous
matters which have been introduced into the Council’s
action today can have the effect of changing either
the negotiating framework, the basis for these negotiations, or the participants in them.

125. It is in recognition of the urgent necessity to
undertake such efforts that the Council resolution this
time provides for a debate and review of the problem
of the Middle East, including the Palestinian question,
to be undertaken
by the Council at a meeting in
January 1976. My Government welcomes this decision
and the accompanying decision of the Council majority
to invite the PLO representatives
to participate
in
that debate. My Government has already stated in the
General Assembly that it supports the participation
of the PLO in discussions of the problems in the Middle East under the asupices of the United Nations.
No lasting solution to the Middle East problem can be
achieved without taking into account the legitimate
national rights of the Palestinian people.

119. I should like also to note that subparagraph (a)
of the operative paragraph, properly read, declares the
intention
of the Security Council to debate the
question of whether or not the Middle East problem
does in fact include the Palestinian question. Such
is the role of the comma in English composition.
120. None the less, and finally, to the parties concerned and to the Council, the United States pledges
its continued efforts to further the process towards
peace in the Middle
East. We do that with the
indispensable support of UNDOF, of its Commander,
its officers and its men, and of course, once again
you, Mr. Secretary-General,
and those not less valiant
colleagues whom you have brought as your associates
on the thirty-eighth floor.

126. It is now more than ever urgent to take real
steps towards a negotiated solution of this complex of
problems which has so long been a source of great
tension and which has prevented the peoples of the
Middle East from realizing the great human and
material potential of the area. In this context I should
like to underline, as my delegation has done on all
occasions on which the Middle East problems have
been debated in the United Nations, that in our view
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) of the Security
Council remain the basis for any just settlement in the
Middle East.

121. Mr. RYDBECK
(Sweden): Once again, after
protracted
and difftcult negotiations,
the Security
Council has arrived at a decision to renew the
mandate of UNDOF
for a further period of six
months.

127. My delegation would like on this occasion once
again warmly to commend the men and officers and
the Force Commander of UNDOF, as well as the collaborators of the Secretary-General
and the Secretariat
in charge of UNDOF operations for their outstanding
services and their devoted efforts in the cause of peace.

122. It was with profound
satisfaction
that the
Swedish delegation voted-in favour of the draft resolution which we have just adopted. The continued
presence of UNDOF provides a further period of grace
and contributes to the maintenance of an atmosphere
which would allow for continued efforts in the search
for peace in the area. This positive outcome of our
deliberations
is, to a very great extent, due to the
efforts of the Secretary-General.
His mission to the
Middle East and his persistent efforts pursued day and
night after his return, have in fact created the basis
for the decisions taken today by the Security Council.
The Secretary-General
has thus indeed played a
crucial role in assisting the Council to overcome
its difficulties,
and I would like to express the deep
appreciation of my Government to him.

128. My ‘delegation would like to see- in the draft
resolution we have just adopted a testimony of renewed
dedication on all sides to an intensification
of the
efforts towards a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East. A very grave responsibility
rests with all the
parties to do their utmost in contributing towards the
achievement of this goal. We must not allow the present
quiet, in the maintenance of which the presence of
UNDOF plays such an important role, to degenerate
into stagnation and immobility.
It is our hope that the
Council, when it meets again in January, will be able
12
”

.

to give its weighty contribution
the cause of peace in the Middle

to the furthering
East.

of

the Council, provides for two elements which we
believe make it more meaningful than the previous
resolutions on the subject-namely,
that as a condition for the extension of the mandate the Council
will convene next January to deliberate on the Middle
East problem in all its aspects, including the question
of the Palestinian problem, and that, in the consideration of the Middle East problem in January, account
will be taken of all relevant resolutions of the United
Nations. It is obvious that the resolutions
of the
United
Nations
referred to in operative
paragraph (a) of the draft resolution
adopted include
General Assembly
resolution
3375 (XXX),
which
specifically provides for the participation
of the PLO,
as the representative of the Palestinian people, in the
deliberations
and negotiations
on the Middle East
problem.

129. Mr. SALIM
(Tanzania):
When, in May this
year [1822nd meeting]
we adopted a resolution 369
(1975), extending the mandate of UNDOF for a further
period of six months without at the same time
providing a stimulus for the revitalization
of efforts
at progress in the search for a peaceful and just settlement of the Middle East problem, my delegation,
together with several others, expressed our increasing
concern over the possible adverse implications
which
such mechanical
extension of UNDOF’s
mandate
could entail. It was therefore only with mixed feelings
of such concern and the earnest hope that another
opportunity
such as that provided by the resolution
might be put to good use that we went along with
that resolution.
130. We responded favourably then to the request
for the extension of UNDOF’s
mandate on the understanding that the quiet which would be brought about
would be utilized
meaningfully
and solely in a
determined
search for a peaceful settlement of, the
Middle East problem as outlined in Security Council
resolution 338 (1973). The cease-fire was not and is not
peace in itself, nor should any of the parties bank on
it in forgetting the precarious nature of the truce
and become complacent.

134. We should like to pay a tribute to the Syrian
Government for the proposal it has made, which led
to the resolution we have adopted. We believe that
this resolution is a meaningful one and should provide
a catalyst for speeding up the process leading to a
just and peaceful settlement in the area. Furthermore, these proposals by Syria testify to the genuineness of the Syrian Government in its desire to reach
a peaceful, just and permanent
settlement of the
Middle East problem.

131. We then warned that the patience and good
intentions of the Council should never be used for the
purpose of either perpetuating
the state of tension
in the area or consolidating illegal territorial acquisitions. It is therefore disappointing
that six months
later there is neither discernible
progress nor an
indication of progress in the immediate future in the
realization of a peaceful settlement of the problem.
A period of quiet and considerable resources of the
United Nations have been wasted. We completely
agree with the Secretary-General’s
observation that,
unless further progress can be made towards the
objectives set forth in Council resolution 338 (1973),
the situation in the area will be unstable and, with
the passage of time, increasingly
dangerous,
for
neither the Arab States whose territories have been
illegally occupied by Israel, nor the Palestinians who
have been uprooted from their homeland, will indefinitely tolerate the present situation.

135. It is our hope, and we are confident of this,
that the Council’s consideration
of the Middle East
question, including the Palestinian problem, in the
month of January, will afford a unique opportunity
for the Council to have a substantive discussion on
the root cause of the Middle East conflict-namely,
the injustices done to the dispossessed Palestinians
and the urgent need to put an end to that injustice.
136. Before concluding, I should like on behalf of my
delegation to offer my sincere thanks to the SecretaryGeneral and his staff for their selfless efforts in the
search for peace and justice in the Middle East.
The Secretary-General
should be particularly
commended for his outstanding and crucial contribution
in providing his good offices to facilitate negotiations
leading to the draft the Security Council has just
adopted. I wish also to offer the same sincere
appreciation
to the personnel of UNDOF,
whose
sacrifice in the cause of peace is inestimable,
and
their direct contribution
in the pursuit of peace
deserves the highest commendation.

132. It is in the light of such dangerous implications
that this time we have tried to avoid a repetition of
an unconditional
extension of the mandate of UNDOF.
We therefore welcome Syria’s position, as explained
to the Secretary-General,
that the resolution to further
extend UNDOF’s
mandate should be coupled with a
catalyst for renewed efforts towards the realization of
the ultimate purpose of UNDOF’s
presence in the
Middle East. We are glad that this time we have
managed to avoid the dangerous previous ritual.

137. As the last speaker among the non-aligned members sponsors of the draft resolution, I should like
on behalf of my own delegation and on behalf of all
my colleagues to express our gratitude to all those
members of the Council who have referred to the
contribution
made by the non-aligned group in the
negotiations leading to this resolution. I can only say
that we are very appreciative
of the positive and
co-operative spirit of all our colleagues in the Council
which made the negotiations successful.

133. The draft resolution
my delegation
had the
honour to co-sponsor, which has just been adopted by
13

138. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Russian): I shall now speak in my capacity as representative of the- UNION
OF SOVIET
SOCIALIST
REPUBLICS.

on 23 September.
following:

Among

other things he said the

“A Middle East settlement cannot make headway
if those crucial problems are left unsolved. Without
their solution a settlement in the Middle East can
only be delayed indefinitely, with increasing dangers
for the situation.
No palliative
measures or
camouflaging
can change the substance of the
matter.“6

139. As President
of the Security Council and
represeptative
of ‘the Soviet Union in the Security
Council, I have already had the opportunity,
in the
process of consultations
to express my gratitude’ to
the Secretary-General,
for his active and sustained
efforts, both during his recent trip to the Middle East,
which was filled with major events, and after his return
to the United Nations, right up until today and the
very convening of this official meeting of the Council
on this item. Today, at this official meeting of the
Security Council, I should like again to express our
gratitude to the Secretary-General.
His efforts have
been aimed at active and sustained support, to enable
the Council to take a just decision on this question.
Those efforts, together with the participation
of the
representatives of the parties concerned and members
of the Council, have led to a positive result.

144. Experience has shown that piecemeal methods,
particularly if they are undertaken on a separate basis,
cannot lead to any solution to the Middle
East
problem because they leave aside the key issues
relating to a political settlement, and indeed lead us
away from such a-settlement.
Those key issues are
well known, but they must be repeated constantly.
They are: the full withdrawal of Israeli forces from all
the Arab territories occupied in 1967 and the satisfaction of the legitimate national rights of the Arab
people of Palestine, including its right to create its own
State. Only if those crucial questions are solved
will it be possible to establish a genuinely just and
therefore genuinely lasting peace in the Middle East
and to provide sound conditions for the safe existence,
development and co-operation of all the States in that
region.

.140. The Security Council has considered the question of the renewal of the mandate of UNDOF and the
report on this matter by the Secretary-General,
in
connexion with his talks with all the interested parties
on the situation in the Middle East. It must be obvious
to one and all that the question of the renewal of the
mandate of the Force in the Israeli-Syrian
sector is
not an isolated issue, but is very intimately connected
with the entire ,set of. issues relating to the Middle
East problem, including the Palestinian question.

145. The Soviet Union and other countries belonging
to the socialist community
have consistently
and
unswervingly taken one fundamental
stand-that
is,
that a decisive end must be put to aggression, that
aggression should not be encouraged, that the countries that have been the victims of aggression should
have returned to them the lands which legitimately
belong to them and which have been seized by the
aggressor, and that every State is entitled to a free,
independent existence and development.
Indeed, that
is a fundamental,
a cardinal issue not only in regard
to the Middle East but in regard to all international
relations of the present day.

141. The unsatisfactory state of affairs regarding the
settlement of the conflict in the Middle East continues
to darken the international
horizon and to be a subject
of concern for the Sqviet Union and for many other
countries. The basic reasons for that conflict have not
as yet been removed. Israel continues to hold on to the
Arab lands that it seized by force. Israel and its patrons
continue also to ignore the legitimate
rights of the
Arab people of Palestine. The fundamental issues of a
settlement-that
is, the full withdrawal of Israeli
forces from-all the Arab territories occupied in 1967
and the satisfaction of the legitimate national rights
of the Arab people of Palestine, including its right to
create its own State- have so far not been resolved.

146. The Soviet Union considers, as it has always
considered, that the only true way to achieve a definitive settlement of the Middle East problem is through
the joint and collective efforts of all the parties directly
concerned. To achieve a just settlement, there is one
well-known
international
mechanism:
The Geneva
Peace Conference on the Middle East. In that forum
we may consider and seek to solve all the aspects
of the Middle East problem. However, as a result
of the obstructionism
of Israel, supported by its
protectors, that mechanism has not been used for some
time now. The reason is well known. It is that the
achievement of a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East is being blocked by Israel. But that is a shortsighted policy. We cannot ignore the legitimate rights
of the Arab countries and peoples that have been
the victims of aggression. We cannot be indifferent
to the fate of the Palestinian people or to its legitimate
aspirations and interests.

142. It is precisely as a result of the foregoing
that the situation in the Middle East continues to be
tense and fraught with the danger of military confrontation. That tension has also been referred to and
reflected in the Council’s decision today.
143. The fundamental and consistent position of the
Soviet Union on the question of-a Middle Eastern
settlement was once again stated exhaustively during
the general debate at the thirtieth
session of the
General Assembly in an address by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union, Mr. Gromyko,
14

r

147. A continuation
of the present tense situation
in the Middle East can only be-fraught with the danger
of fresh explosions. The Soviet Union has always
been and remains a firm supporter of the establishment of a lasting and just peace in the Middle East
and of the achievement
of genuine progress in the
settlement of the Middle East conflict. That is why
recently, on 9 November,
the Government
of the
USSR once again proposed to the Government of the
United States, which is a co-Chairman of the Geneva
Peace Conference, that the work of that Conference
be fully resumed. The Soviet Union proposed that
the Soviet Union and the United States, as coChairmen
of the Conference, should take a joint
initiative to that end.

equal footing with all other parties and on the basis
of resolution 3236 (XXIX), in all efforts, deliberations
and conferences on the Middle East held under the
auspices of the United Nations. The General Assembly
also requested the Secretary-General
of the United
Nations:
“to inform the Co-Chairmen ‘of the Peace Confer:
ence on the Middle East of the present resolution
and to take all necessary steps to secure the
invitation of the Palestine Liberation Organization
to participate in the work of the Conference as well
as in all other efforts for peace;.”
These just decisions of the United Nations regarding
,
the PLO cannot justifiably be’ignored - by anyone.

148. The position of the Soviet Union is that the
Conference, from the very outset of the resumption
of its work, should be open to the participation
on
an equal footing of all the parties directly interested
-namely,
Egypt, Syria, Jordan, the representatives
of the Arab people of Palestine, as embodied in the
PLO, and Israel, as well as the Soviet Union and
the United States as co-Chairmen of the Conference.

153. That is why the Soviet delegation considers
logical, valid and just the position taken by the
Syrian Arab Republic, which has insisted that the
renewal of the mandate of ‘UNDOF
in the Middle
East, and particularly
those in the Israeli-Syrian
sector, cannot be considered or decided upon in
isolation, as merely the renewal of the mandate for
the sake of renewing it. The decision on the renewal
of the mandate cannot be regarded or taken in isolation
from the cardinal problems relating to a Middle East
settlement.

149. The purpose of resuming the Conference in that
way, as established from the very outset, should be
to achieve a comprehensive
and cardinal political
settlement of the Middle East conflict. The basis for
such a settlement is quite clear-namely,
the relevant
United Nations decisions, and first and foremost
Security Council resolution 338 (1973) and General
-Assembly resolution 3236 (XXIX).

154, In this connexion,
the Security Council ‘is
obliged to take account of the resolutions
which
have been adopted on this matter and on its individual
aspects by the General Assembly -and by the’ Secu’rity
Council and to take steps to implement them and not‘
to protract a Middle East settlement under the pretext
of renewing the mandate of UNDOF.
It would be a
serious and inadmissible
mistake to..@ to use the
disengagement
of forces among the parties to the
conflict and the renewal of the mandate of the Force
for this purpose as a pretext in order to freeze the
existing dangerous situation in .the Middle East, in
order to fix the occupation by Israel of the Arab
lands which it has seized, and in order to flout
the inalienable
national
rights of the Palestinian
people, which have now been recognized by the
entire world and the entire international
community
as represented by the United Nations.

150. The adoption of the above-mentioned
Soviet
proposal in full, taking into account the aspect of the
participants in the Geneva Conference, would be in
complete accordance with the interests of the Arab
peoples and of the establishment
of a genuine, just
and lasting peace in the Middle
East for all the
States and peoples of that region.
151. The validity of the position that the representatives of the Arab people of Palestine, as embodied
in the PLO, should participate in the Conference from
the very outset of its resumed work is now quite
obvious. It is primarily
the position of the United
Nations itself. Resolution 3236 (XXIX), adopted by the
General Assembly at its twenty-ninth
session, reaffirmed the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
including
its right to self-determination
without
external interference and its right to national independence and sovereignty. Of paramount importance
also is the General Assembly’s
decision that the
Palestinian people is a principal party in the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.

155. ‘The very idea of the disengagement
of the
troops of the parties arose and was implemented
’
in order to promote a speedy settlement in the Middle
East. In Security Council resolution
363 (1974),
which renewed the mandate of UNDOF for an additional six-month
period, it was quite clearly and
unambiguously
pointed out that the Disengagement
Agreement was simply one step on the way towards
implementation
of Council resolution 338 (1973) on the
Middle
East settlement.
The Council even then,
more than two years ago, called upon all interested
parties to implement that resolution immediately.

152. Moreover, at the present, thirtieth, session of
the General Assembly, resolution 3375 (XXX) was
adopted. In it the Assembly demands that the PLO,
the representative
of the Palestinian people, should
be invited to participate
and be involved,
on an

156. In its most recent resolution,
resolution 369
(1975), the Security Council expressed its concern
15

over the prevailing
state of tension in the Middle
East and reaffirmed that the disengagement
agreements were only a step towards the implementation
of Council resolution 338 (1973), to which I have just
referred. The Council in that resolution also once
again called upon the parties concerned to implement
immediately
Council resolution 338 (1973). Eighteen
months have now elapsed, however, and there appears
to have been no advance on this question. It is quite
clear from this that the Council has never treated
the question of the renewal of the mandate of
UNDOF
as a separate issue, or considered it in
isolation from the problem of a general settlement in
the Middle East.

statement read out by the President of the Security
Council at an official meeting of the Council, the PLO,
as the representative of the Palestinian people, must of
course be a party to that discussion.
159. Precisely for these reasons, and consistent with
the fundamental position of the Soviet Union on the
question of a Middle East settlement,
the Soviet
delegation supported the draft resolution, the initiative
taken by Syria, and also the efforts of our colleagues,
the representatives of the four members that sponsored
the.draft resolution which the Council adopted today,
namely, Guyana, Mauritania,
United Republic
of
Cameroon and United Republic of Tanzania, and voted
in favour of that draft resolution.

157. The Security Council has believed, and still
believes, that the renewal of the mandate of United
Nations forces in the Middle East in general, and
in the Israeli-Syrian
sector in particular,
should
not be an end in itself, but should be a means
to help to accelerate a peaceful settlement in the
Middle East. This should not simply be a matter of
continuing to renew the mandate, as a mere device.
The time has come to give serious thought to solving
the Middle East problem.
The Council should do
everything in its power to promote a political settlement in the Middle
East and to accelerate that
settlement.

160. Speaking now as PRESIDENT,
I should like
to extend to my successor to the presidency of the
Council, the representative of the United Kingdom,
Mr. Richard, my best wishes that the work of the
Council in December will be less tense and less
heavily charged than it was in November, and that he
will not have to convene meetings of the Council and
hold consultations among members of the Council on
Saturdays, Sundays and at night.
The meeting

rose at 8.40 p.m.
Notes

158. That is why the Soviet delegation supported
the proposal of the friendly Syrian Arab Republic
to the effect that the Security Council, instead of
postponing the matter for a long time, should consider
the situation in the Middle East, including the -Palestinian question, at the beginning of next year. In
accordance with the opinion expressed in the official

’ Se; resolution 381 (1975).
2 See Ojj?cial Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, Plenary Meetings, 2363rd meeting.
3 Ibid., 2394th meeting.
4 A/10272, para. 71.
s Ibid., para. 63.
6 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, Plenary Meetings, 2357th meeting.

16

..,.

.^
.’

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United Nations
world. Consult
COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore
or write to: United Nations. Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informer-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
B : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAK
HJAaHXX
3NxaX

xarxenr

IIOJIY’IHTh
Opt-BHFK%UtHH

HSAAHHIi

OPrAHLi

06Z‘?AHXeHHbIX

x 8rexTcTBaX
80 ecex pBtiOXaX
xxx~xox
xarasxxe
xnx nxmx~e

3AltHN
HaqXA

OE’bEAHHEHHhIX
MomXo

KyXXTh

Mupa. HaBOAHTe
CnpaBKN
no anpecy : Opraxx3auxx

HAUHH
B KXXXCXLIX
Mara06 HJAaXNIlX
B

06zenxxexxzrx

HasXR.CeKuXXnonpo~ameX3naXXZL.Hbm-FfOpKXnX)KeXeBa.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en librerfas y casas distribuidoras
en
todas panes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas, Section de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York
