A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/31
5 January 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 33
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/53/L.38 and Add.1)]
53/31.

Support by the United Nations system of the efforts of Governments to promote and
consolidate new or restored democracies

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the indissoluble links between the principles enshrined in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights1 and the foundations of any democratic society,
Recalling the Manila Declaration2 adopted by the First International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies3 in June 1988,
Considering the major changes taking place on the international scene and the aspirations of all
peoples for an international order based on the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
including the promotion and encouragement of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for
all and other important principles, such as respect for the equal rights and self-determination of peoples,
peace, democracy, justice, equality, the rule of law, pluralism, development, better standards of living and
solidarity,

1

Resolution 217 A (III).

2

A/43/538, annex.

3

Then called the International Conference of Newly Restored Democracies.

99-76111

/...

A/RES/53/31
Page 2

Recalling its resolution 49/30 of 7 December 1994 in which it recognized the importance of the
Managua Declaration4 and Plan of Action5 adopted by the Second International Conference of New or
Restored Democracies in July 1994, as well as its resolutions 50/133 of 20 December 1995, 51/31 of
6 December 1996 and 52/18 of 21 November 1997,
Recalling also the document entitled “Progress Review and Recommendations”, adopted by the Third
International Conference of New or Restored Democracies on Democracy and Development, held at
Bucharest from 2 to 4 September 1997,6 in which guidelines, principles and recommendations were
addressed to Governments, civil society, the private sector, donor countries and international community,
Noting in particular the recommendations contained in that document addressed to the United Nations
system and the international financial organizations,7
Taking note with satisfaction of the seminars, workshops and conferences on democratization and
good governance organized in 1998, as well as those currently being planned, under the auspices of the
International Conference of New or Restored Democracies,
Taking note of the views of Member States expressed in the debate on this question at its forty-ninth,
fiftieth, fifty-first, fifty-second and fifty-third sessions,
Bearing in mind that the activities of the United Nations carried out in support of the efforts of
Governments to promote and consolidate democracy are undertaken in accordance with the Charter and
only at the specific request of the Member States concerned,
Also bearing in mind that democracy, development and respect for all human rights and fundamental
freedoms are interdependent and mutually reinforcing and that democracy is based on the freely expressed
will of the people to determine their own political, economic, social and cultural systems and on their full
participation in all aspects of their lives,
Noting that a considerable number of societies have recently undertaken significant efforts to achieve
their social, political and economic goals through democratization and the reform of their economies,
pursuits that are deserving of the support and recognition of the international community,
Noting with satisfaction that the Fourth International Conference of New or Restored Democracies
will be held at Cotonou, Benin, in the year 2000,
Stressing the importance of support by Member States, the United Nations system, the specialized
agencies and other intergovernmental organizations for the holding of the Fourth International Conference
of New or Restored Democracies,

4

A/49/713, annex I.

5

Ibid., annex II.

6

A/52/334, appendix.

7

Ibid., sect. IV.
/...

A/RES/53/31
Page 3

Having considered the report of the Secretary-General8 and its focus on innovative ways and means
to enable the Organization to respond effectively and in an integrated manner to requests of Member States
for assistance in the field of good governance and democratization,
1.

Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General;8

2. Expresses its appreciation for the activities carried out by the United Nations system, as well
as the observations and recommendations contained in the report, with respect to building a political
culture through human rights observance, mobilization of civil society, electoral assistance, free and
independent media, enhancing the rule of law and improving accountability, transparency and quality of
public sector management and democratic structures of government;
3. Invites the Secretary-General, Member States, the relevant specialized agencies and bodies of the
United Nations system, as well as other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to continue
to contribute actively to the follow-up process of the Third International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies on Democracy and Development;9
4. Commends the Secretary-General, and through him the United Nations system, for the activities
undertaken at the request of Governments to support the efforts to consolidate democracy;
5. Welcomes the measures taken within the organizations of the Administrative Committee on
Coordination for coordinating their work carried out in the field of democratization;
6. Welcomes also the work carried out by the follow-up mechanism to the Third International
Conference of New or Restored Democracies on Democracy and Development;
7. Recognizes that the United Nations has an important role to play in providing timely, appropriate
and coherent support to the efforts of Governments to achieve democratization within the context of their
development efforts;
8. Stresses that the activities undertaken by the Organization must be in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations;
9. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to improve the capacity of the Organization to
respond effectively to the requests of Member States through coherent, adequate support of their efforts
to achieve the goals of good governance and democratization;
10. Encourages Member States to promote democratization and to make additional efforts to identify
possible steps to support the efforts of Governments to promote and consolidate new or restored
democracies;

8

A/53/554 and Corr.1.

9

Ibid., chap. II.
/...

A/RES/53/31
Page 4

11. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth
session on the implementation of the present resolution;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session the item entitled “Support
by the United Nations system of the efforts of Governments to promote and consolidate new or restored
democracies”.
67th plenary meeting
23 November 1998
