S/PRST/2017/3

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 February 2017
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7881st meeting of the Security Council, held on 10 February 2017, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Somalia”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the conclusion of the electoral process
in Somalia and the election of President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed
“Farmajo”. The Security Council pays tribute to former President Hassan
Sheikh Mohamud for his service and commends the swift and gracious transfer
of power in Somalia.
“The Security Council welcomes the political and security progress in
Somalia since 2012, and underscores the need to maintain the momentum
towards democratic governance in Somalia. The Security Council commends
the increased participation and representation of the people of Somalia in the
electoral process. The Council emphasises the importance of governing in a
spirit of national unity in an inclusive manner and of adhering to the political
road map in order to reach one-person, one-vote elections in four years time.
“The Security Council commends the role of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) in enabling the electoral process in
close cooperation with the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and other international partners. The Security Council
pays tribute to the contribution of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) to lasting peace and stability in Somalia, noting in particular
AMISOM’s critical role in ensuring the provision of security for the electoral
process, which along with the Somali security forces, enabled voting to take
place across the country.
“The Security Council strongly condemns recent Al -Shabaab attacks that
attempted to disrupt the political process in Somalia and pays tribute to the
bravery and sacrifice of AMISOM and the Somali security forces for their
efforts in reducing the threat posed by Al-Shabaab.
“The Security Council welcomes the increased representation of women
in the Upper House and the House of the People and underlines the important
contribution of women to Somalia’s peacebuilding and State building process.
“The Security Council underscores the importance of the timely and
transparent appointment of Ministers and Cabinet positions in consultation with

17-02081 (E)

100217

*1702081*

S/PRST/2017/3

the Somali Parliament. The Council calls on the Parliament and all Federal and
State leaders to cooperate fully with the Federal Government of Somalia in
driving forward reform and addressing immediate priorities without delay.
“The Security Council calls on President Farmajo and his government to
give urgent attention to the immediate risk of famine, to take active steps to
prevent it, and to address the consequences of the severe drought in Somalia.
The Council appeals to donors to increase support to the Humanitarian
Response Plan for Somalia and to support the appeals for aid by Somali
Federal and Regional authorities’. The Council reiterates the need for full, safe
and unhindered access for the timely delivery of aid to persons in need across
Somalia.
“The Security Council emphasises the need to accelerate agreement
between the federal and regional authorities on a Somali federal security
sector architecture, which clearly defines the roles, responsibilities and
structures of relevant security sector institutions under full Somali ownership
as an immediate priority. The Council stresses the importance of the Federal
Government of Somalia enhancing and strengthening efforts to strengthen
Somalia’s security capabilities in order to move towards the eventual handover
of security responsibilities from AMISOM to the Somali security services. In
this regard, the Council encourages UNSOM to continue to undertake a
Comprehensive Approach to Security in close coordination with the Somali
authorities, AMISOM and international partners.
“The Security Council underlines the importance of good faith
cooperation between federal and regional authorities in Somalia in order to
accelerate Somalia’s peacebuilding and State-building process, and calls on
the international community and Somalia's partners to step up their support to
efforts to build and strengthen Somalia’s national institutions, governance
structures and socio-economic infrastructure.
“The Security Council underlines the need to ensure progress in the
Somali-led constitutional review process. The Council encourages the Federal
Government of Somalia to promote a comprehensive reconciliation process
that brings about local, regional, and national cohesion and integration in a
climate of respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms, and to establish
an effective federal political system. The Council further encourages President
Farmajo, the Federal and Regional authorities to reiterate Somal ia’s
commitment to increase transparency and accountability of public financial
management, including to advance security sector reform.
“The Security Council urges the new Federal Administration to take
active steps to lay the foundations for inclusive and transparent elections in
four years time, including by ensuring that public office in Somalia cannot be
achieved through harassment, intimidation, corruption or manipulation.
“The Security Council reaffirms its respect for the sovereignty, territori al
integrity, political independence and unity of Somalia.
“The Security Council recognizes that the coming months will be an
important period for Somalia. The Council will continue to follow progress
closely, and reaffirms its support for peace, stability and development in
Somalia.”

2/2

17-02081
