S/PV.9375

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9375th meeting

Thursday, 13 July 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kariuki. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Stastoli
Mr. França Danese
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Dime Labille
Mrs. Onanga
Mr. Korbieh
Mrs. Shino
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Afonso
Ms. Zabolotskaya
Ms. Chanda
Ms. Shaheen
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-20577 (E)
*2320577*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9375

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Karim
Khan, Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Khan.
Mr. Khan: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity you have given me today to once again
brief the Security Council. I would also like to express
my gratitude to the Permanent Representative of the
Sudan for the opportunity that I had to meet with
him yesterday.
It has now been 90 days since 15 April, when
fighting erupted between the Rapid Support Forces
(RSF) and the Sudanese Armed Forces. That conflict
and engagement has spilled out of Khartoum to engulf
much of the Sudan. It is certainly being felt by the people
of Darfur. The simple truth is that as we in the Council
and across the world are seeing increasing reports on
the matter, we are in peril of allowing history to repeat
itself — the same miserable history that compelled the
Council in 2005 to refer the situation in Darfur to the
International Criminal Court (ICC).
As we speak, there are women and children,
the elderly and the young, fearing for their lives and
living with uncertainty in the midst of conflict. As
their homes burn, many do not know what the night
will bring or what fate awaits them tomorrow. That
is neither hyperbole nor polemic but the result of an
objective assessment by myriad sources. Just today, the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
released a report detailing allegations of the killing of
87 ethnic Masalit allegedly by the RSF and members of
their allied militia in West Darfur. We are investigating
2/20

13/07/2023

those allegations. By any analysis, we are not on the
precipice of a human catastrophe, but in the very midst
of one. It is occurring. Based on my own analysis, it
is my advice and my prayer that we act urgently and
collectively to protect the most vulnerable. If the oftrepeated phrase “never again” is to mean anything, it
must mean something here and now for the people of
Darfur, who have lived with uncertainty, pain and the
scars of conflict for almost two decades.
With respect to the role of my Office, I want to
be very clear that our mandate pursuant to resolution
1593 (2005) is ongoing with respect to crimes within
our jurisdiction, that is, the crime of genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes. Any individual
who is found to have committed any of those crimes
within our jurisdiction will be investigated. Depending
on assessments by the independent judges of the
ICC, we will strain every sinew and leave no stone
unturned to ensure that they are held accountable in
fair and independent trial. We have already started
investigating, as I said.
I want to send a clear message to all the belligerents,
commanders and foot soldiers who have guns, or who
believe that they have the power to do what they want,
that intentionally targeting civilians, especially women
and children, and their homes or businesses is a crime
prohibited by the Rome Statute. The attacks on schools
and on humanitarian supplies and facilities must cease,
because the harm that such activities are causing is so
profound that it goes beyond words. I think that reality
deserves that we pause for thought and contemplate the
lot of people who are not in rooms or in a Chamber
such as this. This is a moment in which we should
really bring together the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, the principles hard won at Nuremberg,
the Rome Statute obligations and the authority of the
Council itself, which made a determination in 2005
that such acts represented a threat to international
peace and security. It applies not only in relation to
acts committed in the Sudan. Any individual outside
the Sudan who aids, abets, encourages or directs
crimes that may be committed in Darfur will also be
investigated. This is a moment that should bring some
clarity in terms of where it is going, the legal options
available and the moral and legal responsibility that we
owe to people who feel invisible and have felt invisible
for almost 20 years. They feel that the law and the
pronouncements and resolutions of the Council are not
23-20577

13/07/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

taken seriously or delivered on to protect or shield them
as the Charter of the United Nations requires.
The investigations that we are looking at also
encompass many allegations of crimes in West
Darfur — looting and extrajudicial killings and the
burning of homes — and in North Darfur. With regard
to those allegations, I have already mentioned the
report of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
today, but they also emerge from other sources, such
as the report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/355) on
the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS). I would like
to take this opportunity to commend the excellent
leadership and cooperation of Volker Perthes, as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, in
the most recent period. I have given clear instructions
to my Office to prioritize crimes against children and
of sexual and gender-based violence. While I cannot
vouch for the accuracy of the various reports that we
have received at this juncture, we are already looking
at new, imaginative and innovative ways to verify what
is the truth and subject it to scrutiny.
I have said that during my term as Prosecutor, I will
not apply for warrants unless there is a realistic prospect
of getting a conviction. But God willing, we will ensure
that justice is not merely spoken about in this Chamber
but is felt, so that civilians and the vulnerable can see
their rights vindicated in ways that they have not seen
sufficiently in their lived experiences. Today I can also
announce our launch of a new public campaign in which
we are asking and encouraging civilians, members
of the various groups and any other individual with
information to provide it to my Office through a secure
channel, using a portal that we have set up.
At this critical moment — and I think by any analysis,
that is the blandest way we can put it — we need a very
honest assessment. This outcome has been staring us
in the face. It has been staring the Council in the face.
It has been staring the Sudan in the face for an awfully
long time. We could see it coming. The question is what
we are going to do about it. This reality, the fact that
children are rendered orphans, women are violated and
buildings are burned, is the result of an unwillingness,
over a significant period — despite the reports that I
and my predecessors have brought before the Council,
the work of the Office of the High Commissioner, the
work of various United Nations organizations, and of
UNITAMS in the more recent past — to give value
to the accounts of the lived experiences of so many of

S/PV.9375

our Sudanese and Darfuri brothers and sisters. In my
respectful view, it stems from a fundamental failure
to recognize that justice is not simply required for
upholding normative values and principles of public
international law, or even to vindicate essential
principles of the Charter. But for all those reasons, all
those instruments speak to a fundamental reality that
justice must be and is a foundation for any prospect of
sustainable peace and real security.
That failure of recognition reflects a fundamental
disregard for and breach of clear, repeated commitments
that have been made to the people of the Sudan by
their Government. One can go through a whole litany
of instruments and promises made, but it can simply
be reduced to two things, the unfulfilled Juba Peace
Agreement of 3 October 2020 and the commitments
made to myself and my Office by the Government of the
Sudan, by dint of the memorandum of understanding
signed on 12 August 2021.
That compels my Office to look at how it can more
effectively render justice at this moment in a way that
will not allow any errors of the past, obstruction or
non-cooperation to sabotage the prospects for justice or
render impotent the will of the Council, with the heavy
responsibilities that are placed on it. By any measure,
a failure to meet international legal obligations and
the absence of any meaningful justice in the Sudan for
the serious crimes committed in Darfur 20 years ago
have sown the seeds that have grown into the weeds of
woe that are now the misfortune of so many Darfuris.
I remain open to engaging with all actors to prevent
further backsliding into ever deeper violence. I have
tried over the past months to engage, and we have
received messages from the leadership of the various
armed groups, the Government of Sudan and the RSF.
And I will continue to make those efforts, but any
engagement has two key conditions.
It is essential that those involved in the hostilities
recognize, however late in the day, that they must uphold
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
There cannot be further excuses, prevarications and
justifications for what is intolerable and unjustified — the
targeting of humankind’s most vulnerable. It is essential
that those involved in the hostilities engage in genuine
communication and meaningful cooperation with my
Office, both in relation to the current hostilities that
we are investigating and with respect to the previous
crimes committed in Darfur. We will be redoubling

23-205773/20

S/PV.9375

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

our efforts to make sure that we can penetrate any
obstruction we may face.
As the sky darkens over Darfur, and indeed over the
people of the Sudan, we must hold on to the light that
justice can bring, not because of blind hope or faith,
but steered by determination, focus and the willingness
to make a decision to change things that we have seen
in the past. And there has been hope. In the past six
months, tremendous progress has been made in the ICC
case of Prosecutor v. Muhammad Ali Abd-Al-Rahman.
We have closed our case after presenting 81 witnesses
who have been tested by the defence and heard by the
judges of the ICC. That is a key milestone, and I would
like to take the opportunity to commend my team — the
men and women of my Office who have persevered,
in very difficult circumstances, in discharging
their responsibilities with honour and integrity, and
extraordinarily efficiently.
The voices of victims have been heard. Recently,
victims called by the legal representatives of the
victims have been heard before the Court. For 20 years
they have been yearning for an opportunity to present
their views. One example is worth repeating because it
speaks both to their misery of the past 20 years and to
what is befalling them now. I would like to repeat the
words of one witness, who said,
“I would like to say that we like justice, and we
want justice. We want all those who turned our lives
into humiliation and suffering and exhaustion to be
held accountable. We want those who destroyed us
to be held accountable. Those people destroyed our
future and the future of our generations. And in this
moment, I am presenting to you my voice and the
voice of all Darfurian refugees present everywhere
around the world, and I would like to tell you that
we want peace. We want to return to our homeland.
It is enough now.”
How could anybody be more eloquent, sincere and
simple than that individual, who spoke understandable
truths? He is right. It is enough now — by any
benchmark or metric.
The power of that testimony and its tragic
relevance today underlines the fact that the trial of
Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman continues to make progress,
despite all the difficulties and the current increased
hostilities. And I am pleased that because of the
excellent trial management of the judges of the ICC,
this has been the most effective and efficient trial in
4/20

13/07/2023

the history of the Court. But we must ensure that it can
come to a conclusion. I call on the Government of Sudan
to join me by providing every assistance to the defence,
the legal representatives of the victims and the Court
so that that trial can come to a final determination,
following an assessment by the judges of the ICC.
But we need to show that we are delivering
more than words and promises. We need to show
demonstrable action. And as I have said, that is going to
be determined not only by the potency and effectiveness
of investigations — nor even by the issuance of
arrest warrants if judges of the ICC scrutinize any
applications we present and are compelled to issue such
warrants — but we need to see actual justice in court
to separate truth from fiction and to give confidence to
the people of Darfur that their lives mean something at
all, and that what took place is going to be justiciable.
As I have said repeatedly to the Security Council, I
do not want these Council referrals to be never-ending
stories. I have tried to engage with the Government
of the Sudan with road maps and different options to
ensure that justice in any forum is delivered in a way
that can satisfy the objectives of the Council and the
demands of justice. But if authors are intent on writing
further chapters of despair and further pages of misery,
we will not close this book. We will keep reading, and
we will ensure to the best of our ability that there is
justice and accountability. Because if we fail to deliver
here, I think that the implications would be very severe,
as we see in other situations. It would call into question
the relevance of the Council.
And I make no apology in making my final remark.
I am a Muslim, and many actors in this conflict, in
both of the parties, proclaim to be Muslims. I recall
not only their responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations and resolution 1593 (2005), as well
as their commitments with respect to Juba and in the
memorandum of understanding they signed, but also
in terms of the religion they profess to uphold, which
is Islam.
To quote the Qur’an, which makes it clear,
“Be upholders of justice and witnesses of truth,
even if it be against yourselves or against your
parents, or the rich or the poor. If you distort
justice, Allah knows all that you do.” (The Holy
Qur’an, CXXXV:4).
23-20577

13/07/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

There has to be a day of reckoning in this world. And
that is another reason why I encourage each and every
person, however high their status is in any party to a
conflict, or any civilian, to speak the truth and to avail
themselves of the opportunity now to take the hand of
justice and allow there to be some accountability — the
accountability that has been often promised and has
not been delivered by the Government of the Sudan. I
think that only if we work in that way of humility will
we vindicate the promises we have now been making
since 2005.
The President: I thank Prosecutor Khan for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I thank Prosecutor Khan for
the thirty-seventh report on the situation in Darfur
pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
The International Criminal Court (ICC) is a
key institution in upholding the rule of law, and its
contribution to the fight against impunity is crucial.
Japan reaffirms its unwavering support to the ICC and
the Office of the Prosecutor.
Japan is seriously concerned about the continued
hostilities that have negatively affected the Office of
the Prosecutor’s ability to implement its mandate in the
Sudan. Regrettably, it is reported that widespread war
crimes and crimes against humanity are happening in
the Sudan again. Furthermore, three major fugitives
detained in Khartoum — Mr. Al-Bashir, Mr. Hussein
and Mr. Harun — who are under ICC warrants, have
now been released from prison upon the outbreak of
the fighting. It is deplorable to learn that the efforts to
establish meaningful justice for serious crimes have not
taken root in the Sudan. Japan urges all the parties in
the Sudan to immediately cease fighting and to respect
the process of justice and the rule of law in the political
process going forward. Justice and the rule of law are
the fundamental pillars for building long-lasting peace.
As the ICC emphasizes in its report, the impact of law
must be felt in real time.
In that regard, we take note of the Court’s
investigation and collection of relevant information.
We understand that that investigation is conducted
pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). We underscore that
under international humanitarian law, all those involved

S/PV.9375

in hostilities are required to take steps to ensure the
protection of civilians.
On the other hand, it is encouraging to learn that
some progress has been made despite the challenges.
In particular, we welcome the completion of the
Prosecutor’s case in the trial of Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman,
the first-ever case from a Security Council referral,
with the participation of victims’ representatives.
Likewise, we appreciate the Office of the
Prosecutor’s active engagement with civil society and
its launch of a public appeal via an online platform to
enable victims and witnesses to provide information.
We expect that those efforts will contribute to meeting
the legitimate expectations of survivors.
We, the Security Council, need to do whatever we
can to enable the ICC to fulfil its mandate based on the
resolution. Japan reiterates its continued support for the
Court and readiness to continue providing both human
and financial resources.
Mrs. Chanda (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland would like to thank the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Mr. Karim Khan, for
his detailed briefing on the situation in Darfur, and
welcomes the participation of the representative of the
Sudan in this meeting.
In a few days’ time, we will be celebrating the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court, which
marked a crucial milestone in the international
community’s commitment to the fight against impunity.
By referring the situation in Darfur to the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court, the Security Council
highlighted the intrinsic link between justice and
sustainable peace. What was reaffirmed 25 years ago is
still valid today: there can be no peace without justice.
With that conviction in mind, I would like to highlight
three points.
First, we express our grave concern about
the escalation of the conflict and the worsening
humanitarian situation in the Sudan, including Darfur.
Switzerland condemns the violations of international
humanitarian law that may have been committed
there. It is particularly concerned by the allegations
of sexual and gender-based crimes, including those of
mass rape and violence against children mentioned in
the Prosecutor’s report. In that respect, his decision
to investigate incidents in the context of the current

23-205775/20

S/PV.9375

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

hostilities is an important contribution to the fight
against impunity.
Secondly, we welcome the progress made by the
Prosecutor since the presentation of his most recent
report (see S/PV.9249), despite the difficult context.
Switzerland is closely following developments in the
trial of Mr. Ali Abd-Al-Rahman and welcomes the
speed of the proceedings and the central role given
to victims and witnesses. Their voices must be heard.
We also welcome the increased interaction with civil
society organizations and affected communities, both
inside and outside the Sudan.
Thirdly, we would like to stress the importance of
full cooperation with the International Criminal Court.
We reiterate our call on the Sudanese authorities and
all parties to the conflict to fulfil their obligation to
cooperate with the Court under Security Council
resolution 1593 (2005). Switzerland welcomes the close
cooperation between the Office of the Prosecutor and
third countries. It calls on all States to redouble their
efforts to ensure that the victims in Darfur receive the
justice they have long awaited.
At a time when the situation in the Sudan is
deteriorating on a daily basis, the need for justice
is central and requires renewed commitment and
attention from everyone, including the Council.
Switzerland would like to reaffirm its determination
to fight impunity and its unconditional support for the
Court as an independent judicial body responsible for
investigating the most serious crimes of concern to the
entire international community. It is a beacon of hope
and deserves our full support. As the report says, this
time, the law should provide protection to those who
need it most.
Allow me to conclude with the words of a Sudanese
victims’ representative: “We have been waiting for a
long time to see perpetrators stand in court. We are
following the progress of the Abd-Al-Rahman trial
closely and trust that justice will be delivered”.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Prosecutor Khan for his report and his briefing
today on the ongoing investigations and prosecutions
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) concerning
the situation in Darfur. We appreciate the unwavering
commitment of the Court’s judges, attorneys and staff
to the pursuit of justice for the people of Darfur.
6/20

13/07/2023

The situation in Darfur is deeply disturbing. We
hear credible reports of mass violence by the Rapid
Support Forces and allied forces, including horrific
forms of sexual violence, killings based on ethnicity
and attacks that target civilians. That such violence
is being perpetrated against the people of Darfur,
who have already experienced the genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes that prompted the
ICC’s investigation in the first place, is particularly
devastating. As we have said before, the fighting must
stop immediately and, with it, the unconscionable
killing of civilians.
We condemn the atrocities committed by both
parties throughout the country in the strongest terms.
We call on the leadership on both sides to immediately
stop the violence, enable the provision of humanitarian
aid, medical care and appropriate services to survivors,
and submit to a genuine process of dispute resolution.
There is no acceptable military solution to this conflict.
We concur with Prosecutor Khan’s conclusion that the
violence is the product of years of impunity, including
the failure to hold those responsible for the most
egregious crimes accountable and the failure to provide
justice to the people of Darfur.
The Sudan’s failure to follow through on its
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations
and its obligations to cooperate with the ICC over the
past two decades under Security Council resolution
1593 (2005) reveals a disturbing pattern of disregard
for international legal obligations, the rule of law and
human life. We therefore welcome the Prosecutor’s
announcement that alleged war crimes and crimes
against humanity committed during the current
fighting may be subject to ICC investigation and
prosecution and that his Office has commenced
focused investigations on recent events. We commend
the efficient progress that has been made over the past
six months in the trial of former Janjaweed commander
Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman, also known as Mr. Ali Kushayb,
despite many challenges, and we acknowledge the
courage of the witnesses and victims who have come
forward. We also support efforts to bring to justice the
four other current suspects with outstanding warrants in
the Darfur situation: former President Omar Al-Bashir,
former Minister Ahmed Harun, former Minister
Abdel Raheem Muhammad Hussein and Abdallah
Banda Abakaer Nourain. It is critical that the present
whereabouts of these individuals be determined so that
they can face the serious charges against them.
23-20577

13/07/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Let this be a warning to these and other fugitives, as
well as to all others who would consider committing war
crimes and other atrocities, including those involving
acts of sexual violence, in the Sudan and elsewhere.
The international community maintains an unrelenting
commitment to individual criminal accountability
and will not rest until those who stand accused of
committing atrocities face justice. We urge all States
to cooperate with the ICC in the Darfur situation and
to deliver the justice promised to the people of Darfur.
We urge all nations to join us in supporting efforts to
hold accountable those responsible for past and present
atrocities in Darfur and in standing with the people of
the Sudan in their quest for peace.
Mr. Korbieh (Ghana): I would like to thank
Mr. Karim Khan, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), for presenting his thirty-seventh
report to the Council on the activities of the Office of
the Prosecutor with regard to the situation in Darfur. I
also wish to welcome the Permanent Representative of
the Sudan, Ambassador Mohamed, to this meeting.
The current report demonstrates once again the
Office’s seriousness in dealing with impunity in
Darfur, especially based on the continuous progress
that has been made regarding the trial proceedings in
the case of Mr. Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-Al-Rahman,
which is the first trial before the Court on the basis of
a referral from the Council. That progress would not
have been achieved without the support of witnesses.
On that score, Ghana applauds the courage of victims
and witnesses who have braved all risks to provide
testimonies in that particular trial. That fact further
affirms that victims of atrocity crimes will always
strive for justice, no matter how long it takes.
With reference to the current situation in Darfur,
we strongly support the Prosecutor’s decision to initiate
investigations into the acts of alleged war crimes and
crimes against humanity due to the current hostilities
in the Sudan, and more particularly in Darfur. Ghana
expresses grave concern about the loss of life and the
displacement of thousands of people. Ghana reiterates
its call on the parties to the conflict to respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law and the
international rules of engagement governing conflict.
We particularly condemn the ethnic dimension of
the conflict, where black Sudanese populations are
deliberately being targeted.

S/PV.9375

The current conflict in the Sudan will certainly
have an impact on the road map of the Office in relation
to the cases in Darfur. Despite those challenges, Ghana
urges the Office not to relent on its continuous efforts to
empower victims, witnesses and affected communities
by bringing its work closer to the affected communities
through sustained missions to Darfur, as well as the
enhancement of the Office’s permanent presence as
soon as the situation is ripe for such engagements.
Ghana maintains its call for the full cooperation
of the competent Sudanese authorities, especially on
the Al-Bashir case, where documentary evidence is
very much needed. We emphasize that this remains
central to accelerating the investigative work of the
Office and fulfilling the legitimate expectations of
survivors. Ghana recalls that in the thirty-fifth report,
the Prosecutor detailed some areas that are key to the
work of the Office. Regrettably, as the report indicates,
those commitments have not been kept, particularly
with regard to the whereabouts of indictees such as
Al-Bashir, whose present whereabouts are unknown in
the wake of the current conflict in the Sudan.
We note with appreciation that during the period
under review, the Office has continued to broaden
and deepen its engagement with third States and civil
society organizations in support of its investigative and
prosecutorial activities. It is gratifying to note that the
significant cooperation and assistance received from a
number of those States has helped with the progress of
the trial of Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman. We call on States and
non-States parties to the ICC to continue to cooperate
with the Office by giving timely responses to requests
from the Office of the Prosecutor to support the
effective and efficient discharge of the Office mandate,
pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
We once again urge the Office to continue with
its efforts to increase cooperation and dialogue with
African States, as well as the African Union. As we
have always emphasized, that approach could not only
address the lack of cooperation between the Court and
the Sudanese authorities, but also garner the broadest
support to address issues of accountability in other
cases that the Court is investigating.
I wish to conclude by once again thanking Mr. Khan
for his leadership of the Office and commend the States
and non- States parties that are cooperating and assisting
the Office in carrying out its mandate, pursuant to
resolution 1593 (2005), being the first referral from the

23-205777/20

S/PV.9375

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Council to the ICC. We call on the Council to support
the work of the Office and send a strong and unified
message to the perpetrators of atrocity crimes — that
no matter where they hide, in due time, the arms of
justice will seize them and deliver accountability for
their victims, who should no longer be powerless.
To show its support and to emphasize that the ICC
is truly relevant for us, Ghana joined this afternoon’s
press stakeout.
Ms. Zabolotskaya (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): What the Security Council just heard from
the so-called Prosecutor of the so-called International
Criminal Court (ICC) was not a briefing. The briefings
of the officials of this politicized entity to the Council
have long since turned into a theatre of the absurd.
This entity, which is an obedient tool in the hands
of the West, operates in two modes. The first is the
speedy fabrication of cases against unwanted persons
from out-of-favour countries and the second is an
imitation of work, accompanied by explanations of why
said work is not yielding results. At present, the ICC
is in the second mode when it comes to the Sudan file.
As a result, every six months the Council has to listen
to verbal gymnastics and explanations about who is to
blame for the fact that nothing is happening.
In that context, we could not overlook the fact that
Mr. Khan, in his briefing, characterized the only trial,
against Ali Kushayb as “the most efficient proceedings
in the history of the Court.” Let me recall that this case
was opened 17 years after the situation was referred to
the ICC. Here, the obvious comparison is the following:
as the Court is, so too is its “most effective trial”. After
all, the ICC did not see anything objectionable in the
mass war crimes committed by NATO in Afghanistan,
Iraq and Libya. Against that backdrop, even one person
accused in Darfur was truly an impressive success.
The current report on Darfur is as empty as the
previous ones. We must finally honestly admit that
the ICC is unable and not particularly willing to fulfil
the mandate conferred to it by resolution 1593 (2005).
As soon as the story of “electoral violence” in Darfur
ceased to be of interest to its Western masters, the ICC
switched to the mode of sluggishly imitating work,
which it has been doing for almost two decades.
At the same time, the ICC chose the simplest way to
explain its ineffectiveness — by blaming its failures on
national authorities. Indeed, with a budget of hundreds
8/20

13/07/2023

of millions of dollars, why would it not report two times
a year that the ICC is powerless because the Sudan is
supposedly not cooperating? But it is very difficult to
reproach the Sudan, given what the ICC has become
since 2005, the date the Darfur file was referred to it by
the Security Council to it, and the consequences of the
Court’s activity, including for this country.
The situation in the Sudan perfectly illustrates
the false Western premise that there can be no peace
without justice. We are, of course, talking about ICC
justice. The situations in Darfur and Libya referred by
the Security Council to the ICC are similar. In both of
them, the ICC, though progressing at different paces,
did fulfil its main and only function — being a battering
ram to destroy the statehood of developing countries
that are out of favour.
The ICC is a direct accomplice in the collective
West’s crimes. It is equally enthusiastic in fabricating
cases against those who have been designated “bad
guys”, closes its eyes to the atrocities of “very bad
but loyal to the West guys” and, of course, it sweeps
under the carpet the numerous crimes committed by
its masters.
ICC justice has become synonymous with impunity
for the architects and the main beneficiaries of the allconsuming chaos that follows the collapse of a State.
The bloody price for the various “colour revolutions”
organized by Western countries is always measured
in the hundreds of thousands of civilian lives lost and
broken. The blood of those victims is in part on the
conscience of the ICC officials.
Currently, for example, we are again witnessing
a conflict in the Sudan. The level of suffering among
the civilian population is clearly higher than during the
“electoral violence” of 2005, and the ICC still adopts a
wait-and-see position. Why is that? That is because its
“Western patrons” have not yet decided who they are
going to support in the conflict that is taking place in
the country. However, once we see Mr. Khan becoming
active in the Sudan, we will know that they have
established their priorities.
We need to consider the following: did it make
sense to spend millions on the ICC in Darfur? Maybe it
would have made been better spent on more effectively
helping the Sudan to strengthen State institutions.
Maybe justice should be in the hands of the people of
the country, and not the forces from across the seas.
Practice has shown that had that been the case the
23-20577

13/07/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

process of justice would have been more effective and
would certainly not have been accompanied by the
collapse of the State.
The main question that we need to be considering
in this context is who actually needs the ICC and why.
This question also arises in context beyond that of the
Sudan. The Court was planned as a comprehensive
international body of justice, but from the very
beginning, something went wrong in the practical
implementation of this ideal. Western countries
immediately started using the Court as an instrument
for imposing their will under the infamous “rules-based
order”. Initially, they proceeded carefully, making sure
they did not frighten potential allies. In its first years,
the ICC pointedly limited itself to investigations against
non-State actors. However, as soon as the West saw that
a sufficient number of countries were in bondage to
the Rome Statute, the ICC moved on to more decisive
work under its direct remit, becoming an instrument
of fighting those who crossed the path of the hegemon
and its satellites. And the focus immediately shifted
to State leaders, up to and including former and even
current heads of African States.
It is noteworthy that the absolute majority of cases
on the ICC’s docket are concerning Africa, despite
the fact that the most massive and bloody atrocities in
modern history were committed by Western countries,
which steamrolled not just across countries, but across
entire regions, with their aggression. Throughout
its existence, the ICC has filed charges against 52
people, 47 of whom are Africans. There are no Western
nationals on that list at all. We must therefore draw the
obvious conclusion that the ICC is simply an instrument
for punishing those who displease the West.
Accordingly, we must honestly acknowledge that the
ambitious project of a genuinely universal and impartial
international court has failed. We suggest that those
States that sincerely seek to restore justice, inevitably
punish crimes and have national reconciliation should
consider strengthening their national justice systems
and stop participating in this politicized entity that has
nothing to do with justice.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I have
listened attentively to the briefing by Prosecutor Karim
Khan and welcome the Permanent Representative of
the Sudan to today’s meeting.
China’s position on the International Criminal
Court (ICC) has been consistent. The Court’s current

S/PV.9375

cases relating to the Sudan were referred to the ICC in
2005. We hope that in its work the Court will continue
to strictly comply with the principle of complementary
jurisdictions, as stipulated in the Rome Statute, fully
respect the judicial sovereignty and legitimate opinions
of the country concerned and avoid politicization and
double standards.
Some colleagues have mentioned the current
situation in the Sudan, and I wish to briefly state
China’s position. The armed conflict in the Sudan has
persisted for three months. Although the two parties
to the conflict have reached multiple temporary
ceasefires, fighting has never stopped. The recent
humanitarian tragedy in the Omdurman region is the
last thing that any party would wish to see. China hopes
that all parties in the Sudan will prioritize the peace
of the country and the well-being of its people, resolve
differences through dialogue and negotiation, cease
hostilities and end fighting at an early date, in order to
avoid a greater humanitarian crisis.
China supports the efforts of regional organizations
and the countries concerned in promoting peace talks. We
note that the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development have convened a number of
meetings on the issue of the Sudan in order to come up
with proposed solutions. Egypt has also just hosted a
summit of the Sudan’s neighbours. China hopes that the
United Nations and international partners will support
the efforts of regional organizations and cooperate
with them. We encourage the regional organizations to
strengthen coordination with all parties in the Sudan
and form synergies to promote an early de-escalation of
the situation and avoid greater spillover effects.
Recently, the humanitarian situation in Darfur has
deteriorated. The Darfur issue goes back a long way
and involves such complex factors as intercommunal
clashes, competition for resources and external
interference. The conflict in the Sudan has made
the situation in Darfur even more fragile. China is
of the view that the most urgent task at this stage is
to urge all parties to uphold and implement the Juba
Peace Agreement and provide support to the Sudanese
authorities so that they can fulfil their primary
responsibility to protect civilians. China calls upon all
parties to abide by their obligations under international
humanitarian law, fulfil their responsibility to protect
civilians and curb violence, and ensure unimpeded
humanitarian assistance.

23-205779/20

S/PV.9375

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I thank the United
Kingdom presidency of the Security Council, and Japan
and Switzerland as co-focal points, for facilitating
today’s periodic briefing, which is an important tool
for the international community to keep track of the
follow-up to its referral to the International Criminal
Court of the serious violations perpetrated in Darfur.
I also acknowledge the presence of the Permanent
Representative of the Sudan at today’s meeting.
I also thank Prosecutor Karim Khan for the thirtyseventh report to the Security Council submitted
pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). This resolution is
an important instrument in the history of international
criminal justice, as it was the first time the Security
Council availed itself of its power to refer a situation
to the Court, even though the resolution allowed for
discriminatory exercise of ICC jurisdiction.
The thirty-seventh report brings a grimmer picture
than we have seen of the prospects for the investigation
and prosecution of the crimes committed in Darfur.
Progress seems to have stalled in important aspects of
the road map proposed by the Prosecutor for the followup to the referral. The conflict in the Sudan has affected
the ability of the Office of the Prosecutor to conduct
investigations and outreach activities in Darfur. It has
also affected the Sudanese authorities’ capacity to
comply with assistance requests.
In order for the Office of the Prosecutor to be
able to carry on with its work, the necessary security
conditions must be established. We therefore call again
for the immediate cessation of the current hostilities.
To counteract those setbacks, a few steps should be
taken when the situation allows.
First, cooperation between the Office of the
Prosecutor and national authorities is key. Despite the
current crisis, which limits the authorities’ ability to
respond to the ICC, it is crucial that they improve their
cooperation with the Office of the Prosecutor.
Secondly, complementarity is a fundamental
principle of the Rome Statute and the basis for effective
international justice in the long term. Without strong
national institutions capable of delivering justice to
local populations and of protecting them from further
harm, there will always be a higher risk of relapse in
instability, conflict and the perpetration of serious
crimes. That is why the primary responsibility to
provide justice belongs and must remain with national
States, without prejudice to the complementary role the
10/20

13/07/2023

ICC must play when the States are unable or unwilling
to do so. In that regard, the international community
must stand ready to support the Sudan in enhancing its
national institutions’ ability to investigate and punish the
perpetrators of serious crimes under international law.
Thirdly, the Office of the Prosecutor needs help
in overcoming the challenges related to the limitations
on the internal resources he needs to do his work. In
that respect, I want to reiterate Brazil`s position on the
need for expenses that the Court incurs as a result of
referrals by the Security Council to be borne not just
by States parties to the Rome Statute but by the United
Nations as well.
We were glad to hear that in the first trial following
the adoption of resolution 1593 (2005) the prosecution
was able to present its case against Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman.
The hearings before the Court brought to the forefront
the suffering of people who had lost their families. Brazil
welcomes the continued engagement of the Office of the
Prosecutor with third States and regional organizations
to support its investigative and prosecutorial activities.
We also commend the measures taken by the Office
of the Prosecutor to maintain its dialogue with civil
society and representatives of communities affected
in the Darfur region, despite the obstacles preventing
direct outreach to them in their territory.
The Sudan has faced severe economic hardship
in recent months. The fighting that broke out in
April aggravated an already dire situation. Half the
population is in need of urgent humanitarian assistance,
and many have fled their homes and sought refuge
in neighbouring countries. We urge all stakeholders
to abide by their obligations under international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
to protect civilians and enable humanitarian action.
We commend all the mediation efforts by international
organizations and other partners aimed at ending the
current crisis. We also want to remind everyone that the
Juba Peace Agreement of 2020 remains binding on all
its signatories. Respect for its terms will be crucial to
bringing durable peace to the Sudanese people.
Brazil is a founding member of the ICC and has
a deep-rooted commitment to international law and
international justice. The ICC, as a permanent treatybased tribunal, represents a breakthrough for ensuring
accountability for the most serious crimes under
international law. It is important to ensure that it pursues
23-20577

13/07/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

all its investigations with equal zeal and support from
the international community.
Mr. Camilleri (Malta): I too thank Prosecutor Khan
for his briefing, and I am grateful to him and his team
for all their commitment and efforts in the pursuit of
justice. We also welcome the Permanent Representative
of the Sudan to this meeting.
Accountability remains essential to ending the
cycle of violence that has engulfed the Sudan, destroyed
many lives and displaced many people, particularly
the most vulnerable. Regrettably, our discussion today
illustrates what a disregard for international obligations
and the linked absence of meaningful justice and
accountability for serious crimes can lead to. Ensuring
justice for the people of the Sudan is crucial. That is the
case for all the atrocity crimes committed, including
those that are the result of the escalation of violence
during the current hostilities. In that regard, we express
our support for the Prosecutor’s efforts, including the
start of investigations of incidents in Darfur in the
context of the hostilities. It is imperative that this time
around we ensure that the victims and the people of the
Sudan truly feel the tangible effects of the law. Malta
deplores all sexual and gender-based crimes, including
campaigns of mass rapes and violence against children.
All allegations must be investigated, and the victims of
atrocities must be given the justice they deserve.
We commend the efforts of the Prosecutor to remain
focused on the core elements of the renewed strategy
for the situation in Darfur, as outlined in previous
briefings. Ensuring that investigations and prosecutions
continue unchecked is essential. In that connection, we
welcome the completion of the Prosecution’s case in the
trial of Ali Kushayb and all the efforts to make sure
that the trial was not unreasonably delayed as a result of
the current situation. We applaud the profound courage
and determination of the witnesses, without whom
that would have not been possible. We also welcome
the progress that has been made in other key areas,
such as access to information and leads relevant to the
investigations. We commend the launch of a dedicated
online appeal for information and the support of third
States and other organizations in that regard. The
continued efforts to empower the victims, witnesses
and communities affected are critical, including
the convening of a round table for civil-society
organizations on gender persecution, with invitations
to civil-society organizations from the Darfur region.

S/PV.9375

While we commend States that have cooperated
with the Court, we regret that the Sudanese authorities
have failed to abide by their obligations under resolution
1593 (2005). We stress that cooperation is central to
the investigative work of all cases and to meeting the
legitimate expectations of survivors. We are concerned
about the release of the suspects Omer Al-Bashir, Abdel
Raheem Muhammad Hussein and Ahmed Harun from
Kober prison in Khartoum. Maintaining investigative
activities to strengthen the evidence base is essential.
Let me reiterate Malta’s concern that the outbreak
of ethnic violence in Darfur bears a terrifying similarity
to the suffering of civilians 20 years ago. The situation
in El Geneina mentioned in the Prosecutor’s report is
of the utmost concern. We deplore ethnically motivated
targeted killings, sexual violence, the widespread
burning of homes and mass displacement. We urge
all the parties to cease violations against civilians
and comply with international humanitarian law.
Malta supports mediation efforts, including regional
initiatives, solidified by strong and unified messages
from the Security Council.
We echo the call to the parties to cease hostilities
without preconditions and lead the Sudan back to its
political transition. Our collective aim here is to ensure
a durable and sustainable peace in the Sudan, which
is unfortunately eluding us as the violence has surged.
Sustainable peace can be achieved only by addressing
the grievances and providing justice to the victims
and survivors of atrocity crimes. The Office of the
Prosecutor and the International Criminal Court can
count on Malta’s unwavering support in all their efforts
to ensure accountability.
Mrs. Onanga (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
you very much, Sir, for convening this meeting on
the thirty-seventh report of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) pursuant to
resolution 1593 (2005). I also thank Prosecutor Karim
Khan for his contribution to international criminal
justice in prosecuting serious violations of international
humanitarian law committed in the Sudan. I welcome
the representative of the Sudan and his delegation to
this meeting.
Our discussion of this agenda item is taking place
at a time when hostilities leading to mass displacements
in the Sudan continue to rage, despite the political and
diplomatic efforts being made under the auspices of the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on

23-2057711/20

S/PV.9375

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Development, as well as the United States- and Saudiled mediation within the framework of the Jeddah
process. The environment created by the political and
humanitarian crisis, marked by serious acts of violence
against women and children, prevented the Office
of the Prosecutor from visiting the Sudan so that its
members could meet with the country’s authorities and
carry out the judicial investigations and fact-finding
activities mandated by the Security Council. In such
a situation of insecurity, it is the investigative team’s
responsibility, given the resources available, to assess
whether its members can carry out the tasks they have
been set according to the established timelines in order
to shed light on the facts and ensure that justice prevails.
Against that very difficult backdrop, we welcome
the fact that the very first case investigated by the Court,
that involving Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-Al-Rahman,
came to a successful conclusion, which represents an
important step forward in the process of investigating
the crimes and bringing justice to victims and survivors.
We must do everything possible to end the war in the
Sudan so that we can see this vast undertaking come
to fruition. We call wholeheartedly for redoubling
political and diplomatic efforts to restore peace and
stability to a country scarred by many years of war.
We also welcome the special attention that the
Prosecutor continues to give to civil society and
communities affected by the conflict in Darfur, and we
encourage him to continue his efforts to strengthen the
effectiveness and performance of the Court’s services.
However, the effectiveness of all of those measures still
depends on improving the political and security situation
in the Sudan. In that regard, we want to emphasize
that the restoration of peace is an absolutely essential
condition for the Sudanese authorities to be able to
honour the commitments made under the 12 August
2021 memorandum of understanding, which established
the terms of uninterrupted cooperation between the
Sudan and the Office of the Prosecutor. As soon as the
appropriate conditions allow, we hope the authorities
will respond positively and without further delay to the
designation of focal points, which are essential links in
the chain for the pursuit of productive cooperation.
I would also like to stress the importance of
building the capacity of the Sudanese judiciary. It will
be essential to make those courts and other mechanisms
relevant and more effective in order to reaffirm their
willingness to eradicate impunity, with a view to once
again putting a stop to the hellish cycle of violence
12/20

13/07/2023

and massive violations of human rights such as those
currently happening across the country. Responding
diligently to official requests for assistance would
contribute significantly to that.
In conclusion, Gabon would like to reaffirm its full
support for the efforts of the Prosecutor and encourages
the Sudanese authorities to cooperate fully with his
Office. That partnership remains vital for the effective
implementation of resolution 1593 (2005).
Ms. Shaheen (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I thank Mr. Karim Khan,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for his briefing and welcome the participation of the
representative of the Sudan in our meeting today.
We are concerned about what we have been
witnessing in the Sudan as the fighting has escalated
and has resulted in civilian casualties, including in the
Darfur region, in a reflection of the fragile security
situation caused by the ongoing clashes in the country.
We firmly condemn such criminal acts, as well as
the burning of homes, public facilities and hospitals,
which has led to a total collapse of medical services and
the influx of hundreds of families into neighbouring
countries. We are also concerned about the negative
repercussions of the security situation on ongoing
humanitarian efforts in the country. That demands
continuing the ceasefire initiatives and redoubling
efforts to find an urgent political solution to the crisis.
The United Arab Emirates therefore calls on all the
parties to heed the voice of wisdom and reason, stop
the fighting immediately and adhere to what was
agreed in Jeddah. We also underscore the importance
of respecting international humanitarian law and
facilitating relief assistance to meet the growing needs
of the Sudanese people. In that context, the United
Arab Emirates has provided humanitarian and medical
support to alleviate the dire humanitarian situation
caused by the influx of Sudanese refugees into Chad in
the wake of the fighting.
Diplomatic efforts remain essential at this critical
time, and we stress the importance of coordinating
international and regional efforts to ensure their
effectiveness. We would like to remind members of
the press statement the Security Council released last
month (SC/15305), pointing out to the parties that
the Juba Peace Agreement remains binding on all
signatories and should be fully implemented. That
especially applies to its provisions on the permanent
23-20577

13/07/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.9375

ceasefire in Darfur, which also requires the necessary
support of the international community.

continue its efforts to investigate and monitor crimes
committed in the new context.

In conclusion, we take note of the Prosecutor’s
statement and report, particularly with regard to the
mandate of his Office pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1593 (2005). In that regard, the United
Arab Emirates reaffirms its position that the principle
of complementarity enshrined in the Court’s Statute
must guide the work of the Court and its Prosecutor.
The objectives of complementarity must continue to
be pursued as soon as the conditions are conducive to
discussions on how to achieve that complementarity.

The events in the Sudan have worrisome
potential consequences for the conduct of the Court’s
investigations. We call on the Sudanese authorities
to cooperate with the Office of the Prosecutor and to
honour their obligations under resolution 1593 (2005),
the Juba Peace Agreement and the memorandums
concluded with the Office of the Prosecutor. While the
situation of Omer Al-Bashir, Abdel Raheem Muhammad
Hussein and Ahmed Harun has been uncertain since the
beginning of the clashes in Khartoum, we encourage
the Sudan to respond to the Court’s formal request to
clarify their whereabouts. We once again urge Abdallah
Banda Abakaer Nourain to immediately present himself
to the Court so that he can be tried.

Mrs. Dime Labille (France) (spoke in French):
I thank Prosecutor Khan for presenting his thirtyseventh report pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005),
concerning the Sudan. We welcome his willingness to
renew the Office of the Prosecutor’s strategy in view of
the changing context in the Sudan, and to return there
as soon as the situation allows.
France is very concerned about the security
situation in the Sudan. We condemn the continued
fighting and urge all the parties to cease hostilities
and respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law, including by protecting civilians
and ensuring humanitarian access throughout the
territory. The clashes represent a tragic setback in
the transition to the civilian Government that the
Sudanese people desire. France reaffirms its solidarity
with the Sudanese people, who are the main victims
of the conflict. In particular, the violence in Darfur is
worrisome in terms both of its scale and its community
dimension. The United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan has stressed that the
ethnic violence that has occurred in recent years in
Darfur could constitute crimes against humanity, if
proved. In that regard, the information communicated
today by the High Commissioner for Human Rights on
the discovery of mass graves is extremely worrisome.
We note the willingness to address that situation that
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) expressed in his statement. Building a lasting
and inclusive peace in the region will not be possible
without justice. In that context, the Court’s opening
of an investigation into the situation in Darfur, in line
with the Security Council’s request in its resolution
1593 (2005), is essential, including with regard to the
crimes committed against the backdrop of the ongoing
conflict. France invites the Office of the Prosecutor to

France welcomes the continuation of the trial in the
case of Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-Al-Rahman, otherwise
known as Ali Kushayb. We commend the important work
done by the Office of the Prosecutor and the Court as a
whole in handling that case. We recall that it is essential
that the witnesses in that case be able to intervene
without risk of reprisals and without hindrance. We also
commend the cooperation between the Office of the
Prosecutor and third States, as well as with international
organizations, and encourage countries in the region to
continue their cooperation with the ICC, particularly to
ensure that the Court can take evidence from Sudanese
refugees. While the Prosecutor is carrying out essential
investigative work on all abuses within his jurisdiction,
including in Darfur, Libya, the Sahel and Ukraine, we
reaffirm France’s support for the International Criminal
Court as the only permanent international criminal
jurisdiction with a universal vocation. The victims and
their families, and the survivors of atrocities, know that
we need the International Criminal Court and that it is
an indispensable judicial body.
In conclusion, I want to affirm that a lasting return
to peace in the Sudan cannot be achieved without the
involvement of all Sudanese actors. France calls for
the Sudan’s political forces and civil society to engage
in the ongoing discussions as soon as possible, with
a view to achieving a lasting ceasefire and a political
resolution to the crisis. We reaffirm our support for the
efforts of the States of the region, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the African Union, and
for the work of the United Nations.

23-2057713/20

S/PV.9375

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to welcome the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court and to once again recognize his
Office’s outstanding work in the implementation
and enforcement of international criminal law. I also
welcome the Permanent Representative of the Sudan to
this meeting.
During his presentation of the previous report
on this situation (see S/PV.9249), the Prosecutor said
that he hoped to be able to report tangible progress in
the implementation of the renewed investigation and
prosecution strategy in his next briefing of the Security
Council. Unfortunately, the outbreak of hostilities
in April, which has caused a severe humanitarian
crisis, with hundreds dead and wounded and more
than 2.8 million people displaced, has prevented the
achievement of the objectives proposed. In that context,
my delegation would like to focus on three aspects of
the Prosecutor’s report.
First, Ecuador is particularly concerned about the
allegations of sexual and gender-based violence against
children and other attacks on them. Under resolution
1593 (2005), the International Criminal Court has
jurisdiction to investigate and prosecute alleged war
crimes and crimes against humanity that are committed
against children in the current conflict. We therefore
welcome the fact that the Office of the Prosecutor
has started investigations into the allegations of
extrajudicial killings and the burning of homes and
looting in El Geneina and other areas of Darfur. As
the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide said
in a press release on the situation in the Sudan, when
perpetrators of past atrocities are not held accountable
for their acts we are doomed to see history repeat itself.
Secondly, we urge the authorities to comply with
their international legal obligations and to cooperate
with the Court in order to create the conditions that can
enable its officials to move around the Sudan’s territory
and gain direct access to evidence and witnesses. We
also encourage the Office of the Prosecutor to continue
to strengthen its relationship of cooperation with third
States and international organizations.
Thirdly, regarding the Abd-Al-Rahman case, which
the Prosecutor has completed, we hope the proceedings
will not be affected by the current conflict, as this
represents a historic and long-awaited opportunity for
justice for the victims in Darfur. We urge the Sudanese
authorities to respond to the Prosecutor’s request for
14/20

13/07/2023

information on the whereabouts of Mr. Al-Bashir,
Mr. Hussein and Mr. Harun, who have reportedly been
released from Kober prison in Khartoum, and to take
concrete action to locate Mr. Banda, who remains at
large. We also call on the Government of the Sudan to
provide protection to victims and witnesses.
The violence we are witnessing in the Sudan
reminds us of the importance of breaking the cycle of
impunity. For that reason, Ecuador reaffirms its support
for the International Criminal Court, whose work, in
observance of the principle of complementarity, will
contribute to achieving sustainable peace in the Sudan.
And we maintain that support despite the fact that the
work of the Court and the Office of the Prosecutor is
not always welcomed by some Governments.
Mr. Stastoli (Albania): Let me begin by thanking
Prosecutor Khan for his valuable and sober presentation
and his steadfast commitment to fighting impunity for
serious violations of human rights.
Despite all the obstacles, we are encouraged by the
progress that has been made in the pursuit of justice in
the Sudan. The completion of the case for the trial of Ali
Muhammad Ali Abd-Al-Rahman is a long-awaited step
towards justice. It is one of the most efficient cases in
the history of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
and we especially welcome the participation of victims
in it. We applaud the Court’s decision to hear in person
women and girls who were subjected to sexual violence
in Darfur to let them speak for themselves and fight
their stigmatization and suffering. We also welcome the
launch of the public campaign for supplying information
and call on people of goodwill and the aggrieved to seize
that opportunity and share information and evidence
with the Office of the Prosecutor on alleged atrocity
crimes committed since 2003.
However, we are troubled by the heinous crimes
that have been committed in the wake of the recent
outbreak of conflict in the Sudan. They include mass
rapes and violence against women and children,
extrajudicial killings and deliberate attacks on civilians
and civilian infrastructure. We fully support the
Prosecutor’s decision to extend investigations into the
ongoing hostilities. We are troubled by the release of
Omer Al-Bashir, Abdel Raheem Muhammad Hussein
and Ahmed Harun, who had been held in custody until
the outbreak of fighting in Khartoum on 15 April,
and we ask that the Sudanese authorities hand them
over to the ICC to face justice. We deplore the lack
23-20577

13/07/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of cooperation of the Sudanese authorities with the
Office of the Prosecutor, and the fact that they have
not honoured the commitment they made in this
Chamber in January (see S/PV.9249) to supporting the
Prosecutor to pursue justice for crimes committed in
Darfur. We call on all the Sudanese authorities to show
goodwill and cooperate in good faith with the Office
of the Prosecutor to address past and present crimes
committed in the country. There will be no end to the
violence and suffering in the Sudan unless we put an
end to impunity so that we can bring all perpetrators
to justice.
In conclusion, let me reiterate our unwavering
support to the ICC in the pursuit of justice and
accountability for all atrocities, wherever they are
committed. We applaud States’ expanded support
partnerships with the Court and call on all States to
cooperate in good faith with the Court to advance peace
and justice around the globe.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): Mozambique would
like to thank Mr. Karim Khan, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for his update,
and we welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representative of the Sudan in this meeting.
Mozambique attaches great importance to the
information just shared by the Prosecutor regarding the
activities carried out by the Court pursuant to resolution
1593 (2005) in the Republic of the Sudan.
We note that despite the efforts made by the
Government of the Republic of the Sudan before the
hostilities began in April, recent reports point to an
increase in violence against the most vulnerable sectors
of the population, especially women and children. The
situation has been aggravated by the current political,
military and humanitarian crisis in the country. We
believe that the solution to the conflict in the Sudan and
Darfur lies in a combination of judicial and non-judicial
measures. In our view, that approach will contribute to
enhancing accountability and laying down the building
blocks for a true national reconciliation process in the
Sudan. In that regard, we would like to highlight the
following points.
First, addressing injustice is crucial to paving the
way towards reconciliation and sustainable peace. Both
the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan and the
national plan for the protection of civilians in Darfur
reaffirm the centrality of justice, accountability and the
protection of human rights in the peace process in the

S/PV.9375

Sudan. In the spirit of the principle of complementarity
enshrined in the Rome Statute, we recognize the crucial
role of the ICC in combating impunity for massive and
systematic human rights violations in its efforts to
promote the rule of law.
Secondly, the situation in the Sudan remains of
great concern. Despite multiple ceasefires, violence
continues to spread, causing civilian fatalities,
particularly in Khartoum, Darfur, Blue Nile and
Kordofan. We reiterate our strong condemnation of the
attacks on civilians and their private property. Abuses
and violations of human rights, including sexual violence
against girls and women, are equally unacceptable,
and we condemn such heinous crimes. We call on the
parties to comply with international humanitarian law
and human rights law at all times. In that regard, we
welcome the commitment of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) to working closely
with the international community to put in place a
robust monitoring and accountability mechanism
in order to bring the perpetrators of such abuses and
crimes to justice. We condemn in the strongest terms
the repeated violations of the Vienna Convention on
Diplomatic Relations of 1961, as manifested in attacks
on and looting of diplomatic missions and premises. We
demand respect for the inviolability and protection of
such premises.
Finally, in the pursuit of justice for the Sudanese
people, there is a need for the national and regional
judiciary institutions to play an important role, along
with reconciliation mechanisms such as the transitional
justice provisions of the Juba Peace Agreement, and
the African Court on Human and Peoples’ Rights.
We therefore encourage the Office of the Prosecutor
to maintain a constructive dialogue on this process
with the Sudanese authorities and other stakeholders,
including IGAD and the African Union. In defending
the supreme interests of the Sudanese people, we
need to focus our efforts on achieving a cessation of
hostilities, making peace and addressing the root causes
of conflict in the Sudan.
The President: I will now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I thank Prosecutor Karim Khan for his thirtyseventh report on the situation in Darfur and his
briefing today. I welcome the unwavering commitment
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) to helping to
deliver justice for the people of Darfur. I also recognize

23-2057715/20

S/PV.9375

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the participation of the representative of the Sudan in
this meeting.
The United Kingdom welcomes the progress
made in the trial of Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman. The case
is testament to the victims’ courage and patience in
being willing to tell their stories after two decades. We
urge all parties to help maintain the trial’s momentum.
However, we regret that from the October 2021 military
coup until the outbreak of conflict in April 2023, the
Sudanese authorities failed almost completely to
cooperate with the ICC. We share the Prosecutor’s
concern about the impact of the current conflict on the
ongoing investigations, including the apparent release
from custody of ICC suspects. We are also deeply
troubled by today’s reports of continued violence and
mass graves outside the capital of West Darfur. The
United Kingdom shares the Prosecutor’s assessment
that the current conflict is partly the result of the failure
to ensure justice and accountability on the part of those
who hold power in the Sudan. Their disregard for
international obligations and for ensuring meaningful
justice for past crimes has helped sow the seeds of this
latest cycle of violence and suffering.
All sides are responsible for the crimes they
commit. We remind the Sudanese Armed Forces and the
Rapid Support Forces that the ICC’s mandate in Darfur
is ongoing. We welcome the Prosecutor’s decision to
commence investigations into offences committed in the
current conflict — including, in particular, ethnically
targeted killings and sexual violence. In conclusion, the
United Kingdom would like to reiterate its support to
the Court in delivering justice for the people of Darfur.
At the same time, we underline the Council’s call for an
immediate end to the current hostilities.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your country’s presidency of the Security Council
this month and to thank Mr. Karim Khan, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), for the
comprehensive briefing he provided today to the
Security Council and detailed in his report. We are
also grateful to him for his efforts and endeavours, his
positive engagement and his commitment to ensuring
the implementation of criminal justice for redressing
victims and survivors in Darfur.
16/20

13/07/2023

There is a legal basis for cooperation between the
Government of the Sudan and the ICC, and that basis
must be clarified. As everyone is aware, the Sudan
has not yet ratified the Rome Statute of the ICC.
However, following the December 2018 revolution, and
specifically in 2021, the Transitional Government was
understanding and began to cooperate and coordinate
with the Court. The Sudan received an ICC delegation
in December 2021. At that point, cooperation with the
Court was asserted pending ratification of the Statute,
while the Sudan provided facilitations, including
agreeing to the obligation to protect witnesses.
In response, the ICC delegation commended the
Government of the Sudan on its cooperation. In that
context, former Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda visited the
Sudan, particularly the refugee and internally displaced
persons camps in Darfur.
The memorandum of understanding was signed in
consideration of paragraph (a) of article 86 of the Rome
Statute, concerning States not party to the Statute,
with a view to providing the assistance established in
part 9, which requires cooperation with the ICC and
the Prosecutor with regard to ICC investigations in the
Sudan and the extradition and transfer of suspects for
whom arrest warrants were issued.
The memorandum of understanding establishes
cooperation mechanisms between the two parties,
but ensuring that cooperation under national laws
involves the legal reform of transitional justice, as
noted by certain Council delegations today, as well
as the Sudan’s approval to cooperate with the ICC. I
underscore that the extradition of suspects is conducted
under a permanent legal framework, rather than a
temporary one, as required by the ongoing conditions
of the political transfer process, with the challenges
noted by the Prosecutor’s report.
Furthermore, full cooperation with the ICC also
requires that we finalize the ratification of the Rome
Statute in accordance with the provisions of Sudanese
law, where a request for cooperation requires a statement
that indicates the underlying legal basis and specific
information on the place of residency and identity of
persons. The Government of the Sudan treats the ICC
like any other intergovernmental organization, and
there are no restrictions on the Court’s communications,
movements or activities in the Sudan.
The implementation of requests for assistance
under paragraph (a) of article 99 of the Rome Statute
23-20577

13/07/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

will be carried out in accordance with the procedure
established by national law. I note that according to
paragraph 4 of article 93 of the Statute, the Government
of the Sudan can refuse to cooperate, fully or partially,
when the Court’s request concerns presenting
documents or evidence related to our national security.
The Government of the Sudan can also declassify
such documents, but that takes time. Notwithstanding,
the Government of the Sudan does cooperate with
the ICC Prosecutor. Ratification of any international
conventions must be submitted to the Ministry of
Justice for its review. I have clarified that point many
times in the Security Council, and it is included in
article 19 of the memorandum of understanding signed
between the ICC and the Sudan.
Procuring the accused or suspects or getting access
to evidence and witnesses require more international
cooperation. Until a legal framework is introduced,
the form of cooperation and legal compliance will
remain shaky because the measures contained in the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide seem to be very primitive. Pending
the final ratification of the Rome Statute, the best path
forward is to maintain cooperation between the Court
and the Sudan, under article 1 of the Rome Statute, on
the basis of the complementarity principle.
With regard to cooperation between the Government
of the Sudan and the Office of the Prosecutor, the
memorandum of understanding, signed on 12 August
2021 between the Minister of Justice of the Sudan
and the Prosecutor, is based on a legal framework that
combines the implementation of resolution 1593 (2005),
on the cooperation of the parties to the conflict in
Darfur and the Government of the Sudan with the ICC,
and cooperation under paragraph 5 (a) of article 87 of
the Rome Statute, which calls upon non-States parties
to provide assistance in trial proceedings, under part
9 of the Statute, for crimes committed in the Darfur
region since July 2002, to facilitate investigations in
the Sudan and to transfer suspects for whom arrest
warrants have been issued.
With regard to facilitating investigations on the
Sudan’s territory, there was no objection in principle,
and given the current exceptional circumstances, it is
possible to start considering enhancing cooperation
so as to ensure justice for victims and to discuss the
Prosecutor’s proposals through the established channels
of communication or the focal points on the basis of the
principle of legal complementarity and article 3 of the

S/PV.9375

memorandum of understanding. The Ministry of Justice
is the channel of communication when it comes to
requests for cooperation, information and coordination
between the two parties, as needed. That is a request
made by the Prosecutor.
Pursuant to article 10 of the Rome Statute, the
Office of the Prosecutor may also provide assistance to
the Sudan in conducting an investigation or prosecution
for any crime within the Court’s jurisdiction or for
any crime under Sudanese legislation. That includes
technical and legal coordination, which has not taken
place. The Sudan cannot be held solely accountable
for that. Any such request has to provide sufficient
time, as specified in article 18 of the memorandum
of understanding, which refers to paragraph (a) of
article 99 of the Rome Statute, which, in turn, supports
the Sudan’s position with regard to requests for
cooperation, to be carried out in accordance with the
applicable procedures under national law and in the
manner specified in the request, unless it is otherwise
prohibited by law. Article 20 of the memorandum
of understanding noted the need to implement the
Prosecutor’s requests on a voluntary basis with regard
to interviewing persons and inspecting sites. Said
requests must allow sufficient time, as agreed by both
parties, and provide information on the activities to be
carried out on the territories of the Sudan.
The Juba Peace Agreement mentioned by certain
delegations has not been implemented — in particular
the demobilization, disarmament and reintegration
process — since the donors and the international
community have not funded the process in full and
the pledges have not been honoured. It was therefore
not possible to complete this process on the basis of
national resources alone due to the current economic
difficulties. I would ask that delegations not accuse the
Sudan of this failure every time this issue is raised.
On cooperation with the Prosecutor from 2020 to
2022, including after 25 October, the report referred to
violations of international humanitarian law as falling
under the jurisdiction of the ICC, but it is legally
established that international humanitarian law and the
four Geneva Conventions apply to international armed
conflicts, not domestic conflicts. Despite that, the
Sudan has upheld all of its commitments related to the
ceasefire agreement, under the auspices of the United
States and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in Jeddah.

23-2057717/20

S/PV.9375

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The report also notes, in more than one paragraph,
that the Government of the Sudan did not cooperate
with the ICC and refers to the increased deterioration
of relationships before the breakout of the ongoing
clashes. However, the Government of the Sudan has
been cooperating with the ICC and the Office of the
Prosecutor as follows.
The Sudan signed the Rome Statute in 1998, and the
Ministry of Justice conducted a study on the Statute,
which was presented to the Council of Ministers for
final ratification. However, political developments
prevented the report from being ratified, and, in May
2021, a cooperation agreement between the Government
of the Sudan and the ICC was signed. Then, in August
2021, the memorandum of understanding was signed.
As to cooperation with the Office of the Prosecutor
since Mr. Khan’s taking office on 16 June 2021, a
new memorandum of understanding between the
Court and the Government following the departure of
Ms. Bensouda was signed in August 2021 by Mr. Khan
with a view to strengthening cooperation with the
Ministry of Justice. Prosecutor Khan then visited
Khartoum, where he met with staff at the highest level
of authority, in order to ensure justice for victims and
displaced people in Darfur.
After several visits to the Sudan, the Prosecutor
requested the opening of a liaison office which would
include the presence of officials. The Sudan had
previously hosted Ms. Bensouda on two occasions and
facilitated her work. She met with Government officials
and visited the victims and survivors in Darfur camps.
In August 2022, the Prosecutor and his team were
hosted in Darfur from 20 to 25 August 2022. Some
members of his team travelled to south and central
Darfur. They met with state Governors and with local
officials in the refugee camps. Other members of the
team headed by the Deputy Prosecutor, Judge Nazha
Shmeem, met with the Minister of Justice, the Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs, and the Minister of
Culture and Information. They also met with members
of the Sovereignty Council and the Governor of Darfur.
On 23 August 2022, when the Prosecutor returned
from Darfur, he met with the Deputy Chairperson of
the Sovereignty Council, after which the Prosecutor
made his historic briefing to the Security Council from
Khartoum without any restrictions (see S/PV.9113). The
next day, on 24 August, the Prosecutor met with the
Chairperson of the Sovereignty Council and appeared
at a press conference at the Rotana Hotel in Khartoum.
18/20

13/07/2023

In September 2022, another delegation from the
Office of the Prosecutor, comprising nine members,
came to Khartoum for a six-day visit, which was followed
by many visits from 12 September to 18 December
2022. Another delegation of eight members also visited
the Sudan to discuss the issues of coordination on the
ground, legal accountability, case management and
awareness-raising. That delegation included the Head
of the Public Relations Department and visited sites
in Zalinji, Bendisi, Makjar, Kilma, Bandis North and
South, Kadoum camps and Old Makjar camp.
In addition, a delegation of 12 people led by the
Prosecutor had visited Nyala on 21 August and met with
the Governor and the security committee. On 22 August
they visited the town of Zalinji. Consequently, our
cooperation with the ICC was more positive than has
been characterized by members of the Court.
The ICC Prosecutor asked the Government of the
Sudan for permission to open an office in the Sudan and
to send officials there. However, the Court Registrar
did not come to the Sudan to finalize the request. The
Government of the Sudan is completely ready to do that
once the hostilities stop.
The Prosecutor also requested documents,
archives, witnesses and evidence on the crimes
committed in Darfur and asked for permission to go to
the crime scenes. Responses have always been in the
affirmative as evidence of our willingness to cooperate
and coordinate.
There are several important points that I expected
the report to mention, namely, the legislative reform
measures taken by the Government of the Sudan to
show our cooperation with the ICC, including the
relevant amendments made to the 1995 Sudanese
criminal law, the 2007 Armed Forces law, and to article
3 of the 1991 Code of Criminal Procedures to bring it
in line with ICC requirements of the ICC, as well as the
appointment of a specialized Sudanese Prosecutor and
the establishment of specialized tribunals to investigate
the crimes committed in Darfur.
The report also fails to mention my Government’s
efforts to protect the civilians in Darfur, including
sending joint forces to implement the Juba Peace
Agreement and following up on the security situation
in the region. The report states that the Sudan did not
take notable measures to facilitate cooperation with the
Office of the Prosecutor before the events of 15 April
2023, including administrative impediments and a
23-20577

13/07/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

refusal to work with Sudanese witnesses and authorities
or with affected communities. Upon his visit to the
Central Darfur state, the Prosecutor said that he would
assure General Al-Burhan of his cooperation with the
Governors in Darfur and that he saw no obstacles that
might hinder that. The Prosecutor’s only request was
for contact to be established between the Government
and the Office of the Prosecutor. That request is to
be discussed with the Sudanese authorities in the
near future.
On the issue of handing over the three remaining
suspects wanted by the ICC whose location is alleged
to be unknown, which is mentioned in the report and
has been raised by certain delegations, the Minister of
Justice assured me yesterday that these individuals are
under strict surveillance in a hospital where they are
being treated. I duly informed the Prosecutor of these
facts when he visited the mission yesterday, at which
time we also thoroughly discussed future cooperation.

S/PV.9375

the crimes committed in Darfur through its national
criminal courts in accordance with international legal
criteria under the ne bis in idem principle, which is
recognized in most national criminal systems and in
Article 14 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights.
Finally, under article 90 of the Rome Statute, the
Sudanese judiciary has the right to issue judgments
against those who perpetrate international crimes
within the ICC’s jurisdiction. The Government of
the Sudan is entitled to receive from the Prosecutor
a copy of the information and investigations that are
considered primary evidence for justifying the trials.
The Prosecutor’s view that the Sudanese authorities
have not cooperated with his Office by refusing to hand
over suspects to be prosecuted in The Hague is not fair
given the clarifications I have made today on the scope
of cooperation between the Sudan and the Office of
the Prosecutor.

The Prosecutor’s report notes a single option,
namely, having the trial of suspects in The Hague
and nowhere else. However, in her briefings to the
Security Council in 2020 and 2021, former Prosecutor
Bensouda had proposed three options from which the
Sudan would choose. That will be addressed with the
Prosecutor in the near future. As for the five accused
persons, their trials will take place either in a Sudanese
court, in The Hague, or in an internationally supported
hybrid tribunal established by a Council resolution.
A memorandum of understanding was signed by the
Government of the Sudan and the Prosecutor’s Office
when the case was referred to the ICC pursuant to
resolution 1593 (2005).

In conclusion, there was a discussion on the
situation in the Sudan in the United Kingdom Parliament
yesterday. In that discussion, Ms. Anita Ferrara, author
and expert on transitional justice at the Irish Centre for
Human Rights stated,

As to the case of the three suspects, the Rome
Statute does not provide for a statute of limitations for
the crimes alleged. Once the comprehensive aggression
is over, we could deal with that aspect, keeping in mind
that we have additional options that have already been
approved by the previous and current Prosecutors, as
mentioned previously.

The President: I now give the floor to Prosecutor
Khan to respond to some comments.

After the revolution, we began to deal with the ICC
based on respect for the principle of criminal and legal
complementarity where preference is given to trying
criminal cases in our national courts under our national
criminal law. That principle makes the ICC, as stated
by the Prosecutor, the court of last resort and not the
court of first instance. Accordingly, the Government
of the Sudan wishes to exercise its right to prosecute

“Criminal justice for victims of war throughout
the world arrives late when the aggressor wins
the war. In the short term, transitional justice can
be implemented.”
She called on the Sudanese parties to start first
with transitional justice, and we noted the challenges
that entailed. As for criminal justice, it will come in the
long term.

Mr. Khan: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to say a few final words and for the
comments and observations and also largely support
from the members of the Security Council.
I would love to be able to give positive news and to
commend cooperation. I would take any opportunity to
commend any country, any State, any individual that
is bending towards justice and away from criminality.
But, unfortunately, I have not been given that
opportunity today.
I will try to be brief, because I know that there is an
important meeting after this one.

23-2057719/20

S/PV.9375

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

It is a basic principle of international law that every
single member knows — that a national authority, a
Government, a country cannot pray in aid a lacuna
or domestic impediment to fulfil an international law
obligation. There is no higher authority in the world in
terms of maintaining international peace and security
than the Security Council. And it was the Security
Council, in 2005, indeed, in paragraph 2 of resolution
1593 (2005), that made it absolutely clear in black and
white that the Government of the Sudan and all parties
to the conflict shall cooperate fully with and provide
necessary assistance to the Court and the Prosecutor
pursuant to that resolution. That is an international
obligation, which, unfortunately, has been much more
honoured in the breach than in the observance.
The writing has been on the wall. I am not making
things up. In my last report (see S/PV.9249) and in
my address to the Council, I made it very clear that,
unfortunately, despite all the promises and all the
protocol at the airport, for which I am very grateful,
there was on any analysis a clear trend of no cooperation
from some cooperation. And what cooperation there
was had its high point before October 2021. So, the
words that have been uttered have not actually been
met, with the greatest of regret, in terms of fulfilment
of international law obligations.
An example is that there are 34 requests for
assistance that remain outstanding, and those requests
have not just come yesterday; they have been outstanding
since 2020. As a candid and honest assessment, it is not
the case that the events over the past 90 days can gloss
over or muddy the waters of non-cooperation that we
have seen over a significant period, and particularly
from October 2021, because even before April, at
the beginning of this year, after my last report, after
I appeared in the Council, two missions to the Sudan
were cancelled because we did not get visas, and I have
raised that issue many times. That is the simple truth
and the reality.

20/20

13/07/2023

I am a real proponent of dynamic complementarity,
and when I met General Al-Burhan face to face, it is
not the case that I insisted that trials take place in The
Hague. I have been on record to say trials should be
in the region. They should be as close to the people as
possible, and I went further, in fact, and said, subject to
judicial orders, I would be open, of course judges would
decide, to the trials taking place even by video link
from Khartoum. Trials can take place in The Hague
with accused appearing by video link, perhaps subject
to judicial orders. The point is complementarity is the
foundation of the Rome Statute, but there is another
important part that we should not look away from:
that if there is a determination that a State is unwilling
or unable to ensure that international obligations are
fulfilled, that if there are not active investigations in
relation to genocide, crimes against humanity and war
crimes, we must make sure and we must be resolute to
ensure that there is accountability to make sure that the
promise of “never again” is given effect to.
It therefore pains me and I have no joy in saying
that, unfortunately, I am compelled to the conclusion
that, at this moment, the Sudan is unwilling and unable
to fulfil its obligations. That is why I have announced
as clearly as I can that we are progressing to look at and
investigate the current allegations. And I reiterate, and
that must be my final word, a call on both parties to the
conflict and any individual, for the good of the Sudan
and for their own sake, to cooperate with me even at
this eleventh hour and provide information to fulfil the
promise of justice, because that is an opportunity that
will not perhaps come again.
I thank the Security Council for the opportunity to
say those final remarks.
The President: I thank Mr. Khan for his
clarification and his comments.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.

23-20577
