A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/8
18 November 1999

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 32
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/54/L.13 and Add.1)]
54/8.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Latin American
Economic System

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 52/3 of 22 October 1997 on cooperation between the United Nations and the
Latin American Economic System,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on cooperation between the United Nations and
the Latin American Economic System,1
Bearing in mind the Agreement between the United Nations and the Latin American Economic System,2
in which the parties agree to strengthen and expand their cooperation in matters that are of common concern
in the field of their respective competence pursuant to their constitutional instruments,
Considering that the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean has intensified its ties
of cooperation with the Latin American Economic System,

1

A/53/420.

2

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1651, No. 1061.

99-77503

/...

A/RES/54/8
Page 2

Bearing in mind that the Permanent Secretariat of the Latin American Economic System has carried out
programmes with the support of the United Nations Development Programme in areas that are considered
of priority for the economic and social development of the region,
Considering that the Latin American Economic System is developing joint activities with the specialized
agencies and other organizations and programmes of the United Nations system, such as the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World Intellectual
Property Organization,
Welcoming the continued monitoring of changes in the treatment of topics relating to the United Nations
system, in close contact with the delegations of the Member States participating in such deliberations,
1.

Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the Secretary-General;1

2. Urges the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean to continue deepening its
coordination and mutual support activities with the Latin American Economic System;
3. Urges the United Nations Development Programme, within its new overall framework and highpriority development objectives in support of sustainable human development, to renew its financial and
technical cooperation with the programmes that the Permanent Secretariat of the Latin American Economic
System is carrying out in areas of mutual interest and concern, aimed at complementing the technical
assistance activities conducted by the Latin American Economic System;
4. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations, funds and programmes of the United
Nations system to continue and intensify their support for, and cooperation in the activities of, the Latin
American Economic System;
5. Requests both the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Permanent Secretary of the Latin
American Economic System to assess, at the appropriate time, the implementation of the Agreement between
the United Nations and the Latin American Economic System and to report thereon to the General Assembly
at its fifty-sixth session;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution.
38th plenary meeting
25 October 1999
