S/PRST/2015/6

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 February 2015
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7388th meeting of the Security Council, held on 18 February 2015, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Burundi”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“In accordance with Security Council resolution 2137 (2014), the
mandate of the United Nations Office in Burundi (BNUB) terminated on
31 December 2014. The Security Council commends the continued
contribution of BNUB to the peace, democracy and stability of Burundi in
these last four years. The Security Council commends the role played by
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
in this regard, notably in the facilitation of dialogue between political actors in
Burundi. The Security Council welcomes the Secretary-General’s final report
on BNUB (S/2015/36).
“The Security Council welcomes the significant progress made by
Burundi since the adoption of the Arusha Agreement in 2000, notably in the
restoration of security and stability in the country. The Council notes that the
spirit of Arusha helped to sustain almost a decade of peace in Burundi. The
Security Council welcomes Burundi’s contribution and active participation to
United Nations and African Union peacekeeping operations, especially in
Somalia and Central African Republic.
“The Security Council notes that there remain challenges to overcome to
ensure that the significant progress is not reversed, especially in the context of
the 2015 elections. The Security Council stresses, in this regard, the crucial
need for a free, transparent, credible, inclusive and peaceful electoral process
in 2015 and sustained attention to such a process. The Council welcomes
continued engagement by international and regional partners, including the
African Union, in support of the reform agenda and the electoral process in
Burundi.
“The Security Council expresses its concern regarding the recent events
that occurred in the provinces of Cibitoke, strongly condemns such attempts to
resort to violence for political means, and stresses the importance of
guaranteeing a peaceful electoral process. The Security Council expresses its
deep concern at the high number of reported victims resulting from this
incident, looks forward to the outcome of an impartial investigation by the

15-02282 (E)

190215

*1502282*

S/PRST/2015/6

Government of Burundi, and stresses the need for it to be independent and
impartial, led by competent national institutions.
“The Security Council welcomes the unanimous adoption of the
Electoral Code in 2014, as well as of the Roadmap for the elections and the
signing of the code of conduct for political parties and political actors, which
was facilitated by BNUB.
“The Security Council takes note of the engagement of the Government
of Burundi to implement the code of conduct for political parties and political
actors as well as the Roadmap towards the elections. The Security Council
expresses concern with reports of intimidation, harassment, political violence,
arbitrary arrest and detention and other curtailments to the enjoyment of the
rights of freedom of peaceful assembly and expression. The Security Council
encourages the Government of Burundi to make further efforts to ensure a
space for all political parties, including from the extra -parliamentary
opposition, and to improve dialogue between all political actors, with a view
to ensuring a conducive, free and open environment for the run up to the 2015
elections, and further calls upon the Government of Burundi to ensure the full
and effective participation of women at all stages of the electoral process.
“The Security Council welcomes the efforts of the Independent National
Electoral Commission (CENI) and emphasizes the importance of guaranteeing
the independence and impartiality of the CENI, as well as its provincial and
communal organs, and their engagement with all partners to ensure inclusive
participation in the electoral process throughout the country to all citizens and
candidates.
“The Security Council welcomes recent steps taken by the CENI to reach
out to electoral stakeholders and address some of their concerns and stresses
that it is critical that the CENI continues to undertake effective measures to
strengthen the public’s confidence in the electoral process. The Security
Council also encourages the opposition to play its part and remain engaged
throughout the electoral process and use peaceful and democratic means to
address any electoral disputes.
“The Security Council takes note of the Electoral Workshop held by the
CENI in Bujumbura on 29 January 2015 with the participation of the
Government, political parties, civil society, religious entities as well as
international technical and financial partners, to address the reports of
significant irregularities during the voter registration process conducted
between 24 November and 12 December 2014. The Council encourages the
Government of Burundi and the CENI to continue efforts to work with the
interested parties to ensure the credibility and inclusivity of the upcoming
elections.
“The Security Council welcomes the deployment on 1 January 2015,
immediately at the end of BNUB’s mandate, of the United Nations Electoral
Observation Mission in Burundi (MENUB) under the leadership of
Mr. Cassam Uteem as the Special Envoy of the Secretary-general and Head of
the Mission. In accordance with its resolution 2137 (2014), the Security
Council recalls that this mission has the mandate to follow and rep ort on the
electoral process in Burundi, before, during and after the elections, and calls

2/4

15-02282

S/PRST/2015/6

on the government of Burundi, the CENI and all relevant electoral
stakeholders to ensure close cooperation with MENUB in this regard.
“The Security Council notes the efforts made by the Government of
Burundi to improve the human rights situation in Burundi and takes note of the
reports of a reduction of extrajudicial killings, cases of torture and ill treatment, as well as politically-motivated acts of violence carried out by
youth wings affiliated to political parties, while expressing concern about
some recent developments and urging the Government of Burundi to resume
the previous trend.
“The Security Council expresses concern for restrictions on freedom of
expression and opinion, peaceful assembly and association, as well as
continued threats against journalists and representatives of civil society,
including those who work on human rights. The Council calls for the
Government of Burundi to take all appropriate measures to ensure the exercise
of these fundamental freedoms, and to assure the protection of civil society,
including those who work on human rights, in order to ensure an inclusive and
credible electoral process. The Security Council further expresses its concern
about the insufficient progress on the fight against impunity and calls for the
Government of Burundi to deploy greater efforts to ensure that all human
rights violations and abuses are seriously investigated and that perpetrators are
held accountable.
“The Security Council commends the growing role played by the
National Human Rights Commission (CNIDH) in leading a national effort to
protect human rights and calls on the Burundian authorities to guarantee the
Commission’s independence.
“The Security Council welcomes the opening of a stand-alone office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights in Burundi with a comprehensive
mandate to monitor and report on human rights violations and abuses and to
support the Government of Burundi in upholding its obligations under
international human rights law. The Security Council encourages the
international community to support the Office, including through providing
sufficient resources.
“The Security Council notes that Burundi remains one of the po orest
countries in the world and stresses the utmost importance of fighting against
poverty. In this regard, the Council urges progress by Burundi towards
development and of ongoing economic reforms to enhance macro -economic
stability, including the policy on zero tolerance on corruption, and calls for
these efforts to include holding accountable individuals that violate the zero
tolerance policy on corruption.
“The Security Council emphasizes the need for the United Nations
system and the international community, including the international financial
institutions and Burundi’s development partners, to maintain their support for
peace consolidation and long-term development in Burundi. In this regard the
Security Council welcomes the Round Table meeting held in Bujumbura on
11 and 12 December 2014, and calls upon the Government of Burundi and
international and regional partners to fully implement the mutual commitments
made in the meeting’s Joint Communique.

15-02282

3/4

S/PRST/2015/6

“The Security Council welcomes the continued engagement of the
Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, and encourages the
continued constructive cooperation between the Government of Burundi and
the Peacebuilding Commission, and acknowledging the contribution that the
Peacebuilding Fund has made to peacebuilding efforts in Burundi.
“The Security Council reiterates its call on the United Nations Country
Team and its component United Nations agencies to scale up their activities
and factor them into the United Nations Development Assistan ce Framework,
and urges the Secretary-General to work toward a seamless transition to the
Resident Coordinator and United Nations Country Team management model.
“The Security Council emphasizes the need to address the implications
of BNUB’s departure as identified in the Joint Transition Plan adopted by the
Transition Steering Group, in particular in the areas of political dialogue, high level facilitation and advocacy, as well as human rights. In accordance with its
resolution 2137 (2014), the Security Council reiterates its request to MENUB,
as may be required, to report to the Secretary-General and the SecretaryGeneral to the Security Council before, during and after the elections, and
further reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to report every six
months to the Security Council until after the 2015 elections. ”

4/4

15-02282
