UNlTED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
THIRTY-FOURTH

COUNCIL
RECORDS

YEAR

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
agenda (S/Agenda/2157)
. . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Report of the Security Council Commission
established under resolution
446 (1979) (S/13450 and Corr. 1 and Add.l)
............................

SA’V.2157

1
1

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly Supplements of the O#kialRecordr of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to.resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2157th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 19 July 1979, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Mr. Ivor RICHARD
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the-provisional rules of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. El-Chou#i (Syrkzn
Arab Republic) took the place reservedfor him at .the side of
the Council chamber.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2157)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Report of the Security Council Commission established under resolution 446 (1979) (S/13450 and
Corr. 1 and Add. 1)
The meeting was called to order at.43

p.rit.

Adoption of tbe agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in tbe occupied Arab territories:
Report of tbe Security Council Commission established
under reshion
446 (1979) (S/13450 and Corr.1 and
Add.1)

3. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): Mr. President, I congratulate
you sincerely on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of July. This presidency is your
pleasant finale after five years of distinguished service in the
United Nations, in which you served the cause of your
country brilliantly. Relations between the United Kingdom
and Kuwait have always been excellent, always splendid,
and they date back for some years. I must say, in all fairness,
that the British in my country have sometimes overstayed
their time on the parking meter. We wish you the.best in
your future career. The Council will miss you. We who have
knownyou for a long time, both outside the Council and in
the ,work of the’Couricil,‘have benefited greatly from your
pragmatic approach.’
4. I should also like to express with appreciation our
gratitude to your predecessor, Mr. Troyanovsky of the
Soviet Union, for the skiiul manner and the dignified style,
in which he handled the proceedings of the Council for the
month of June. We place on record our admiration for the
way he led the Council’s work during that month.

In accordance with the decisions
taken at the 2156th meeting, I invite the representative of
Jordan to take a place at the Council table. I invite the
representatives of Egypt and Israel and the Acting Chairman of the ,Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People to take the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber. I invite the
representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization to
take a place at the Council table.

5. The members of the Security Council of the Commission established under resolution 446 (1979) merit our admiration. The report they submitted is fair, objective and
important for what it states directly and for what it conveys
between the lines. ‘When the Council established the Commission, the idea was to send it to investigate Israeli practices relating to settlements. The Commission did its best
under the circumstances to maintain strict objectivity. In
paragraph 17; the report states that the Israeli representative
informed the Commission that

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan)
took a pIace at the Council table, Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt),
Mr. Lumdan (Israel) and Mr. Roa Kouri (Acting Chairman of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People) took the places reservedfor them at the
side of the Council chamber and Mr. Terzi (Palestine L.iberation Organization) took a place at the Council table.

“the Israeli Government had nothing to hide concerning
its actions in the territories under its controi; that the
situation there had been freely examined by numerous
impartial observers who had always confirmed the statements made by the Israeli Government, and that hisMission was not prepared to have any contact with the
Commission”.

2. The PRESIDENT: I wish to inform members of the
Council that I have received a letter from the representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic in which he requests that he be
,-invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
‘. to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in

6. If the Government of Israel has nothing to hide, would
it not be better for its image to admit the Commission to the
occupied territories to see on the spot what has been done
there? If Israel says that everything is normal, what does it
fear from the arrival of the Commission? The posture of
righteousness that Israel assumes cannot he reconciled with
its brutal refusal to admit the Commission.

1. The PRESIDENT:

7. In paragraph 23, the report states that the Israeli representative informed the Commission :that

In fact, this plan has been systematically carried out since
1948, although in practice Israel has ignored Dr. Herzl’s
advice that this should be done delicately and cautiously.

“the Government of Israel had rejected that resolution
[446 (197911 in its entirety and accordingly could not
extend any form of co-operation to a Commission set up
under it”.

13. In 1940, Joseph Weitz, then head of the Colonization
Department of the Jewish National Fund and a prominent
leader of the Mapai Labour Party, wrote in his diary that
the Palestinian Arabs “must evacuate this small country for
us” and that:’

What hypocrisy. In paragraph 17, we are told that Israel has
nothing to hide; then in paragraph 23, Israel tells us that it
has nothing to do with the resolution. Let us draw the
attention of the Council to his dangerous treatment of the
Security Council resolutions. A Member State cannot select
the resolutions it likes and discard the resolutions it does not
like. According to Article 25 of the Charter, Member States
agree to’accept and carry out the decisions of the Council,

“There is no room in this country for both peoples
together.. . . The only solution is. . . Eretz Yisrael . . .
without Arabs. In this, there is no room for compromise.”
He further reDorted that. together with other top Zionist
leaders, including Ben-Guri&, he worked out a’ detailed
plan for expelling all Arabs from Palestine. This waswritten’
in his diary, published in 1965, volume 2, pages 154 and 181.
In a subsequent volume of that diary, he reported how he
and others worked in 1948 and 1949 under the guidance of
Ben-Gurion to put that plan into effect. That waspublished
in 7%e Guara%rn in June 1979.

8. Israel’s defiance of the Council’s resolutions is an inevitable and unavoidable result of its policy. The problem lies
in the concept of Zionism, as we have been saying for a long
time, and the report of the Commission, although it does
not clearly state thii, has left to the reader to draw the
obvious conclusion. The issue of settlements cannot be
detached from thii concept of Zionism.

14. What is happening now in the West Bank and in Gaza
is the frantic pursuit of that goal. The present Government
of Israel makes no bones about its policy of, colonizing
Palestinian land through the establishment of massive
Jewish settlements.

9. On 16 July, only three days ago, the world celebrated
the centenary of Dr. Albert Einstein, a great scientist and
humanist. He had this to say on the concept of zionism:
“It is important to reach an understanding with the
Arabs. To do this is the responsibility, not of the Arabs,
not of the British, but of the Jews. And to reach such
understanding is no lessthan the founding of new institutions in Palestine.”

15. The Labour Government, which was less forthcoming, argued that the policy of settlements was followed for
security reasons. Mr. Begin does not mince words. He says,
“The land is ours. We inherited it from our forebears. We
have the right to settle anywhere”. Unlike the former
Labour Government that pegged everything on the pretext
of security, Mr. Begin usesthe Bible. No matter what excuse
Israel uses, the’ goal remains the same-the realization of
the concept of Zionism. And now the West Bank and Gaza
are witnessing a feverish race for the establishment of
Jewish settlements. The report of the Commission speaks
about the ways and means used for the expulsion of the
poor and defenceless Palestinians.

10. In paragraph 45, the Commission’s report speaks of
the members meeting with the Minister of Information of
Jordan who told the Commission that Israel’s policy of
settlements was a step towards the realization of the primary goal of zionism, namely the creation of a purely
Jewish State in the Middle East. That goal required that
space be readily provided for new immigrants until the local
Arab population could be outnumbered.
11. This statement of the Jordanian Minister is not a
product of our fantasy, especially if we take note of the
following. The Guardian of 18 June 1979 published a letter,
from which the following excerpt is taken:

16. As wasthe casebefore 1967, the first thing the Govemment of Israel resorts to is the expropriation of the land of
indigenous Palestinians. According to paragraph 44 of the
Commission’s’ report, 1,500,000 dunums have been taken
by Israel. This figure constitutes 27 per cent of the total area
of the occupied West Bank. With land always comes water,
and that is,why Israel has been diverting water-the lifeline
of the poor Palestinian-to its Jewish settlements. The terrorizing and intimidation of the population usually follows
the arrival of the Jewish settlers, as we have witnessed in a
recently reported case, when a bunch of Jewish vandals ran
amuck, beating defenceless Palestinians and destroying
their homes, and furniture.

“In the official history of Haganah (published jointly
by the Zionist Federation and the Israeli Army), the
editors approvingly quote Rabbi Isaac Rilf, an early
Zionist thinker. He said: .‘In our country, there is room
for us. We shall tell the Arabs, “Move away”. If they do
not agree, if they resist by force, we shall force them to
move. We shall hit them on the head and force them to
move.’ ”
12. Dr. Theodor Herzl, the founder of the Zionist movement, noted in his diary in the entry dated 12June 1895 that
the

17. When Mr. Sharon, the present Minister of Agriculture, wascriticized for his over-zealousnes in colonizing the
West Bank, he said that’these critics ‘did not understand
that the issue is part of the struggle against the establishment of a Palestinian State”. Accordingly, he said: “Israel
will go ahead with its settlement programme. No fifth

“poorer section”-meaning
the Palestinians-“of
the
indigenous population of what is to become the Jewish
State must be transferred acrdss the border*‘.
2

that I&gin’s policy is disastrous for the area and the intemational communit) and, finally, that Israel’s action makes a
mockery of Israel’s protestations in favour of peace.

column will prevent it from doing so and no band of
hypocrites will succeed in undermining Zionism”.
18. The delegation of Kuwait expressesits sincere appreciation to the Chairman of the Commission, Ambassador
Leonardo Mathias, and to its two members, Mr. Julio de
ZavaIa of Bolivia and Mr. Kasuka Mutukwa of Zambia, for
the efforts they made in producing this lucid report; We
understand and appreciate the pains they took and the
inconveniences they encountered in the discharge of their.
mission-and we apologize for those inconveniences. It was
a noble mission for a noble cause, for the sake of an
aggrieved people whose land is being plundered and colonized. The scolarly way in which the report has been prepared attests to the integrity and to the high quality of the
members of the Commission. I am certain that, regardless
of what may follow, the visit of the mission to the area has
provided a glimpse of hope to people who live on borrowed
time. Their cry of despair is well stated in paragraph 72 of
the report.

24. According to a report by the Jewish Telegraphic
Agency on 17 July 1979, a spokesman for the Israeli Miision to the United Nations told that Agency that the report
of the Commisison is “one-sided and includes distorttons
and errors*‘. That opinion was confirmed yesterday by the
representative of Israel. But there is nothing more one-sided
than the way Israel interprets the action of the United
Nations. The fact of the matter is that Israel is on one side
and the rest of the world is on the other. Israel’s policy,
actions, perceptions and concepts are at fault, and it gets
irritated when the world points this fact out. Such righteous
behaviour which makes its followers believe that they are
the only blessed community on this globe has already
endangered world peace and security. How long will the
world put up with such irresponsible behaviour7 How long
will the world bear the consequences of the instability of the
area-and we have just experienced some of those consequences? The Commission rightly notes that it

19. The conclusion by the Commission that Israel’s policy
in the occupied territories is in violation of international law
as reflected in the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,
reinforces the position of all Member States, including special friends of Israel who have always denounced this policy
as illegal and as an obstacle to peace. It is also noteworthy
that the Commission considers Israel’s policy to be a violation of the relevant decisions adopted by the United
Nations, and more specifically Security Council resolutions
237 (1967), 252 (1968) and 298 (1971), as well as other
resolutions.

“found evidence that the Israeli Government is engaged
in a wilful, systematic and large-scale process of establishing settlements in the occupied territories for which it
should bear full responsibility*’ [S/13450 and Corr.1,
para. 22OJ.

25. What encourages Israel is the fact that the Security
Council is unable to face up to the challenge Israel’s policy
poses. Because Israel knows that sanctions against itcannot
even be contemplated, owing to the protection it gets primarily from our friends in the United States, it has indulged
in a policy of territorial expansion. What the Council saysis
important, but its action in the face of this challenge
becomes more imperative and decisive. In the absence of
this possibility of action, Israel continues, unabated, its
programme of colonization and expulsion, and the Palestinians have either to resign themselves to this dismal destiny or to resort to unconventional means, for the use’ of
which they are always described and branded as unbridled

20. We stated in the debate held last March that Israel’s
behaviour in the occupied territories is immoral, illegal,
condemnable and war-mongering. It is a policy of annexation of the territories, and at the same time it aims at the
expulsion of the indigenous population.
21. In the Syrian Golan Heights, out of 40,000 persons,
only 8,000 remain. Yesterday the Israeli representative said
that no Arabs had been expelled. I wonder if he was overlooking the fact that the Syrian Golan Heights have been
suffering from occupation since 1967. In the West Bank and
Gaza, young Palestinians are removed from their land for
any kind of trivial reason or under any pretext. The aim is to
empty the land for the aliens who come with chauvinistic
ideas that endanger the daily lie of the helpless Palestinians.

telT0liSt.S.

26. My delegation accepts and endorses the recommendations of the Commission. It is obvious that those recommendations were made in full. knowledge of the limitations
of the Council. There is no condemnation, no intimation of
sanctions, not even the expression “strongly deplores**. Yet
the recommendations meet with approval of my delegation,
primarily because they are practical and do not depart from
the collective will of the ,Council.

22. The importance of the Commission’s report derives
from the fact that for the first time a commission of the
Security Council has pronounced itself on a tragedy that
has gripped the occupied territories. The Comm&ion says
“no” to the distortion by Israel of international law, “no” to
Israel’s violation of the Charter, “no” to the contempt with
which the resolutions of the Security Councilare treated,
“no*’ to the misinterpretation of Conventions and, more
importantly, to the misconception of what constitutes a
meaningful peace.

27. What is important is the cessation of the establishment
of new Jewish settlements and the dismantling of the existing ones. Israel says Jerusalem is indivisible and will remain
the eternal capital of Israel. We, on our side, say Jerusalem
is non-negotiable and must return to Islamic and Arab rule.
Annexation on the pretext that Jerusalem is more sacred to
one religion is not acceptable,. The crux of the matter is the
return of Arab Jerusalem; otherwise, peace will remain as
eltiive as the mirage of the desert in my country.

23. Let no one be mistaken about the fact that peace and
colonization are irreconcilable, that Jewish settlements are
an invitation to confrontation, that expulsion breeds hatred,

28. The Council is facing a serious problem that may
engulf the world-militarily,
politically and economically.
3

No one can deny that all of us h&e already felt the economic consequences arising from the policy of Israel. We
will, undoubtedly, if things continue as they are, seemore of
those hardships, and all of us will be hard hit-o much so
that it may be too late even to bite our fingers in repetence.

That is a manifesto of piracy; it is a manifes’o of colonization; it is a license for the expulsion of the indigenous
population. That is what underscores the intoxication of
power.
35. Yesterday the representative of Israel talked about ‘me, saying that I was always quoting Shakespeare. I have a *
quotation for him. What we want, as I said, is respect for
law. We.want what the Merchant of Venice said in act IV,
scene 1: “My deeds upon my head! I crave the law.. .*‘.

29. The representative of Israel, in his speech yesterday,
made, I must say, an unflattering reference to me. I will
ignore that, I take exception only to what he said about
co-existence between Jews and Palestinians and to what he
said, in fact, about co-existence between Jews and the Arab
inhabitants of Judaea, Samaria and Gaza.

36. Mr. HUSSON (France) (inrerpretation from French):
Sir, in congratulating you on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council, my delegation does not
intend merely to hail the representative of a great friendly
country and ally whose prestigious history has been closely
and continuously mingled with that of France. It wishes,
above all, since you will be leaving us shortly, to pay a
tribute to you as an eminent diplomat who has-won a degree
of respect, esteem and affection among his colleagues in this
community of ours that is rarely attained. You may be sure
that we unreservedly share those feelings and that we wish
you every successin your present and future work.

30. There is nothing wrong with co-existence: it is a logical
and constructive philosophy. But there must be coexistence
in all of Palestine; there cannot be co-existence only in the
West Bank and Gaxa, which were grabbed by brutal force.
in 1967. Co-existence must be betweenequals, co-existence
cannot survive between the colonizer and the brutalized and,
terror&d population.
31. This idea of co-existence cropped up recently in an
interview given by General Dayan, the Foreign Minister of
Israel, to the New York Post on 29 July 1977. I quote
General Dayan on this concept of co-existence that was so
much displayed and paraded yesterday. He said:

37. May I also extend my thanks to Ambassador Troyanovsky of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, who
guided our work last month with the savoir-fair and
authority for which he is known.

“I do not know of anything more -productive and
constructive for peace than living together with the
Arabs, and that is what we are doing there in those
settlements.”

38. The situation in the Arab territories occupied by Israel
has been a constant source of concern to the French
Government. My delegation reiterated that position Flearly
last March, during the debate which resulted in the Security
Council decision to appoint a Commission to enquire into
the Israeli settlements established in those territories.

But he had another revealing and interesting interview, this
one given to the Jewish Chronicle of London in May 1977,
in which he said: “Arabs and Jews canto-exist, but only
under Jewish rule.”

39: The French authorities have taken very careful note of
the report that the members of the Commission drew up
and that their Chairman, Ambassador Math& of Portugal,
submitted to us with such &rity and talent at yesterday’s
meeting. I should like to extend to him and to his colleagues,
Mr. de Zavala and Mr. Mutukwa, my delegation’s thanks
for the exemplary manner in which they accomplished their
task and for the quality of their work. The most exhaustive
document they drew up so rigorously is indeed clear proof
of this and prompts me to make the following comments.

32. This is the truth of the matter, and this is the type of
co-existence so vigorously paraded yesterday. It is the coexistence which I described as that which always prevails in
a relationship between horse and rider. The best answer to
thii new definition of co-existence came in an authoritative
article written by a man called Mohammed Milhem, the
Mayor of Halhoul, a city of 13,000 people on the West
Bank. In that article, published on 9 July by Newsweek the
Mayor wrote:
“The Palestinian people would be prepared to discuss
how and when they are to achieve independence in their
homeland. But they are not prepared, and no one has the
right to expect them to be prepared, to discuss the modalities of denying them their freedom.*’

3.. Fit of all, it is regrettable that the persistent efforts
made by the Commission to solicit the assistance and cooperation of all Governments concerned should have met
with Israel’s rejection. Mindful of the need for effectiveness
and fairness, we must deplore the fact that the Commission
was not author&d to visit Israel and that it was unable to
hear the explanations and comments of the Israeli
Government.

33. What we want is respect for international law, observance of the Geneva Conventions, adherence to the United
Nations Charter and implementation
of the Security
Council’s decisions. Those are legitimate expectations.

41. However, the information, it was able to assemble
from other sources and which it has presented to us with all
possible discretion, justifies the growing concern many of us
have felt. The members of the Commission state that they
found: “‘evidence that the Israeli Government is engaged in
a wilful, systematic and large-scale process of establishing
. settlements in the occupied territories” [S/Z3450 and
Clwr.2, para. 2201. Further, the Commission is of the view
that “‘a correlation exists between the establishment of

34. Yesterday the representative of Israel stated that:
“The Jewish people and the State of Israel have the
tight in principle, as well as in law and in terms of
national security, to a permanent presence in Judaea,
Samaria and the Gaza District.** [225&h meeting,
para. 85.1

4
:

_...

..*

,

1

Israeli settlements and the disnlacement of the Arab wnulation” [ibid, para. 22Z3. Finally, it considers “that thipr&ern
of that settlement policy, as a consequence, is causing pr*
found and irreversible changes of a geographical and demo
grahic nature in those territories’* [ibid. para. 2253.
.42. All of us recognixe the gravity of those conclusions. As
the General Assembly has stated on several occasions, the
facts reported are directly counter to the provisions of the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949. But as much as
from their illegal nature their gravity derives from the fact
that they constitute a serious obstacle to the search for a
comprehensive settlement to the Middle East question. The
French delegation is therefore ready to join in any effort
undertaken by the Council that would seek to remedy the
situation on the basis of and within the framework of the
recommendations submitted by the Commission.
43. Mr. LAI Ya-li (China) (inrerpretationfiom Chinese):
First of all, on behalf of the Chinese delegation, I would like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for the month of July, and I am
convinced that you will once again display your outstanding ability in presiding over the busy work of the current
month.
44. The Chinese delegation has carefully studied the
report of the Security Council Commission established
under resolution 446 (1979). With an abundance of irrefutable facts, the report enumerates the grave crimes committed by Israel in continually and illegally setting up
Jewish settlements on occupied Arab territories in pursuance of its policies of aggression and expansion. They must
-be dealt with in all seriousness.
45. As is known to all, defying the strong condemnation
of the people of the world and ignoring the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, the Israeli Zionists have over a
long period kept on establishing Jewish settlements on
Arab territories they have forcibly occupied in order to
realize their wild ambition of perpetuating their occupation
of the Arab territories. Up till now, Israel has established
‘more than 130 settlements, spreading over almost all ,the
occupied territories, from the West Bank to the Gaza Strip,
the Golan Heights and Jerusalem. Those settlements control important strategic points and communication routes
and have in fact become military bases and forward outposts set up by Israel in pursuance of its plan to perpetuate
the occupation of Arab territories and further enlarge the
scope of its aggression. While forcibly establishing the settlements, the Israeli authorities have resorted to the formulation of legislation and every other possible means to change
the legal status, geographical nature and demographic composition of the occupied territories in an attempt to legalize
their occupation there. Not long ago, the Israeli Zionists
arrogantly claimed Jerusalem to be the eternal capital of
Israel and even brazenly decided to apply Israeli laws to the
Arabinhabitants on the occupied Golan Heights and forcibly issue to them Israeli identification cards and passports.
The wanton acts of Israel in flagrant violation of the United
Nations Charter and international law, as well as the relevant resolutions of the United Nations and in particular of
the Security Council, fully testify to Israel’s continued

intransigence in pushing its policies of expansion and annexation against the Arab people and its deliberate attempt to
raise serious obstacles to a comprehensive settlement of the
Middle East question. That reactionary policy on the part
of the Israeli authorities has naturally met with resolute
resistance from the Arab and Palestinian peoples and
strong condemnation from people all over the world.
.46. We have always held that the question of Israeli occupied territories is ‘a inseparable part of the whole Middle
East question. the untold sufferings of the Arab and Palestinian peoples in the,occupied territories are solely the result
of the Israeli policies of aggression and expansion and the
rivalry between the super-Powers in that region. In order to
resolve the question of the occupied territories and the
whole Middle East question, it is imperative firmly to get rid
of super-Power intervention and sabotage, fvmly to oppose
Israel’s policies of aggression and expansion, to recover the
occupied Arab territories and realize the national rights of.
the Palestinian people, including the right to return to their
homeland and establish their own State. To that end, it is
essential to rely on the great strength of the unity of the
Arab people. We sincerely hope that the Arab world will
strengthen its unity against the common enemy so as to
hasten the achievement of final victory.
47. In our view. the Securitv Council should adont a
resolution strongly condemning the Israeli authorit& for
their crimes of aggression and expansion, supporting the
just struggle of the Arab and Palestinianpeoples and recommending the adopting of more practical and effective measures than those embodied in resolution 446 (1979), so as to .
stop the atrocities being committed by Israel in the occupied
territories.
48. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the Acting
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, Mr. Rati Roa Kouri. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make a
statement.
49. Mr, ROA KOURI

(Cuba)
-- -_ (inrerprerationfiom Spanish): May I first congiatulate you, ~,~m-myXpa&i~%the
representative of Cuba, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of July. We are
certain that you will guide it with your well-known brilliance and skill.
50. I am grateful to you and to the other members of the
Council for allowing me to participate in the present debate
as the Acting Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People. It will be
recalled that I had the honour to speak on behalf of the
Committee [2I23rdmeeting] when.the question we are dealing with today was considered by the Council on an earlier
occasion when it adopted resolution 446 (1979), establishing the Commission whose report .is now .under consideration.
51. The Council still has before: it the question of Palestine, and we believe that in the course of this month it will
continue its consideration of the Committee’s recommendations. Accordingly, I can on this occasion deal very
briefly with the report of the Security Council Commission

established under resolution 446 (1979), because, as we are
happy to note, its conclusions and recommendations in
large measure coincide with the Committee’s recommendations.

pied since 1967, have no legal validity and constitute a
serious obstruction to achieving a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace in the Middle East” [ibid., para. 2293.
57. We are extremely pleased that the Commission created
by the Security Council has an understanding of thisfluestion identical to that of the Committee which wascreated by
the General Assembly and that its conclusions tid recommendations-within
the limits of its mandate-are so fully
in accord with those of our Committee. We should be
happy to see the recommend&~
of the Commission
endorsed by the Council as a first step towards the
endorsement of the recommendations of the Committee
when they are corisidered by the Council this month.

52. Over the past three or four years, the Commitee has
drawn the attention of the Council on several occasions to
the variolls violations of human rights in the occupied
territories, expressing its concern at the systematic establishment of Israeli settlements in those territories. Without
going further, I shall recall that last May, the Committee
addressed two letters to the President of the Council
[S/13291 mtd S/13324 expressing its concern at the
repeated violations by the Israeli authorities of t$e fourth
Geneva Convention of 12 August 1949 and of Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions.

58. The Committee has always urged that the Council
adopt the necessary measures and that it adopt them
urgently. Now as never before we are moved by a sense of
urgency. We deem it imperative that the-Council undertake
immediate and decisive action so as not to continue to
permit what the Commission has described as

53. We now have before us the report of the Commission
established under resolution 446 (1979). As stated in paragraphs 13 and 16 of that report, the Commission requested
and received from the Committee assurancesof co-operation
and assistance. A summary of the statement made by the
Chairman of the Committee at the 4th meeting of the
Commission on 30 April 1979 appears in an annex to the
report. In that statement, the Chairman emphasized, infer
alia, the importance of the Commission’s visiting the occupied territories. It will also be noted in paragraphs 17 and 18
of th report that Israel maintained its usual arrogant, intransigent attitude and refused to co-operate with the Commission. The Commission should be congratulated because,
despite that Israeli intransigence, it was able to carry out its
mandate and prepare a clear and concise report for the
Council.

“the disastrous consequences which the settlement policy is bound to have on any attempt to reach a peaceful
solution in the Middle East” [ibid, pm. 230].
59. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the Syrian Arab Repu@ic. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
60. M. EL-CHOUFI (Syrian Arab Republic): Mr. President, on behalf of my delegation, I sho&d liie to present
our bestwishes on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. I should also like to take this
opportunity to express our appreciation to your predecessor, Mr. Oleg Troyanovsky, the representative of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, for his able handling of the
Council’s deliberations last month.

54. For our part, we are encouraged, because the findings
of the Commission fully justify the concern of the Committee and confirm that the facts which give rise to that concern
are true. I shall not now’analyse the report of the Commission in detail, but I do believe it necessary to draw attention
to the fact that it found evidence that the Government of
Israel is carrying out

61. Zionism is an intrinsic part of Western imperialism, a
twentieth -century version of nineteenth century classical
colonialism. As well as being a form of racism and racial
discrimination within the borders of Israel, Zionism inculcates and implements a policy of territorial expansionism,
the exploitation of human and natural resources in occupied territories, the oppression of people under military
occupation and the creation of faits accomplisin the form
of Israeli settlements on Arab lands. Israel, however, has
sought to obfuscate the issue by presenting its military
conquests in the guise Of biblical and metaphysical
“promises”.

“a wilful, systematic and large-scale process of establiihing settlements in the occupied territories for which. it
should bear full responsibility” [S/Z3450 and Corr.1,
para. 22OJ
55. The Commission further expressed its conviction that,
in carrying out its settlements policy, Israel has not hesitated
to violate fundamental human rights, in particular the right
of refugees to return to their country. It also considers that
the pattern of that policy is bringing about profound and
irreversible changes of a geographical and demographic
nature in those territories including Jerusalem, and that
those changes are so radical, that, in fact, they represent a
violation of the fourth Geneva Convention of 12 August
1949 and of the decisions adopted by the United Nations
on the subject.

62. For the first time, the Security Council has been provided with irrefutable evidence, gathered by a wholly neu-’
tral Commission, of facts that have been stated many times
before the Council, namely, that the Israeli Govemnient’s
settlement policy is part of its over-all Zionist-imperialist
plan of expansion and annexation of Arab land and exploitation of its human and natural resources to the detiiment
of the’ Arab inhabitants of the occupied territories and,
indeed, to the detriment of peace in general. It is tragic that
the indigenous Arab populations have been made strangers
and exiles in’their own homeland.

56. As did our Committee and the Security Council in its
resolution 446 (1979), the Commission reafirms that
“the policy and
- practices of Israel in establishing settlements in the Palestinian and other Arab territories occu-6

63. In the extensive testimony and voluminous data presented to us in the report of the Security Council Commission there is proof, none better, of the violent, aggressive
and brutal nature of Zionist Israel. The report has documented the fact that the settlement policy of Israel is a
deliberate policy actively pursued by official Israeli authorities. It has proved the fact that those numerous settlements,
which have mushroomed at an astonishing pace, have all
been erected under the direct supervision and with the full
political support and financial backing of Israeli Government authorities. In paragraph 114 of the report it is
disclosed:
6‘. . . the 1979 budget of Israel showed the allocations
set aside for expanding 11 of the existing 29 settlements.
In that connexion, according to a statement by the Israeli
Chief of Administration of Settlements, Israel intended
to establish, in 1979, 20 new settlements, 5 of which
would be in the Golan Heights and it would take over all
the necessary land in order to settle 58,000 families
thereon
over a period of five years.”
_..

capture the minds of the local population as well through
the imposition of colonial education suited to the colonizer’s aims and needs. Arabic curricula have been replaced
by Israeli curricula, and Syrian students have been prevented from pursuing higher education with the aim of
channelling “these youths into the labour force needed in
Israeli factories’* [ibid., para. 111-J.
67. The report has conclusively shown us the conspicuous
pattern of brutality that marks Israeli occupation, whether
it be in the Golan Heights, Gaza, the West Bank or the
Sinai. All this has belied Israel’s denial of its massive and
systematic violations of human rights of the populations of
the occupied territories,
68. The report further proves the contention that has
already been made before the Council that Zionist Israel’s
avaricious desire for more Arab territory is intrinsically
linked to its economic needs as a colonial settler regime. Is it
any wonder, then, that the Israeli authorities should have
stuck those pins on their expansionist map on choice locations of fertile agricultural Arab lands? Is it any wonder,
then, that they arrogantly declare that, autonomy or no
autonomy, Israel must control the water sources in the West
Bank and Gaza?

64. Through the testimony of people who lived daily
under Israeli occupation, the report also confirmed the fact
that, in its pursuit of its expansionist schemes, Israel has
resorted to the most violent methods of occupation and
subjugation. The report has documented the mass expulsion and destruction that Israel has perpetrated in its invasion of the Golan Heights, where all but 6 per cent of the
local population were expelled by brute Israeli force. It is in
this context that the report states:

69. Many of the issues that many Arab representatives.
have brought before the Council have now been borne out
by this report. The facts contained in it stand a clear proof
that the Zionist ideology of Israel is incompatible with the
principles and purposes upon which this international
Organization was founded and which it is committed to
uphold. And still we have to sit here and continue to be
subjected to the arrogance and intransigence of the representative of Israel who persists in maintaining that “Israel
has nothing to hide”.

“The Commission is of the view’ that a correlation
exists between the establishment of Israeli settlements
and the displacement of the Arab population.” [S/13450
and Corr.1, para. 222.1

65. Exhaustive and detailed accounts reveal the brutal
and inhuman methods that have been employed by Israel as
an aggressive occupying force against the native population
in the Golan Heights. It has been documented that the
Israeli authorities bulldozed villages in the presence of their
inhabitants, who were later forced to leave at gunpoint. In
addition, the report describes Israel’s employment of the
classic forms of colonial tyranny. Paragraphs 110 to 112
contain proof of Israel’s systematic violation of the basic
human rights of the people in Golan Heights:

70. Let us be clear that we are not faced here by a crime
committed by an individual who should seek mercy for his
individual acts. We are faced here with an ideology
expressed in the explicit governmental policy of one State
Member of our Organisation. It is this ideology, at the
fountain-head of the evils of colonialism, expansionism and
racism, that we must condemn.
71. Any condemnation of a satellite has to take into
acount the role of its source of power. Hence, an indictment
of Israel has to include an indictment of the United States,
without whose overt, covert, direct, indirect, vocal and tacit
support the imperialist-Zionist entity in the Middle East
would not be able to function, let alone occupy and expand.

“In an attempt to annex the occupied area to Israel,
the occupation authorities were constantly trying to
sever all links between the Syrians remaining in the
Golan area and their kin elsewhere. . . freedom,of movement of the remaining inhabitants was restricted.. .
within the five villages.? [Z&f., para. 110.1

72. The international community cannot have forgotten
the events of 1956 when Israel was forced to give up every
inch it had occupied in the 1956 war, Are we to believe that
what was accomplished in 1956 cannot be repeated in 1979?
Without massive United States aid, Israel cannot survive.
Without magnanimous support, Israel cannot expand.

.In its attempts to subjugate the population, the occupation
authorities took measures “which affected more specially
the conditions of life in the occupied territories” through
“the imposition of. . . Israeli laws, the expropriation of
large areas of agricultural land. . . and the refusal to
respond to humanitarian appeals by-the International Red
Cross, among others, for the reunification of families**
[ibid.].

73. The Security Council has before it the report of its own
Commission, a team of inquiry which, I repeat, does not
include a single Arab. Its report amply substantiates what we
‘Arabs have been saying since 1948. We hope that now, at
least, the world will listen.

-

the colonial schemes
66. .In addition, the report confii
of Israel in seeking not only to grab Arab land but to
7

74. While we appreciate the general spirit of the recommendations made by the Commission to the Council, we
are disheartened that they lack the strength and the force
necessary to effect a change in the situation. After documenting the outrageous violations of human, civil and political rights in the occupied territories, the Commission
merely repeated what had already been recognized and
declared by the Council and is contained in numerous
resolutions which Israel has consistently violated.

82. Professor Rostow’s basic theme, in iustification of the
Israeli occupation authorities* open-ended colonization
and despoliation of the occupied Palestinian territories, was
that my letter did not mention the League of Nations Mandate for Palestine. Yet the Mandate, he continued, provides .’
the only possible modem legal definition of the word
“Palestinian”, and is the basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), on which, he claimed, the
Camp David agreement rests. He added that both the Permanent Court of International Justice and its successor,the
International Court of Justice, have treated League Mandates as “‘sacred trusts*‘. Professor Rostow then made a
spurious comparison with the League of Nations Mandate
over Namibia.

75. The findings of the Commission will be relegated to
the archives as-just another United Nations d&ument
unless the Council takes appropriate measures that could
deliver real justice. It is in that light that we believe that the
Council should apply sanctions as envisaged in Chapter VII
of the Charter. Only then will Israel’s Zionist-imperialist
policies of expansionism and lebensmum be brought to a
halt.

83. From that broad framework of the Mandate over
Palestine, the whole of Palestine, Professor Rostow and
Ambassador Blum, by a stroke of the pen, make a gigantic
leap forward-or is it backward&and suggest that resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) apply the principle of the
Namibia decisions to the future not of Palestine as a whole
but of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.

76. We are also aware of the improbability of Israel’s
patron allowing the Council to impose sanctions against its
protege, but at least the Security Council will have a clear
conscience in that it recommended action under Chapter
VII and that it fulfilled its responsibilities in ensuring international peace and security.

84. May I be allowed to feel some nostalgia about the
Mandate over Palestine, not only because it has a vintage
of at least half a century, but also because it recognized
Palestine’s provisional independence, with Palestine’s overwhelming Palestinian Arab majority, as a classA Mandate
under which only a short interim period of technical training was required to qualify the country for full sovereign
independence. I am referring to a time 50 years ago.

77. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Jordan, on whom I now call.
78. Mr. NUSEIBEH (Jordan): I wish to apologize for
speaking once again in this debate.
79. I do not claim to be an authoritv on national or
international law, as does Ambassador Blum. Even lessdo I
claim to be such an authority as Professor Eugene Rostow
of the Yale Law School-even though I have studied both
at Jerusalem and at Princeton. But yesterday I did make a
passing refutation of the allegation of the legality of Israeli
colonization of the occupied West Bank, the Gaza Strip and
Jerusalem-the allegation made to the Council yesterday
by Ambassdor Blum.

85. That was, as every college student knows, the sacred
trust of the mandatory Powers over Palestine and Namibia;
it applied also to other Mandates.
86. But subsequently, the Balfour Declaration was arbitrarily, unilaterally and unjustly injected into the Mandate.
That declaration stated:
“His Majesty’s Government view with favour the
establishment in Palestine of a national home for the
. Jewish people, and will use their best endeavours to
facilitate the achievement of this object, it being clearly
understood that nothing shall be done which may prejudice the civil and religious rights of existing non-Jewish
communities in Palestine,“-as though there were any
other communities-“or
the rights and political status
enjoyed by Jews in any other country.“’

80. I realize full well that many representatives around
thii table would be bored stiff if they were to be subjected to
additional legal dialogues and sophisticated arguments.
And yet a formidable combination of two legal authorities-and particularly Professor Rostow, with his association with the prestigious Yale University-has
posed a
challenge to Princeton University, which, although it does
not have a professional school of law, does have highly
eminent professors teaching international law, as part of its
curricula. It teaches international law as it should be taught,
without manipulation, politicization or bias.

Infamous ‘as that declaration was, did it give a licence for
present Israeli policies and practices of turning the Palestinian people into refugees and devouring their rights, their
property, their freedom and their continued existence on
their soil-the whole of Palestine, as the Mandate described
it?

8 1. Professor Rostow, in a supposedly analytical study of
the legality or illegality- of Isradii colonization of the o&upied West Bank, Jerusalem and Gaza, in a reply to a letter
which I had written earlier to Thi tie@ I’& Tihes, used
arguments that were so flawed, vulnerable.:and .distorted
that if I had been a little more chivalrous or compassionate,
I should have let his letter go unanswered, if only to save the
authoritative Professor Rostow the embarrassment of having allowed himself to fall into a deep trap, thereby affording me, a non-authority, an easy victory, which is unfair.

87. But that is not the only major flaw in the thesis of
Ambassador Blurn and his authority, Professor Rostow. I
do hope that the Professor will update his notes, for the
benefit ,of his students.
’ Oficial
Records of the General
ment No. Il. vol. II, annex 19.

8

Assembly.

Second Session.

Supple-

88. Again talking in terms of the modem legal definition
of
the word “Palestine”, I would ask: is Professor Rostow
,.-------.---.-i
not aware that m 1939 the original author of the Balfour
Declaration issued a White Paper acknowledging Palestine’s independence after a five-year interim period7 He
who giveth taketh away.

solution to the Palestinian problem, secure and safe boundaries and so on. There is nothing in them which in any way
:ontradicts the valid earlier resolutions of the General
Assembly.
95. The Camp David accords, as far as the 1967 war or the
Palestine question are concerned, do not conform either to
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) or to the original
General Assembly resolutions. There is no provision for
military withdrawal, even though in the preamble the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force is specifically mentioned. There is no provision for Palestinian
national existence. There is a proposal for local selfgovernment for the inhabitants as temporary residents-or
are they guests?- with no jurisdiction over their fate, resources, land, water, repatriation-even
to the West Bank,’
Gaza and Jerusalem-or
anything that might redeem the
Palestinian people.

89. But even more important than what I have just said is
the at that the then British Government, disgusted or tired
out by the Israeli terrorist campaign against it-a campaign
led primarily by Menachem Begin-and pressured from the
outside, sent a letter to the United Nations expressing its
wish to give up the sacred Mandate and hand it over to the
United Nations, the residuary legatee of the League of
Nations, and requesting the United Nations to resolve the
Palestine question.
90. In its capricious greed-and I apologize for the use of
those words; I do not mean them to be taken literally-the
United Nations accepted the offer, or the challenge, and
held a special session at the request of the mandatory
Power, at which the General Assembly adopted, on 29
November 1947, a resolution recommending the partition
of Palestine into two States: one, Palestinian Arab and one,
Jewish-with
Jerusalem to be established as an intemational corpus separatum [resolution 181 .(Il)]. The Security
Council was entrusted with implementing that resolution,
regardless of any opposition.

96. This is not the time to discuss the issue; but it is my
earnest hope that Ambassador Blum and Professor Rostow
can update their notes so that they do not base a legal case
for annexation on a mandate, as pernicious as that mandate
was, after incorporating the Balfour Declaration, as a green
light for the total national destruction of 4 million people.
97. Last, but not least, international law was never
intended to defend lawlessness, but to defend the rule of
law. If anyone should doubt the accuracy of my interpretation, it may be a good idea-1 am just thinking aloud-if
the matter were referred to the International Court of Justice, if only as an academic exercise, for authoritative legal
interpretation.

91. Thus came legally to an end any promises, duties or
obligations arising from the Mandate-and
I would say
here that the basis of Professor Rostow’s argument, of his
analytical study, was the “old Mandate over Palestine”.

98. The ultimate legal imperative is, of course, the intemationally recognized principle that sovereignty over a territory resides in the people who have had prolonged and
uninterrupted possession of that territory. Here we might
perhaps, to my profound relief, refer the matter to the late
Professor Toynbee, the archaeologists and even to one of
the prestigious departments of history, There is a good one
at Princeton, as there are in other well-known universities.
It is gratifying that Princeton does not have a full-fledged
faculty of law, which may at least spare it the kind of
incredible pitfall into which Professor Rostow has allowed
himself to fall.

92. That being the case, by what legal logic does Ambassador Blum or Professor Rostow argue the legality of Israeli
colonization on the basis of a Mandate which had become
definitively and finally defunct, and recognized as such by
the community of nations? Indeed, if the Mandate had not
terminated, there would have been no Israel in existence. Or
have the two professors not heard about the passing away of
the League of Nations and the creation of the United
Nations, which was the inheritor of the former, including
the provisions concerning Mandates contained in the
League Covenant and corresponding to Chapter XI, XII
and XIII of the Charter? Its competence was confirmed
retroactively by the International Court of Justice in the
case of Namibia-and,
as a corollary, in the case of
Palestine.

99. Besides, since international law, as the term connotes,
is designed to serve the purposes of law and not to be the
blind instrument of lawlessness; the interpretation of it may
differ but it can never endorse illegality. A solid background
in the humanities and common sense, elevated in stature by
the trappings of international law, is perhaps the best basis
for achieving a law-abiding international order in which no
people are exposed to cannibalization and national extinction, as is the fate of the Palestinian people. Humanism is
the stuff which must inspire the authors of and authorities
on international law.

93. I hope the distinguished professors were not suggesting that the indigenous inhabitants of Namibia should be
uprooted and cannibalized by oppressive, racist South
Africa.
94. The United Nations, having providentially inherited
the spoils of Palestine, adopted two resolutions which are
still legally binding-namely
General Assembly resolutions
181 (II) and 194 (III)-on
the establishment of the two
States and on the inalienable right of the Palestinians to
return home. Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973), formulated in generalized principles, in no way
vitiate or abrogate the earlier resolutions: they simply talk
about an end to belligerency and about peace, about a fair

100. The Security Council Commission has informed the
Council that a third of Arab Jerusalem, the West Bank and
Gaza has already been devoured. In the Golan Heights that
process is almost totally complete. A third of the Palestinian
inhabitants of Jerusalem, the West Bank and the Gaza Strip
are there no more. Those who are still there are living on
tenuous and borrowed time.
9

burden of defending their homeland and survival. Children
of that age should be enjoying school; sports and the innocence of childhood, which is the birthright of children the
world over. Let us remember that we are living in the
International Year of the Child. Is that situation natural or
acceptable to the supposedly civilized world?

101. After verification of the facts of the case beyond any
shadow of doubt the crux of the whole matter is: Will the
community of nations and its highest executive organ, the
Security Council, permit the Palestinian people to be “terminated” in the fact of incontrovertible evidence, or will it
act promptly and decisively to prevent this crime of national
genocide?

104. The action of the Council can only be a turning point
which will have far-reaching implications for the future of a
civilised world.

102. That is the challenge which confronts the Security
Council no less than the Palestinian people, who will not
hesitate to continue their struggle for existence, just like any
other people. The acid text will be whether the Council will
be action-oriented or will follow in the tragic footsteps of
the League of Nations. We know that ambivalence and
appeasement have led to the catastrophe of global war.
Tie is timeless, and the course of wisdom is not to judge
situations as they exist at present in terms of relative power
capabilities. I pray that all of us will have the vision to look
ahead, if only out of concern for our children.

105. The representative of Israel described jordan, Syria
and the Palestinian people as enemies of peace. I want to
assure the Council that no people in the world are as
dedicated to or long so much for peace as we. But the only
peace that we can live with is a just, comprehensive and
lasting peace. We are not a breed that is prone to abject,
unjust and humiliating surrender.

103. I felt sad, a month ago, to seeyoung, innocent Palestinian children, 11 to 14 years old, shouldering the heavy

The meeting rose at 5.30 pm

10
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

W.S.

1.50

79-70002~March

1982-2350
