UNITED ;iirATIONS

SECU!RITY COUNCIL
OFFICIi4L

RECORDS
UN LwbARY

THIRTIETH

FEB2 9 1984

YEAR

1858 th

MEETING:

1 DECEMBER

1975

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l858)

.. .. ... .. .. ... ... .. .. .. .. ... ... .. .. ..

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New Members concerning the
application of Surinam for membership in the United Nations (S/11891) . . .

1

S/PV. 1858

.Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined .with figures. -Mention’ of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement’in
which it appears or in which information about it is given.
,’
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965,. became fully operative
on that date.
‘,

.

.

,._.

1858th MEETING

Held in New York on Monday, 1 December
President: Mr. Ivor RICHARD
(United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

1. Adoption
2.

4. The Committee further recommends to the Security Council in paragraph 4 of its report the adoption
of a draft resolution on the application for membership of Surinam in the United Nations.

agenda (S/Agenda/l&@

of the agenda
5. In accordance with the procedure followed on
previous occasions, I would propose that the Council
first proceed to the vote on that draft resolution
and that those who wish to speak should do so
thereafter. If I hear no objection I shall take it that
that procedure
is acceptable ,to members of the

Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committe on the Admission of New
Members concerning the application of Surinam
for membership in the United Nations (S/11891)
The meeting

at 3 p.m.

which appears in document S/11891. In paragraph 3
of its report the Committee
recommends
that the
Council should have recourse to the provisions of the
last paragraph of rule 60 of the provisional rules of
proctidure,
whereby the Council will immediately
submit its recommendation
to the General Assembly.
If I hear no objection I.shall take it that the Council
wishes to waive the time-limit setout in that paragraph.

Present:
The representatives
of the following
States: Byelorussian Soviet SociaIist Republic, China;
Costa Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italyi Japan, Mauritania, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist ,Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of
Tanzania and United States bf America., ,’
Provisional

1975,

was called ‘to order at 3.40 p.m.

Council.

Adoption

6. Accordingly
I now put to the vote the draft
resolution contained in paragraph 4 of the Committee’s report concerning the application of Surinam for
membership in the United Nations.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerning the application of Surinam for
‘membership in the United Nations (S/11891)

A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution

1. The PRESIDENT:
I have received a letter from
the representative
of the Netherlands
in which he
requests an invitation
to participate in the Security
Council’s discussion of the application
of Surinam
for admission to membership of the United Nations.

was adopted

unanimously.

’

7. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with rule 60 of
the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure I shall
immediately
request the Secretariat to transmit this
recommendation
to the General Assembly.
8. A number of representatives have asked to speak
after the vote and I shall now call on them.

2. In accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter, I indent with the consent of the Council,
to invite the representative
of the Nertherlands
to
participate in the Council’s discussion, without the
right to vote.

9. Mr. JACKSON
(Guyana): It is, I believe, most
appropriate
in this month, December, regarded by
many of a particular religious persuasion as a month
of good cheer, that you, Ambassador Ivor Richard,
the representative of the United Kingdom, should be
President of the Security Council. Your good humour,
your candour, your flair for the cut and thrust of
the parliamentary
style, are qualities which have been
much in evidence both in this Council and outside it.
We are confident that this Council will benefit greatly
from the exercise by you as its President of those and
your other .cohsiderable
talents and skills; I extend

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kaufjnann,
Netherlands)
took a place at the Security Council
table.
3. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council will now
consider the report of the Committee on the Admission of New Members concerning the application ,bf
Surinam for membership
in the United
Nations,
1

congratulations to you on my own behalf and on behalf
of my delegation, and pledge to continuation
of that
close co-operation
which has characterized
the
relationship
between ourselves and our two delegations.

“For over two centuries Guyana and Surinam
have been more than just neighbouring
territories.
We have shared a common
history and have
enjoyed a relationship ’ of close friendship
and
co-operation.
It is our hope that these bonds of
association that have ‘been forged in the past
will prove a sturdy foundation for the development
of even closer links of friendship
and understanding between our two countries.

10. I should also like to pay a most warm tribute
to Ambassador Malik of the Soviet Union who guided
our deliberations in November. It was a month during
which we spent many long, arduous but productive
hours in the cause of peace. In all of our discussions, the wealth of his experience, his geniality and
his skill were major factors. We are indeed indebted
to him and thank him most sincerely.

“We are happy to welcome Surinam in the Councils of sovereign nations and share with you the joy
of this independnt
nation. We wish you every
success in the years ahead and look forward to
working closely with you at the bilateral, regional
and international
levels as we seek for our peoples
universal acceptance of our right to social and
economic justice in an atmosphere of peace and
tranquillity.”

11. Guyana greets with particular joy, the decision
of this Council to recommend to the General Assembly,
the acceptanre of Surinam into the membership of the
United Nations.
12. Under any circumstances the action the Security
Council has just taken in unanimously recommending
to the General Assembly &he approval of Surinam’s
application for membership of this Organization would
be warmly welcomed by my delegation, and by the
delegations
of the Bahamas,
Barbados, Grenada,
Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago, which wish to be
associated with the sentiments I express in this regard.

16. The bonds that link Guyana and Surinam, to
which my Prime Minister made reference in his message, go far beyond those of mere physical contiguity.
My country and Surinam form part of that area of
South America-the
Guianas-which
served as a
refuge and a haven for Ameridians from the Antilles
and beyond who sought to escape the onslaught of an
expanding European imperium. From the seventeenth
and eighteenth
centuries
when that imperium
embraced our shores, our two countries were subject
to rule from a common colonial source before they
assumed their separate political
and geographical
identities
at the end of the Napoleonic
wars in
Europe in the early part of the last century. In a very
real sense, to glimpse the past of Surinam is to see
much of the history of my own country. And these
inextricable
ties are reinforced by the historical
experience of an identical colonial pattern of development-a
plantation economy based on slave labour,
which was succeeded by an induced migration
of
indentured labour from the East.

13. The completion of a further stage in the progress
of the United Nations towards universality,
coupled
with the achievement of independence by yet another
State which has experienced
the degradation
of
prolonged colonial domination,
represents the fulfilment of principles deeply cherished by us all and for
which we have strenuously fought in this and other
forums.
14. But the occasion is, for the countries of the
Caribbean, one of truly singular satisfaction, and one
which makes this meeting particularly rich in historical
significance for us. For we share with Surinam, a
country within our region, a profundity of identification rooted in a certain similarity of culture and the
common harrowing experience of colonialism.

17. The colonial pattern, as in Guyana, did not
however go unchallenged in Surinam. The history of
Surinam in the eighteenth century bears eloquent
witness to the spirited and heroic resistance of men
and women who would not accept the condition of
serfdom and inequality. The will and determination
of
those fighters were never to be overcome by the
colonial Power and inevitably
they received recognition of their independence.
Today those heroes
stand forth to the nation as a pioneering
symbol
of an implicit
nationalistic
consciousness
which
demonstrated
an impressive resistance to absorption
by the officially-sanctioned
colonial model.

15. My delegation,
in particular,
considers itself
deeply honoured in having had the privilege of participating in the Council’s decision. The pleasure has
been of an especially intense kind. Surinam now
joins us as an independent State in the north-eastern
corner of South America. My country’s joy at this
auspicious development was conveyed in the following
message sent to the Government
of Surinam by my
Prime Minister, Mr. Forbes Bumham:
“On the occasion of the independence of Surinam, it gives me great pleasure on behalf of the
Government
and people of Guyana and in my
own name to send to you and the Government and
people of Surinam, fraternal congratulations
and
best wishes for the progress and prosperity of
your nation.

18. Guyana has followed with close. interest the
disciplined progress of our eastern neighbour towards
independence.
After the conclusion of the second
World’ War, the growth of nationalism
led to the
proclamation
on 29 December 1954 of the Charter of
the Kingdom of the Netherlands
by which Surinam
2

’

inspired revolutions that freed the Spanish-speaking
republics. Yet the process is incomplete. In southern
Africa there are still those who struggle for the
rec,overy of their freedom. And here in the Western
Hemisphere
it is paradoxical to observe that at this
very moment an attempt is being made to reverse
the clear trend of history by the strengthening
of
the colonial presence in the last remaining colonial
enclave on the north-eastern coast of South America,
and to do so in defiance of the wishes of the indigenous
population for freedom and independence.

achieved internal self-government and became an equal
partner with the Netherlands
Antilles
and the
metropolitan
Government.
in the Kingdom
of the
Netherlands.
The Charter was flexible enough to
provide for such further constitutional
developments
as Surinam required.
It ,is therefore only logical
that the process should culminate
in Surinam’s
attainment
of’ independence
on 25 November
1975.
Such an event is the natural expression of the will of
the Surinamese people to govern themselves and to
take all decisions about their political and economic
future. The certainty that such decisions will be
oriented
towards national
interests can only be
assured when they are taken by the representatives
of the people themselves,
unhindered
by the
hampering existence of a metropolitan
presence.

23. We salute the entry of Surinam into the United
Nations. It represents that harmonious heterogeneity
and fiersity
so cnaracferistic
of this hipere,
where no single country or group of countries can
claim a monopoly
of cultural or spiritual values
which set them apart and make them the supreme,
special and unique representatives
of the society
of the new world.

19. May I, at this point, however, acknowledge
the contribution
of the administering
Power towards
Surinam’s
independence.
The Netherlands
has for
some time now provided a worthy example to other
colonial Powers by the manner in which it has
encouraged indigenous participation
in the administration of the affairs of the Territory and co-operated
in the process of decolonization
of Surinam.

24. Surinam comes to us rich in the melange of its
cultures, a veritable microcosm of the international
community.
This fact, I am sure, will enable Surinam
to make a significant contribution to this Organization,
whose primary goal remains the achievement of an
international society truly based on equity and justice.

20. There was a time when the countries of the
Caribbean
were the prized objects of competing
European colonial Powers obsessed with the profits
garnered from the production
of sugar. So prized
were so-called possessions in the Caribbean that
in 1667 the Dutch considered that they had struck
a good bargain when they exchanged much of what is
today Manhattan for Surinam. The Caribbean for a
long historical period has often been seen through
the distorting and romanticizing
lens of the “Discovery”, of fabled and dashing adventurers, of the
kaleidoscopic
patterns of military and naval clashes
between colonial
Powers and shifting
colonial
domination.
But behind the romance lies the grim
reality of a dehumanizing
experience,
which the
people of the Caribbean have survived with admirable fortitude and determination.
Colonisliam
in the
Caribbean has left a legacy of poverty, deprivation
and exploitation.
Surinam is linked to the Caribbean
by the intimacy of this common experience.

25.

Mr. SALAZAR (Costa Rica) (interpretation
from
Mr. President, my delegation wishes to join
the preceding speaker in congratulating
you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month. We are certain that under your
wise guidance our task will be made easier, and
my delegation -wishes to extend to you our most
complete support for success in your important duties.

Spanish):

26. My delegation
does not wish to miss this
opportunity
to pay a sincere tribute to and express
our appreciation of the work done by the President
who preceded you, Ambassador Malik of the Soviet
Union, thanks to whose efforts the Council was able
to deal with very difficult questions last month.
27. To proceed to the item before us, my delegation
wishes to place on record its deep satisfaction with
the resolution, to the adoption of which we contributed by our vote, in which this Council recommends
to the General Assembly the admission of Surinam
to membership in the United Nations.

21. Today, however, the Caribbean peoples are in the
process of reshaping their own political and economic
structures. Surinam now joins us as an independent
nation. We look forward to close co-operation with
it in the future.

28. While it is true that that my delegation has felt
similar satisfaction whenever we have voted in favour
of the admission
of new Members,
in this case
our satisfaction is all the greater because Surinam
belongs to the American continent and its birth as an
independent
nation means that yet another State is
added to the region to which the country I represent
belongs.

22. It has been a happy thirtieth anniversary for the
United Nations. This year has been a fruitful one
for the decolonization
process. Our Organization
has so far admitted as members, Mozambique,
Cape
Verde, Sao Tome and Principe, Papua New Guinea
and, only last month, the Comoros. It is now the
turn of Surinam, the second country on the South
American continent to become independent since the

29. The characteristics
will unite the destiny
3

of a small, developing country
of Surinam with that of the

association of American nations, among,which there is
a great affinity because they are committed to struggles which’unite them in their goals and aspirations.

Netherlands
for the fulfilment
of its responsibility
to assist the, people of Surinam to. attain their full
*
independence.,

30., ‘It is in these circumstances that, when the admission of Surinam is decided upon, we of the group of
Latin American States will welcome the youngest
nation of our continent with whole-hearted friendship.
We are confident that that country will strive for ,and
contribute to the aims of the group with the same
clear-sightedness
and responsibility
as’ the other
nations that joined us earlier.

37. In our examination of the application of Surinam
for membership we have taken note with satisfaction
of the declaration in which it pledged itselfto carry
out the’ obligations of the Charter incumbent upon
Member States. We have no doubt whatsoever that
Surinam is a peace-loving State and is able and willing
to carry out the obligations it will assume when it is
admitted to membership.
This judgement
has been
happily confirmed by all members of the Council in
their unanimous decision.

31. It only remains for us now to welcome the
coming entry of Surinam to the United Nations and
to wish it every success in its independence.

38. I had the honour of visiting Surinam in March
1974. I was greatly impressed by the dynamic vitality
of its people and their continuous efforts to achieve
economic and social development.
My visit convinced
me that they will have a,prosperous future.

32. Mr. SAITO (Japan): Mr. President, at the outset
I wish to express to you the warm congratulations
of my delegation and my own best wishes on your
assumption
of the high office of President of the
Council for this month. I am confident that your
extensive knowledge of the Organization
and your
dynamic contribution
to it will prove most beneficial
to the Council in the fulfilment
of its important
responsibilities.
My delegation assures you that it will
extend its full co-operation to you, Mr. President.

‘39. With this personal experience in mind, I hope
that the General Assembly during its current session
will decide unanimously
to admit Surinam to the
Organization as the 144th Member State.
40. My country is confident that the admission of
Surinam will have the further advantage of bringing
the United Nations a step nearer to one of its most
valuable goals-namely,
true universality of membership-and
will’contribute
to the further strengthening
of the United Nations.

33. I wish also to pay a high tribute to Ambassador
Malik of the Soviet Union, our retiring President,
who, with long experience
in this Organization,
presided during the month of November with dignity
and humour over-the Council’s deliberations
on the
most delicate and complex problems, such as the
questions of the Western Sahara and the extension
of the mandate of United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force. We’ all acknowledge that the Council has benefited from his presidency.

41.) The Government of Japan took pleasure in recognizing Surinam on 25 November, the very same day it
became independent.
In its congratulatory
message
the Government, of Japan extended its warmest congratulations
to the Government
of Surinam on its
independence, and expressed the hope that diplomatic
relations will ‘be established as soon as possible.

34. The delegation
of Japan joined with utmost
pleasure in the unanimous adoption of draft resolution
S/11891, under which the ‘Security
Council
has
decided to recommend
to the General Assembly
the admissions.of Surinain to the United Nations.

42. Surinam has a great potential for economic and
social development. We have confidence in the nationbuilding capacity’of its people.. We extend every good
wish to them for their national unity and continued
progres+
The Government
and people of Japan
ardently desire’ to promote -friendship, goodwill and
close co-operation with the Government
and people
of Surinam,
both within and outside the United
Nations. I need hardly add that my delegation looks
forward with pleasure to Surinam’s contribution to the
work of the United Nations and the peace and stability
of the region.

35. On this auspicious occasion I wish, in the name
of my delegation, to extend most sincere congratulations to the Government and people of Sprinam on the
Council’s .action, by which it has expressed its full
confidence in the new State.
36. My delegation-warmly
welcomes the accession
of Surinam to full sovereignty
as an independent
State, which took place on 25 November
last. We
are very pleased to see that this new State has
acceded to independence in a peaceful and orderly
manner under the leadership of Prime Minister Henck
Arron. We wish to pay a tribute to the leaders of
Surinam for the statesmanship they have demonstrated
in their efforts to maintain national unity and harmony.
At the same time we wish to express our profound
appreciation to the Government of the Kingdom of the

43. Mr. HUANG (China) (translation
from Chinese):
On 25 November the Republic of Surinam, another
new-born State in Latin America, freed itself from
a several-centuries-old
colonial rule and achieved
national independence.
44. On the. occasion of the proclamation
independence
of the Republic
of Surinam,
4

.I

of the
Chou
/
I

L

I
I

En-lai, Premier of the State Council .of the People’s
Republic of China, sent a message of warm congratulations to the Primer Minister of the Republic, of
Surinam, informing him of the decision of the Chinese
Government
to recognize the Republic of Surinam.
We earnestly hope that the friendship between the
peoples of China and Surinam and the friendly relations and co-operation
between the two countries
will develop daily, and we sincerely wish the people
of Surinam continuous new successes in the cause of
safeguarding their national independence and building
their country.

new State’&ith
the former administering
Poker and
the ties of close association ‘which, through. the
Netherlands,
Surinam has maintained with the European Community.
We hope that those ties can continue
to the satisfaction of all, particularly of the new State,
within the framework of its independence.
50: In conclusion, the French delegation wishes to
express to the Republic of Surinam and its Prime
Minister,
Mr. Henck Art-on,. best wishes for the
prosperity of its Government.
51. Mr. RYDBECK
(Sweden):
I should like,
Mr. President, before turning to the matter on our
agenda, to pay my sincere respects to you and to
convey to you the good wishes of my delegation on
your assumption of that office. We look forward to
working under your leadership, which we know will be
firm and marked with. flexibility
and political flair,
which will assist us in ,dealing with the very difficult
questions before us. We pledge to you, our full
co-operation.
.

45. Now the Republic of Surinam has applied for
admission
to membership
in the United Nations.
The Chinese delegation holds that, in accordance with
the relevant provisions ofthe United Nations Charter,
the Republic of Surinam is qualified for membership
in the United Nations. We fully support its application
and we are in favour of the Security Council’s
recommending to the General Assembly the admission
of the Republic of Surinam to membership in the United
Nations.

52. We should like also to extend warm thanks to
Ambassador Malik, the outgoing President. When he
took office I ventured into a field which I had
hitherto shunned-that
of prediction.
I was safe. I
knew of his great experience and his wisdom, and
they were qualities of decisive importance,
together
with his angelic .patience,: in guiding the. Council
through the .heavily-scheduled
month of November.
Our sincere thanks and respects go to him.

46. We believe that upon its admission to membership in the United Nations the Republic of Surinam
will make positive contributions
to the realization of
the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter, together with all the other justice-upholding
Member States;
47. Mr. SCALABRE
(France) (interpretutiin
from
French): Mr. President, please accept my apologies for
the absence of Mr. de Guiringaud, who is unable to
be here for reasons beyond his control. Hence it
falls to me to offer my congratulations
to Mr. Malik,
who discharged his duties as President at a very busy
time with his customary skill, and to congratulate
you, Sir. When Mr. de Guiringaud has the opportunity,
he will offer you both his congratulations
personally.

53. During the autumn we have had the privilege of
having several applications
for membership
in our
Organization
on the agenda of the Security Council.
My delegation welcomes this further opportunity today
of taking part in the decision of the Council to recommend ,for membership
the newly independent
State
-of Surinam.

-48. The delegation pf France was happy to vote in
favour of the admission of Surinam, since the applications was an expression of the will of the population
of that. country. We have no doubt that, having
received the unanimous support of the Security Council, the application
will also be given that of the
General Assembly.

‘54. My .Govemment recognized the new State on the
day of its independence
a week ago. We find its
application for membership to be fully in accord with
the requirements of the Charter and we have therefore supported with pleasure the resolution containing
the recommendation
of this Council to the General
Assembly to admit Surinam’ as a Member of the
United Nations. Surinam’s admission will mark yet
another step towards the attainment
of the desired
goal of universality of the Organization. Twenty years
ago the General Assembly decided to remove Surinam
from the purview’ of Chapter XI of the Charter,
since that Territory,
through new constitutional
arrangements, had achieved full internal self-govemment. The new constitutiqnal
status of partnership
on the basis of eQtiality with the Netherlands was the
result of long negotiations between the two countries
and -was approved by the democratically
elected
Parliament
of Surinam.
After
many years of
experience in managing its own affairs, the people of
Surinam has now taken the last step on the road to

49. France was one of the first to take into account
the coming accession to independence of Surinam by
expressly stipulating,
when it adhered to Protocol II
annexed to the Treaty for the Prohibition
of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America,‘, that, with the full assent
of the administering
Power, it intended to extend the
scope of that adherence to territories which would
later become parties to that Treaty. In supporting
the application for admission of Surinam, France is
also acting in accordance with the wishes expressed
by the Netherlands,
an allied and friendly European
country and a member of our Economic Community.
We are pleased to see the friendship which unites the
5

j
I

full sovereignty,
again by means of negotiation
and democratic procedures. That augurs well for the
future of Surinam.

dignity. For many years we have followed with interest
the efforts of the people of Surinam for freedom and
independence. The United Republic of Tanzania, too,
has never failed to render moral support to the people
of Surinam in its legitimate
struggle. At this hour,
therefore, it is only fair to say that its joy is also
ours.

55. My delegation would like to pay a warm tribute
to the Government
of the Netherlands
for its
essential contribution to this process. Sweden cordially
welcomes the delegation of Surinam to the United
Nations and my delegation looks forward to co-operating closely with it in the years to come, convinced
that it will make an essential contribution
to the work
of the United Nations.

61. In welcoming the Republic of Surinam, we note
with satisfaction that its entry-which
now is only a
matter of time-marks
another milestone
in the
decolonization
of the entire Caribbean and Latin
American subcontinent.
My Government
maintains
very close and friendly ties with the countries of that
region. It is our earnest hope that the independence
of Surinam and its eventual membership in the United
Nations will increase the determination
of the peoples of the Caribbean in their struggle against the last
remnants of colonialism in that region.

56. Mr. SALIM
(United
Republic
of Tanzania):
May I, Mr. President, at the outset congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for the month of December. The friendly relations
existing between our countries make it easier for me
to say how happy my delegation
is to see you
presiding over our important meetings. More significantly, only a few days ago my President was in
your country on a State visit. The success of that
visit and the warm reception he received wherever
he went clearly demonstrate
the close relationship
existing between our two countries.

62. We have taken note with pleasure of Surinam’s
declaration accepting the obligations contained in the
Charter of the United Nations. In this regard, we hope
the entry of Surinam to the United Nations will reinforce the ranks of all peace-loving Members in the
United Nations upholding the principles of the Charter.

57. Added to that are your personal qualities of
leadership and statesmanship which assure my delegation in advance that we are in good hands.

63. Similarly,
we look forward to the active participation of Surinam in the work of the United Nations
and within
the non-aligned
movement,
and to
co-operating and working very closely with the delegation of that country.

58. To your predecessor,
Ambassador
Malik,
I
should like to pay a tribute for the laudable manner
in which he effectively conducted the affairs of the
Council in the month of November.
November was
certainly one of the months in which important decisions of the Council were taken. It was also a month
that witnessed protracted consultations that sometimes
meant that meetings .had to be held during weekends
and members had to work late into the night. That
we managed to take such important
decisions is
to the credit of your predecessor, whose skill, experience and energetic drive are beyond question.

64. It is worth recalling that we have in the past had
the honour of welcoming a delegation from Surinam
in my country. Those bonds of friendship which have
carried us this far have left rich dividends to form
the basis for everlasting ties between our two peoples
and countries. It is our intention further to strengthen
our relations with the people and Government of Surinam. By voting in favour of the resolution we have
just adopted, my delegation wished only to cement the
friendship existing between our two Governments
and our two peoples.

59. It is perhaps sad that the United Republic of
Tanzania will not be a member of the Council when
Ambassador Malik again assumes the presidency of the
Security Council. I use the word “perhaps” advisedly,
for, in all frankness, I must say that considering the
experience we have accumulated
and the fact that,
during his presidency, Ambassador Malik made sure
that we worked every weekend, with one exception
I believe, and that we worked day and night, I believe
that, from a personal point of view, it would not be
all that lamentable to miss his next presidency.

65. Before concluding, I should like to pay a special
tribute to the Government
of the Netherlands,
the
administering Power, for its positive co-operation in the
decolonization
of Surinam. There is no doubt that that
positive attitude on the part of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands has ensured that Surinam’s emergence as
a new nation has not in any way affected the ties of
co-operation and friendship between Surinam and the
Netherlands. Rather, it has paved the way for a more
meaningful
and dynamic relationship
of friendship
based on equality, mutual respect and mutual benefit.

60. It is the greatest pleasure now for me, on behalf
of the Government and people of the United Republic
of Tanzania, to extend a warm welcome to the application for membership in the United Nations of the
Republic of Surinam. Its entry into the Organization
will be yet another logical culmination
of the struggle
of the peoples for freedom, independence and human

66. Mr. TCHERNOUCHT’CHENKO
(Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic) (interprerurion from Russian): Mr. President, the delegation of the Byelorussian SSR would like to join in the congratulations
which have been addressed to you on your assumption
6

of the responsible post of President of the Security
Council. We should also like to express our sincere
gratitude to the representative of the Soviet Union to
the United Nations, Mr. Yakov Malik, for the tireless
efforts he deployed, as President of the Security Council for the past month, in finding solutions to very
complicated and difficult questions connected with the
work of the Council in maintaining international peace
and security.
67. The delegation of the Bvelorussian SSR was very
pleased to vote in favour of the resolution [382 (197.5)3
which has just been adopted, recommending
that the
General Assembly admit Surinam to membership in
the United Nations. The application
of this young
State to be accepted for United Nations membership
is in accordance with all the stipulations in Article 4
of the Charter of the United Nations.
68. The process of the complete abolition of colonialism is remorselessly moving on to its culmination.
This is clearly shown by the fact that, in this year,
in the territories of seven former colonies, young
independent States have grown up. At the same time, it
should be pointed out that since 1960, when, on the
initiative of the Soviet Union, the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and
Peoples was adopted, this is the largest number of new
sovereign States proclaimed in a single year. Mozambique, Cape Verde, Sao Tome and Principe, Papua
New Guinea and the Comoro islands have already
joined the Members of the United Nations and today,
the Security Council has recommended that one further
State, Surinam, which has quite recently been freed
from colonial domination,
be admitted to membership
in the United Nations. However, before the process
of the complete liberation of all countries and territories from colonialism
can be concluded, a great
many difficulties
and complexities
still remain.
Imperialism
and racism are trying to impede this
process and to make it impossible,
particularly
in
Africa, for changes to take place which would considerably strengthen the progressive forces.
69. In conclusion, the delegation of the Byelorussian SSR takes this opportunity
to congratulate the
people of Surinam on achieving its independence and to
wish the people of Surinam success on its road to
independent statehood.
70. Mr. OYONO
(United Republic of Cameroon)
(interpretation
from French): Mr. President, before I
start my statement, I should like to express to you
my own and my delegation’s most sincere and warmest
congratulations
on your accession to the very
important post of President of the Security Council
for the month of December. My delegation which is
fully aware of and appreciates your eminent skills as
a diplomat,
and your human qualities is confident
that our work will be successful under your enlightened guidance. We wish to assure you of our complete
co-operation.

71. I likewise wish to avail myself of this opportunity to pay a just tribute to Ambassador Malik of
the USSR for the competence
and authority with
which he guided our work during the difficult month
of November.
My delegation is most grateful to him
for the manner in which he discharged his heavy
responsibilities.
72. My delegation is very pleased at the unanimity
shown by our Council in supporting the draft resolution in paragraph 4 of document S/l 1891 recommending
the admission of Surinam for membership in the United
Nations. This admission falls within the framework of
the implementation
of the principle of the right of
colonial peoples to independence
solemnly affirmed
by our Organization.
It also crowns with success
the just struggle of the people of Surinam for freedom.
Finally, it is the happy outcome of the slow process
of the historical and political development
of that
territory, which led to its independence on 25 November 1975.
73. We particularly appreciate the manner in which
the Government
of the Netherlands
has discharged
the lofty responsibilities
entrusted to it concerning
that former Territory. The admission of Surinam thus
confirms the aim of universality of the United Nations,
of which the United Republic of Cameroon has been
and remains a convinced advocate.
74. We are happy to welcome Surinam to our Organization and certainly later to the great family of’
non-aligned nations. We wish to assure it at once of
our support and co-operation.
75. Mr. BENNETT
(United States of America):
Mr. President, may I welcome you to the presidency
and say that we look forward to the exercise of
your robust parliamentary
skill and your objectivity in
the month to come. Let me also thank the retiring
President of the Council for the skill and patience
and general good humour with which he guided the
Council through some arduous days.
76. With respect to the agenda item before us, my
delegation concurred wholeheartedly in the recommendation of the Council’s Committee
on Admission of
New Members on the membership
application
of
Surinam. We warmly support and endorse Surinam’s
application for membership in the United Nations.
77. Surinam’s
achievement
of independence
is a
tribute to both the dedication and the capacity of
Surinam’s duly elected laders, and also to the progressive policies and administration
of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands.
78. Surinam has a long history of democratic traditions and has enjoyed a large measure of self-govemment since 1954, Its Legislative Council has been in
existence for more than 190, 110 years to be exact.

80. Surinam’s rich natural -resources, the variety of
agricultural
production
which Surinam’s fertile soil
makes possible, and Surinam’s commitment
to liberal
trade policies are convincing evidence of Surinam’s
excellent
prospects for continued
economic
development.

:
86. Mr. VINCI
(Italy): Mr. President,
it is my
privilege to express to you’& behalf of my delegation
and on my own behalf, warmest congratulations
on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. We wish you, Sir, and ourselves a less hectic
month and’at least a few more leisure hours, especially
at weekends, than we had in November.
Whatever
the future has in store for’ us’in December, however,
you can rely on our full co-operation. I have no doubt
that if the going should become rough you will use
to the full your brilliant mind, your energy and your
political instinct to lead us quickly out of the storm
to safe shores.

81. Surinam begins its existence as a new nation and
approaches membership in the United Nations with the
advantage of first-hand experience in this Organization
and in other international
bodies. Representative
designate, Henricus Heidweilier,
has played an active
role at the United Nations for a number of years
as a member of the delegation of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands.
Surinam is fortunate that it will be
represented by a man of experience and proven
capacity.

87. I wish to take this: opportunity
to express
our deep appreciation
and admiration
to your
predecessor,
my good friend Ambassador
Yakov
Malik, for the tact, courtesy, energy and intellectual
and physical alertness he displayed from the first to
the last day of November.
His steering of our craft
both day and night was flawless, and I do not hesitate
to say that his name is connected with new initiatives
and decisions the result of which will, I believe, be
of some historical significance.

79. As in any new country arriving on the world
stage today, there will be problems. However, the rich
diversity and abilities of Surinam’s population and the
demonstrated
commitment
of Surinam’s
elected
leaders to the welfare of their people are cause for
optimism about Surinam’s future.

88. Once again this year we had on our agenda an
application for membership by a newly independent
country; and, acting on the basis of its rules, the
Security Council has just taken the unanimous decision
to recommend
Surinam
for admission
as the
144th Member of our Organization.
That is a happy
event at which we all rejoice.

82. The United Nations and Surinam have a long
record of warm relations dating back to 1790, when the
first United States Consulate was established in Paramaribo. Our relationship,
in fact, goes back much
further than that, of course. It will be remembered
that in the old days, before either of us was independent, before we had exercised our right to selfdetermination,
an interesting territorial exchange took
place under terms of the Treaty of Breda in .1667.
That Treaty was not without effect on the history of
both our nations. In the intervening years, economic
and commercial
exchanges and shared experiences
have all combined to strengthen our mutual respect.

89. My delegation is particularly
glad to welcome
to the United Nations a new State of the Southern
Hemisphere with which Italy has many and strong ties.
In that connexion I should like to recall that distant
day of the year 1499, when Amerigo Vespucci-who
gave his name to the entire continent of Americamoored in the waters of Guyana and the first European
set foot on its shores and explored parts of what is
now Surinam. Nearly five centuries after that day, we
see the people of Surinam taking,‘with just pride; their
place among the members of the South American
family.

83. On 25 November
1975 the United
States
welcomed Surinam as a sovereign State to the family
of nations and to the community
of the Western
Hemisphere. Surinam. has now announced its support
for the principles of the United Nations. My Government believes Surinam will be a valuable and productive new Member of this Organization.

90. We have on our ‘part followed with friendly
interest the history of Surinam, and especially the
progress made more recently on the road towards
the final date of 25 November last. With all that in
mind, my delegation voted whole-heartedly
in favour
of the drat resolution just adopted. In so doing, jointly
with the other members of the Security Council, we
felt we were taking a further step towards the fulfilment of the idea of the universality of our world
Organization.
We now look forward to establishing
here with, the representatives
of Surinam fruitful
co-operation inspired by the main purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter.

84. My delegation would like at this time to express
to the representative of the Netherlands, Ambassador
Johan Kaufmann, our admiration
for the exemplary
role which the Government
of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands has played in the emergence of Surinam
as an independent State.
85. In closing, I wish to convey to the Govemment and people of Surinam the warm greetings of the
Government and people of the United States, and our
best wishes for the future. It is the sincere desire of
the United States to co-operate cordially and fully
with Surinam as a sovereign and independent nation
and as a’Member of the United Nations.

91. We feel that in the case of Surinam a new
example of the peaceful acquisition of independence
8

has been set. And in that,respect we wish to pay a
tribute to the statesmanship and foresight shown by
the Government of the Netherlands, a country so close
to mind because of our many links of friendship,
alliance and partnership in the European Community.

Security. Council was able to achieve outstanding
successes which do honour to the country and people
he represents here. Now, that his term of office’ as
President is over, I should like to tell him.how grateful.
my delegation is to him for all the positive.‘work
he
did last month.

92. In conclusion,
the Italian
delegation
would
like to extend its warmest congratulations
to the
independent,
sovereign State of Surinam and to its
people. To its leadership we convey our best wishes,
trusting that it will face its many and complex tasks
with greater confidence and sense of responsibility
as
a result of its new status.

98. The Security Council has just adopted the draft
resolution in paragraph 4 of document S/ 11891, recommending to the General Assembly that Surinam be
admitted to membership of the United Nations. During.
the meeting, held this morning, of the Committee on
the Admission of New Members, we expressed our
great admiration for the application for admission made
by the Government of Surinam. It was therefore with
deep satisfaction that we noted .the unanimity
with
which that Committee asked the Security Council to
recommend to the General Assembly the admission of
that new State to the United Nations.

93. Mr. AL-ATIYYAH
(Iraq): I should like first,
Mr. President, to associate myselfwith those representatives who have extended. congratulations
to you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I am confident that the Council
will benefit from your wisdom and experience in the
conduct of its work. At the same time, I should
like on behalf of my delegation to express our deep
admiration to your predecessor, Ambassador Malik of
the Soviet Union, for the excellent manner in which
he discharged his duties and responsibilities
as
President of the Security Council.

99. The legitimate satisfaction felt’by my delegation
is based on the many ties between the people of
Surinam and the people of ‘Mauritania,
ties which
neither time nor distance has altered.
100. The entry of Surinam into the United Nations,
while bringing our Grganization closer to the achievement of the goal of universality that it has set itself,
will at the same -time, enable the Governments
of
Surinam and Mauritania to strengthen the ties to which
I have referred, in the evident interest of the two
countries. I should like at once to assure the representatives of Surinam that we are fully prepared to work
together with them in the United Nations in the defence
of the noble ideals underlying
the Organization’s
activities. Meanwhile, I welcome them to the United
Nations.

94. The Security Council has unanimously
adopted
a resolution recommending
to the General Assembly
the admission
of Surinam
to membership
of the
United Nations [382 (1975)]. Iraq warmly welcomes
the admission
of Surinam to the United Nations
and regards it as a significant step towards the liberation and independence of all the colonized peoples
and Territories. And, surely, the admission of Surinam
to the United Nations will strengthen the principle
of the universality
of membership
of the United
I
Nations.

101. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Repub-,
lies) (intiarpretcrtion from Russian): I should like ‘first
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
responsible post of President of the Security Council
and to wish you success in that post. Indeed, I had
occasion to address some wishes to you ‘in that
connection
yesterday when I adjourned
the last
meeting of the Security Council held under my
presidency. I should like also to express my cordial
gratitude
to all those colleagues in* the Security
Council who have addressed kind words to me in
connection with my presidency of the Council for the
month of November.

95. Iraq sincerely wishes the people of Surinam
success and prosperity and looks forward to friendly
and fruitful
relations
with that people and its
Government.
96. Mr. KANE
(Mauritania)
(intc~~preration from
French):
I should first like to extend to you,
Mr. President, my delegation’s warmest congratulations ‘on your accession to the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We Mauritanians
who have had the privilege of working with you for
what will soon be more than a year know from
experience that your outstanding talents as a statesman and diplomat have always contributed to the success of our work. That is why we are confident that
under your presidency the work of the Security
Council will be crowned with success.

102. The admission to the United Nations of each
newly independent State that has only recently thrown
off the fetters of colonialism
is always a joyous
event. Whenever it occurs, the United Nations takes
a further important. step, first towards the full and
complete abolition of colonialism
in all parts of the
world, in pursuance of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
adopted 15 years ago on the initiative of the Soviet
Union and with the active support of the non-

97. I should like to state too how much we appreciated the way in which the representative of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics carried out his responsibilities as President of the Council last month. Thanks’
to his wisdom, his experience and his fairness, the
9

aligned countries; and secondly towards the achievement of the goal of the universality
of the United
Nations, one of the most important prerequisites for
increasing the effectiveness of this Organization.

members of the Council for allowing me to participate
in this Council’s
meeting -on the application
of
Surinam for admission to membership in the United
Nations.

103. The Soviet delegation was pleased to support the
recommendation
of the Security Council to admit
the Republic of Sui’mam to Uiiitecl Nations membership. The achievement of independence by the people
of Surinam is a new and important
step towards
wiping from’the face of the earth the last unsightly
blemishes of colonialism. As members know, one of the
principles underlying the foreign policy of the Soviet
Union is its constant and resolute fight for the speedy
abolition of the vestiges of the colonial system and
the rendering of comprehensive
support to those
peoples who are struggling for their national freedom
and independence.

109. My delegation is particularly
pleased to see
this meeting chaired by you, Mr. President, represending the United Kingdom,
a eotmtry which, in
view of its own history and indeed in view of its
involvement
in some of the history of Surinam, fully
understands the significance of this application
for
membership
in the United
Nations by Surinani.
I should also like to express the sincere appreciation
of my delegation and of myself to Ambassador Malik
who during the month of his presidency gave valuable
assistance to my delegation in connexion with the
preparation of the application of Surinam.
110. I also wish to put on record my deep gratitude
and that of the Government
of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands for the very kind words which all members of this Council have said today about my country.

104. In supporting
the admission
to membership
in the United Nations of the Republic of Surinam,
the Soviet delegation believed that the application of
Surinam to be admitted to the United Nations was
in full accord with the requirements laid down by the
United Nations Charter. We would voice the hope that
this new member of the United Nations will make its
worthy contribution
to the activities of the Organization.

111. As members of this Council know, Surinam
has been an equal and autonomous
partner in our
Kingdom ever since the Charter of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands entered into force on 15 December 1954.
As a consequence, when the Government and the people of Surinam decided in full freedom to opt for
complete independence, the Netherlands Government
whole-heartedly
co-operated in achieving that aim.

105. In a congratulatory
telegram from the President
of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union,
Mr. Kosygin, addressed to the Prime Minister of the
Republic of Surinam, Mr. Henck Arron, on Surinam’s independence day, the following statement:

112. Thus, Surinam became an independent
and
sovereign nation on 25 November of this year. My
Government is pleased that this important event took
place this year, the thirtieth anniversary of the United
Nations. Although a long historic relationship
has
now ended, the Kingdom
of the Netherlands
looks
forward to maintaining close ties of friendship with the
newly independent nation. Needless to say, our new
relationship
will find concrete expression in various
ways, including
wide-ranging
co-operation
in the
economic and technological fields.

“The Soviet Government,
on the basis of its
unchanging policy of equality and friendship among
all States regardless of their social systems and
guided further by the principle of self-determination
of peoples, hereby states that it recognizes Surinam
as a sovereign and independent
State, and also
expresses its readiness to establish diplomatic
relations with the new State.
“I express the hope that between the Soviet
Union and Surinam relations of friendship
and
co-operation will develop to the benefit of the peoples of our countries and in the interests of consolidating universal peace.”

113. In conclusion,
I wish to thank the Council
and all its members for the decision taken today. I
can assure the Council that the unanimous adoption
of the draft resolution recommending
to the General
Assembly that Surinam be admitted to membership
of the United Nations is warmly appreciated by the
Government of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.

106. The delegation of the Soviet Union would like
to take this opportunity
once again sincerely to
congratulate the Republic of Surinam, its people and its
delegation to the United Nations on the occasion of
their proclamation
of independence, and to wish the
people of that country good fortune and progress on
their road to independent existence and development.
107. The PRESIDENT:
of the Netherlands.

114. The PRESIDENT:
I should now like to make
a brief statement in my capacity as representative
of the UNITED
KINGDOM.
115. May I start by thanking all the representatives
on the Security Council who have said such kind,
generous and undeserved things to me this afternoon. May I also express again my appreciation
to
the representative of the Soviet Union for the way in
which he conducted our affairs during the month of

I call on the representative

108. Mr. KAUFMANN
(Netherlands):
Mr. President, first I should like to thank you and the other
:

10

November.
I had the opportunity
of expressing that
this morning; I would merely reiterate this afternoon
that I am personally deeply appreciative
of the way
in which our affairs were organized during the last
month.

and is now better known in some quarters, I believe,
as The Big Apple. As we shall no doubt be reminded
next year, and I fear for some years to come thereafter, New York’s own colonial associations were
severed some time ago. But in wishing the new
Republic of Surinam peace and prosperity, I hope I
shall not be thought presumptuous
if I take this
occasion to wish New York the same.

116. It gave ‘my Government
particular pleasure to
vote in favour of Surinam’s admission to the United
Nations. I should like to reciprocate the kind words
addressed to my country by, the representative
of
the Netherlands. We do indeed understand the significance of Surinam’s application for membership.
For
many centuries the territories of Surinam and what was
then British Guyana were administered
by our two
countries, and we were, so to speak, temporary
neighbours on the South American continent. That
period is now firmly behind us. But we remain
neighbours and partners of the Netherlands
in the
European
Economic
Community.
We are also
associated, following our joint signature of the LomC
Convention, with many newly independent countries
in Africa, the Pacific and the Caribbean, including
Surinam. We are delighted at these developments
and we look forward to working together with the
independent
Republic of Surinam, both through the
institutions
provided for by the Lome Convention,
and of course in the provision of assitance through
the European Development
Fund.

118. Surinam now joins those former dependent Territories on the American continent and in the Caribbean area which have achieved independence. It will,
I am sure, have a great deal to contribute to the
deliberations
of the Latin American and the Caribbean countries. I am sure, too, that it will equally
contribute
to the co-operation
with its neighbours
which the future well-being of the area requires. My
Government
looks forward to working in close conjunction with the Surinam delegation at the United
Nations. We shall follow its progress as an independent
State with the keenest sympathy and goodwill.
119. In conclusion, may I express my Government’s
appreciation both to the Government of Surinam and to
our partner, the Government
of the Netherlands,
at the successful outcome of their recent negotiations,
of which the application before us today is the witness.
The friendly relations between the two countries
are a tangible reminder of the co-operation and the
sense of partnership which they have created and
which we believe this Organization
is designed to
promote.

117. But my own country’s links with Surinam go
back very much further. The long period of colonial
rule from which Surinam has just emerged began, as
perhaps did that of many other countries, when an
Englishman,
a Lord Willoughby,
established a settlement there is 1651. I am told that in 1667 a Dutch
fleet conquered the territory. When peace was signed
between Britain and the Netherlands that same year,
the treaty provided for the exchange of Surinam
with the city which was then called New Amsterdam

The meeting

rose at 5.05 p.m.
Notes

I See Resolution 382 (1975).
* United Nations, Treaty Series,

------

11

vol.

634, No. 9068,

p. 282.

.
i_

-.

. _.

.

-

‘.

.’
._;

..

.

..

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Inl’ormez-vous auprk de votre libraire ou adressez-vous 6 : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes. New York ou Genhe.
KAK

IIO;IYWITh

NIAAHKH

OPI-AHN

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES

3A4NEI

OWbE~HHEHHhIX

HAIWR

DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas esdn en venta en libretias y casas distribuidoms en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccih de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

00300:

82-61202~December

1983-2.200
