United Nations

S/PV.6049

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

6049th meeting
Thursday, 18 December 2008, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jurica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Croatia)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Grauls
Mr. Tiendrébéogo
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Weisleder
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Mantovani
Mr. Ettalhi
Mr. Arias
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Kumalo
Sir John Sawers
Mr. Wolff
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-65913 (E)

*0865913*

S/PV.6049

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

Adoption of the agenda

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Brazil, Cuba, Iceland, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Japan, Lebanon,
Morocco, Norway, Pakistan, Qatar, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Turkey and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Ms. Shalev
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; the other
aforementioned representatives took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The President: I would like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 11 December
2008 from the Chargé d’affaires of the Permanent
Observer Mission of Palestine to the United Nations,
which will be issued as document S/2008/794 and
which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council will invite the Permanent
Observer of Palestine to the United Nations to
participate in the meeting of the Security Council
which will be held on Thursday, 18 December
2008, regarding the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question.”
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting, in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.

2

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Robert Serry,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Serry to take a seat at the Council
table.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 15 December 2008 from His
Excellency Mr. Paul Badji, Permanent Representative
of Senegal, in which he requests to be invited, in his
capacity as Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. If I hear no objection, I shall take it
that the Security Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Paul Badji.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Badji to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General. I now give
Mr. Serry the floor.
Mr. Serry: I am honoured to brief the Council
two days after the adoption of resolution 1850 (2008).
The Secretary-General welcomes this timely and
important resolution, which embodies the principles on
which Israeli-Palestinian peace must rest. The
resolution came a day after the Quartet affirmed the
need to intensify the political process and address acute
challenges on the ground. The Secretary-General also
chaired a meeting of the Quartet with members and

08-65913

S/PV.6049

representatives of the League of Arab States in a
framework of collaboration that is essential to the
search for peace in the region. The international
community has sent a clear and united message of its
commitment to the irreversibility of the process leading
to the creation of a Palestinian State living in peace
alongside a secure Israel.
Preparations for the Israeli general election
scheduled for 10 February 2009 have continued, with
many political parties holding primaries. A new United
States administration takes office on 20 January. There
are also internal challenges on the Palestinian side. We
are therefore in a period of transition. The immediate
priority is to sustain the process during transition by
building a solid bridge to carry us through the fragile
period ahead. In this regard, a priority must be to
ensure calm in and around Gaza and to urgently
improve humanitarian conditions. The decision of the
Arab League to ensure no vacuum on the Palestinian
side, support the legitimate Palestinian Government
and pursue Palestinian unity demands support. It is
critically important to pursue specific action items to
continue improving conditions on the ground in the
West Bank. We must protect, preserve and, where
possible, advance the three tracks of the Annapolis
process — negotiations, institution-building and
phase 1 Road Map implementation — and set the stage
for a decisive push for peace in 2009.
Let me turn first to the situation in and around
Gaza. Six months ago today, a tahdiya, or calm,
brokered by Egypt came into effect. After a period in
which civilian casualties had reached alarming
proportions, Palestinians and Israelis enjoyed a respite
from daily terror and violence, and many civilian lives
were doubtless saved.
But for the past six weeks, this calm has been
gravely challenged. Since Mr. Pascoe briefed the
Council on 25 November, a further four Palestinians,
including two children, have been killed in Gaza and
18 others have been injured. Eight Israeli soldiers and
four civilians have been injured by rocket and mortar
attacks, more than 130 of which, including 30 in the
past two days, were fired from Gaza towards Israeli
towns and at the crossings through which civilians,
United Nations and other humanitarian workers and all
goods entering the Strip must pass. We condemn rocket
attacks and call for their immediate cessation.

08-65913

Egyptian efforts to secure the preservation and
extension of the calm are continuing. Through ongoing
contacts in Cairo, Israel and Gaza, we are strongly
supporting these efforts. There have been heightened
rhetoric and continued violence in recent days, with an
increase in rocket-firing and a resumption of Israeli air
strikes. I am extremely concerned by statements from
Hamas that the calm expires today and questioning its
renewal. A major escalation of violence would have
grave consequences for the protection of civilians in
Israel and Gaza, the welfare of the Gazan civilian
population, and the sustainability of political efforts.
On behalf of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, I make
today a direct and urgent appeal for the calm to be
respected and extended.
I also strongly appeal for basic humanitarian
principles to be continuously observed. During the
reporting period, access has been restricted for goods
coming into the Strip, as well as for diplomats, United
Nations staff and humanitarian workers and
international press. Between 23 November and
17 December, 614 truckloads of supplies entered
Gaza — a daily average of 29. The daily average in
October was 123, and in May last year it was 475.
Small amounts of supplies have been brought into
Gaza by sea.
The unprecedented level of closure of crossing
points into Gaza has caused unacceptable hardship to
the civilian population. As of today, the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) has had again to suspend, for the
time being, all food distributions. Price increases have
resulted in Gazans now spending approximately two
thirds of their income on food. There are also reported
shortages of some food items, as well as cooking gas.
Limitations on cash allowed into Gaza have left
beneficiaries of humanitarian organizations, Palestinian
Authority employees and pensioners unable to collect
salaries, pensions and welfare payments, and forced
UNRWA to suspend cash assistance to 94,000
beneficiaries. A one-time transfer of 100 million new
Israeli shekels has alleviated this crisis for now, but as
stressed in a recent letter from Quartet Representative
Blair and the Presidents of the International Monetary
Fund and the World Bank, a predictable mechanism for
the transfer of cash is required.
Reductions in the import of fuel have resulted in
regular power outages across Gaza. Half of Gaza City’s
population receives water only once a week for a few

3

S/PV.6049

hours, and other areas of Gaza receive water for a few
hours on alternating days. United Nations projects
worth over $150 million, including six priority projects
identified by the Secretary-General in May, remain
suspended due to a lack of materials.
The Secretary-General outlined his concerns on
conditions in Gaza in a letter delivered to his Quartet
colleagues last week. We welcome the call of the
Quartet for the provision of humanitarian supplies —
including food, fuel, pharmaceuticals, water and
sewage maintenance items — to the people in Gaza to
be assured continuously. The Quartet also reiterated its
previous call for Israel to allow into Gaza sufficient
materials to facilitate the resumption of stalled United
Nations and other donor projects. We continue to seek
more effective communication and cooperation with
the Government of Israel to ensure that the United
Nations is able to execute its mandated programmes to
the civilian population.
We also reiterate the call of the Quartet for the
immediate release of Corporal Shalit. No progress has
been reported on efforts to secure his release in
exchange for Palestinian prisoner releases, and the
International Committee of the Red Cross has not been
granted access to him during his 28 months in
captivity.
No Muslim pilgrims from Gaza were able to
attend the hajj in Mecca prior to the Eid al-Adha
holiday this year as a result of internal Palestinian
divisions. The Palestinian Authority secured visas for
some 3,000 pilgrims, but Hamas denied their exit
through Rafah crossing.
I have detailed the security, humanitarian and
development dimensions of the Gaza crisis, but it is
also a deep political crisis, threatening the unified basis
on which a future Palestinian State, and the two-State
solution itself, must rest.
Last Sunday, on the occasion of the twenty-first
anniversary of Hamas, Hamas leader Haniyeh
challenged the continuation in office of President
Abbas pending a resolution of the internal divide.
While calling for Palestinian reunification, he did so on
a basis that rejected agreements signed and
commitments undertaken by the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO). President Abbas has publicly
raised the possibility of calling elections if
reconciliation is not achieved.

4

When foreign ministers of the League of Arab
States met in Cairo on 26 November in Cairo, they
called on President Abbas to continue his mandate until
such time as Palestinian reconciliation is possible and
presidential and legislative elections can be held
simultaneously in both the Gaza Strip and the West
Bank. They affirmed basic terms for such reunification
and their continued support for efforts to achieve it, so
as to reunite Gaza and the West Bank within the
framework of the legitimate Palestinian Authority.
The Quartet noted that position when it met on
Monday, reaffirming its well-known principles and
stressing that restoring Palestinian unity, based on the
commitments of the PLO, would be an important step
forward. Security Council resolution 1850 (2008) did
likewise. I urge Hamas to respond positively to those
exhortations. It cannot be in the interests of the
Palestinian people for essential cornerstones of
Palestinian legitimacy and national aspirations to be
challenged.
I now turn to the situation in the West Bank,
where, during the reporting period, two Palestinian
militants were killed and 79 civilians injured in Israel
Defense Force and settler violence. Most of those
injuries
were
incurred
during
anti-barrier
demonstrations. Despite the adversities on the ground,
the efforts of the Palestinian Authority, together with
unprecedented donor support and improved IsraeliPalestinian security cooperation, are enhancing
security and creating prospects for economic
improvements. I continue to work closely with Prime
Minister Fayyad to support those efforts of Palestinian
self-empowerment and to promote further-reaching
measures by the Israelis to enable those efforts, so as to
produce a paradigm shift on the ground.
Palestinian Authority security forces continue
their efforts to impose law and order and meet the
Road Map commitments on security throughout the
West Bank. Efforts are continuing in Jenin and Nablus,
forces were deployed in Hebron several weeks ago and
deployment in Bethlehem has begun ahead of the
Christmas celebrations.
Despite the 620 obstacles to movement and
access that remain across the West Bank, an easing of
restrictions around the Nablus area was instituted on
7 December. We strongly encourage further steps to
ease movement and access, given the significant
improvements in security on the ground. We also

08-65913

S/PV.6049

welcome the release on 15 December of 227
Palestinian prisoners as a gesture to President Abbas.
Between 27 and 29 November, a trade fair took
place in Jenin, attended by approximately 200,000
Palestinians. Around 4,500 Palestinian citizens of
Israel came to Jenin on that occasion — the largest
such influx to Jenin for over seven years. An
investment conference in London on 15 December,
hosted by Prime Minister Gordon Brown and attended
by Prime Minister Fayyad, Quartet Representative
Blair and Palestinian and international business people,
showcased new business partnerships formed since the
Bethlehem Investment Conference in May, and forged
more such partnerships.
The Palestinian Authority has finalized and
presented its budget for 2009, which foresees
continued fiscal adjustment and reforms and envisages
a shift in expenditure from recurrent items towards
development projects, especially community projects.
There is an urgent need to secure adequate and
predictable financing from donors to finance the
recurrent deficit for 2009.
The overall challenge is to take the incremental
steps that have been implemented, intensify and
multiply them and make them transformative. One key
element is further action to implement the measures of
Quartet Representative Blair, including full observance
of the moratorium on house demolitions, additional
steps in the northern West Bank, further removal of
specified movement restrictions, actions to build
confidence in East Jerusalem, and further measures in
Area C.
Another key element is action on the Road Map
commitments. In the reporting period, illegal Israeli
settlement activity continued in the majority of
settlements in East Jerusalem and the rest of the West
Bank, and Palestinian institutions in East Jerusalem
remain closed. Contrary to the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice, construction of the
barrier continues in deviation from the Green Line
within occupied Palestinian territory.
We continue to call on Israel to implement its
Road Map commitments. We urge any new Israeli
Government to decisively address the question of
settlement expansion, which threatens the two-State
solution itself. Israel must also refrain from unilateral
actions in Jerusalem that alter the status quo or
undermine trust.

08-65913

We welcome the evacuation by Israeli security
forces of settlers from a house in Hebron on
4 December. We urge further action by Israel to remove
settler outposts in accordance with the Road Map and
address the growing threat of settler extremism. That
threat was made clear in the aftermath of the
evacuation in Hebron, when settlers and their
supporters rioted through areas of the city under
Israeli, and later Palestinian, security control, attacking
Palestinian civilians, torching and damaging cars,
houses and public buildings, desecrating mosques and
graves and uprooting olive trees. We unequivocally
condemn that violence, in which 14 Palestinians were
injured. I welcome the reaction of the Security Council
on that issue and remind Israel of its obligation to
protect the civilian Palestinian population under
occupation.
I was in contact myself with the governor of
Hebron and the Israeli authorities during the crisis to
support efforts to end the violence. I commend the
restraint of Palestinian Authority security forces and
the efforts made by the parties to ensure that that
incident was contained, and I note the forceful
denunciation of the settler attacks by Israeli Prime
Minister Olmert.
I turn now to the search for regional stability and
peace, on which I have held consultations in
Damascus, Amman and Cairo during the reporting
period. No further rounds of indirect Israeli-Syrian
talks have taken place, but we look forward to their
continuation and intensification. The situation in the
occupied Syrian Golan remains quiet, but Israeli
settlement activity continues.
Important efforts to promote comprehensive
regional peace were made in the reporting period,
including a joint letter from Prince Saud Al-Faisal of
Saudi Arabia and the Secretary-General of the League
of Arab States, Amre Moussa, to United States
President-elect Obama, underscoring the commitment
of the Arab world to the comprehensive proposal made
in the Arab Peace Initiative.
In Lebanon, the situation has been relatively quiet
during this past month. The various initiatives taken by
political leaders at national and local levels to bring a
measure of stability to the country have, in general
terms, continued to hold. Nevertheless, a limited
number of isolated security incidents took place

5

S/PV.6049

throughout the country, all of which were contained
without sparking further violence.
On 11 December, Lebanon and Syria exchanged
official documents on the locations of their future
respective embassies in Damascus and Beirut. Visits by
Lebanese officials and party leaders to Syria have
continued. On 10 November, the Lebanese Interior
Minister held talks with his Syrian counterpart in
Damascus on matters of security coordination. The two
Ministers agreed to establish a committee to follow up
and coordinate security issues between the two
countries. On 28 November, Lebanese Army
commander, General Kahwaji, paid a visit to Syria and
discussed cooperation between the armies of both
countries with his counterpart and with President
Assad. Lebanese Member of Parliament Michel Aoun,
leader of the Free Patriotic Movement, went on a fiveday visit to Syria.
As called for by the election law adopted earlier
this year, the 10 members of the Election Campaign
Supervisory Commission, charged with ensuring
compliance with regulatory provisions on campaign
spending and media coverage, were appointed during a
cabinet session on 13 December. In the context of the
run-up to the 2009 legislative elections, prominent
Lebanese political leaders have continued reaching out
to one another in an effort to ease tensions. For
example, on 27 October, a meeting took place between
the leader of the majority bloc, Member of Parliament
Saad Hariri, and the Secretary-General of Hezbollah
for the first time in 30 months.
While rubble removal and reconstruction in the
Palestinian refugee camp of Nahr el-Bared continue,
underfunding of the current appeals for relief of the
displaced and for reconstruction of the camp remains a
serious concern. Recent pledges include $1 million
from the United Nations Central Emergency Response
Fund.
The situation in the area of operations of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
has been generally quiet during the past month.
UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces have
continued coordinated operational activities throughout
the area south of the Litani River. Israeli air violations
continued during the past month.
To conclude, after nearly a year as the SecretaryGeneral’s envoy based in Jerusalem, I and my team at
the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator

6

for the Middle East Peace Process continue to actively
pursue contacts with the parties in the region and with
Quartet colleagues, in order to contain crises and find
solutions to immediate concerns on the ground,
particularly in Gaza. We are continuing to promote
compliance with commitments and obligations, support
dialogue and negotiations on the core issues, and
advance the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515
(2003) and, now, 1850 (2008).
An important platform for peace has been
established in 2008 thanks to the efforts of the parties
and the support of the international community. The
challenge now is to build on that platform and turn the
promise of peace into reality. I am convinced that that
can, and must, be done. The diplomatic process and
improvements on the ground must reinforce each other
and move swiftly forward. A comprehensive peace in
the region, with an end of occupation and the creation
of a Palestinian State living at peace with Israel at its
heart, is possible, necessary and urgent.
The President: I thank Mr. Serry for his briefing.
In accordance, with the understanding reached
among Council members, I should like to remind all
speakers to limit their statements to no more than five
minutes, in order to enable the Council to carry out its
work expeditiously. Speakers with lengthy statements
are kindly requested to circulate their texts in the
Chamber and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I would like to
reiterate our thanks to you, Mr. President, for your able
stewardship of the Security Council this month. I
should also like to express our appreciation to
Mr. Robert Serry for his comprehensive briefing to the
Council. As we approach the end of 2008, I would like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute and bid farewell
to the outgoing members of the Council. We would like
to express our deepest appreciation for their tireless
efforts and immense contributions to maintaining and
strengthening international peace and security.
We come before the Security Council two days
after adoption of resolution 1850 (2008), the first
resolution adopted by the Council with regard to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict in more than four and half

08-65913

S/PV.6049

years despite the many serious issues and crises that
have arisen in that period requiring the Council’s
urgent attention and action. The Council’s inability to
pronounce itself on the situation has prevented it from
playing its rightful role under the Charter to address an
issue of central relevance to the maintenance of
international peace and security, thereby harming its
credibility and depriving us of its contribution, to the
detriment of our collective efforts to achieve peace.
The Security Council’s efforts to address current
developments — including the intensification of illegal
Israeli settlements, the frustration of attempts to deliver
humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian population in
the besieged Gaza Strip, the rise of settler violence in
the occupied Palestinian territory and the status of the
Israeli-Palestinian peace process — are therefore
welcome and signal the Council’s reassertion of its
authority and its intention to play a more active role in
advancing a peaceful settlement.
We have always appealed for the Security
Council’s engagement and called upon it to shoulder its
responsibilities. Therefore, despite serious misgivings
about the exclusionary process and limited scope, we
welcome the adoption of resolution 1850 (2008).
Moreover, we again urge the Council not only to
remain seized of the matter but to actively follow up
and implement its relevant resolutions, including
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515
(2003) and now 1850 (2008), in order to contribute
tangibly to the achievement of a two-State solution that
includes a sovereign, independent, contiguous and
viable State of Palestine living side by side with Israel
in peace and security on the basis of the 1967 borders.
That must remain among the Council’s priorities for a
just resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that
most benefits the Palestinian and Israeli peoples. It will
also vastly enhance the prospects for regional and
international peace and stability.
In that regard, we join Arab ministers, the Quartet
and the many Council members who have emphasized
the importance of the Arab Peace Initiative and of
seizing the historic opportunity it provides to make
peace and coexistence a reality in our region. Along
with the resolutions of the Security Council and the
Madrid principles, which constitute the basis of the
peace process, the Initiative and the Road Map are
integral to the Annapolis process, which has received
wide international support and whose irreversibility the
Council has affirmed. All efforts and practical

08-65913

measures must be exerted to advance that process in a
way that justly resolves all core issues — including
those of Jerusalem, borders, Palestinian refugees,
settlements, water, security and prisoners — and leads
to the conclusion of a peace treaty and the end of
decades of our people’s statelessness, occupation and
suffering.
The Palestinian people, under the leadership of
their sole legitimate representative, the Palestine
Liberation Organization, remain determined to achieve
justice and to live in peace and security in their
homeland, side by side with their neighbours. Indeed,
since the declaration of independence 20 years ago, the
Palestinian leadership has consistently reaffirmed its
commitment to negotiations aimed at ending the Israeli
occupation that began in 1967 and achieving the twoState solution for peace. Accordingly, the Palestinian
Authority has upheld its obligations in good faith under
all agreements reached and made every possible effort
to fulfil its Road Map and Annapolis commitments.
We all know what is needed to make peace, and
yet peace has for too long eluded us. Any impartial
examination of the situation on the ground in the
occupied Palestinian territory and of the peace process
in the past year leads us to the same conclusion.
Despite the high hopes and momentum generated by
the Annapolis Conference and despite some progress in
certain areas, the situation has continued to deteriorate
and minimal progress has been made towards peace.
Once again, the intertwined and mutually reinforcing
nature of the process and developments on the ground
has been harshly confirmed. Negative developments on
the ground have continued to undermine efforts to
advance the peace process. At the same time, the
failure to adhere to peace process commitments and to
undertake steps for building confidence and improving
the situation on the ground have continued to intensify
tensions and exacerbate already difficult conditions.
As we reflect on that reality, it is incumbent upon
us to ask the following questions. Why — despite the
international presence and the promises of Annapolis,
despite United States leadership, despite commitments
made and despite reaffirmation of the Arab Peace
Initiative and the various efforts exerted to support the
peace process — have we been unable to make the
required progress? What has happened in the year since
Annapolis that has prevented us from concluding a
peace treaty by the target date of the end of this year,
as we were promised?

7

S/PV.6049

We need a moment of truth, a reality check and
serious answers. Only that will enable us to pinpoint
what has gone wrong and to determine what needs to
be done henceforth to avoid the pitfalls, repeated
failures and deterioration of the past and to put the
process on an accelerated track towards the
achievement of its stated goals.
In that connection, we agreed to the Quartet
proposal for United States supervision and monitoring
of the process and developments on the ground. It is
our understanding that a report has in fact been
prepared by United States General Fraser, yet we have
not seen it. We believe that, at a minimum, it should be
shared with the Quartet and the Council, not for the
purpose of pointing fingers or blaming anyone but in
order to know what the obstacles before us are so that
they can be removed from the path of the process. The
following must be determined. First, who is upholding
his obligations and who is not? Secondly, what needs
to be done to create appropriate conditions on the
ground and between the parties to advance the process
towards the attainment of the two-State solution based
on United Nations resolutions, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Road Map.
While we continue to await such a report, we are,
of course, all aware of what has transpired in the year
since Annapolis. Despite the commitments made, the
repeated calls of the Quartet and its very clear
obligations under international law, Israel, the
occupying Power, continues to behave on the ground as
if there were no peace process and no prior agreements
reached and as though it were immune from the laws
that govern international relations, including situations
of foreign occupation.
Even as the international community revelled in
the high of Annapolis, Israel continued its deviant
behaviour, persisting with its illegal policies against
the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. However, the
Security Council and the Quartet have remained
incapable of or unwilling to act to bring an end to such
Israeli policies and to constructively support the parties
in doing what must be done to truly achieve peace.
In the run-up to Annapolis and continuously
thereafter, Israel persisted in tightening its siege of the
Gaza Strip, in massive collective punishment of the
Palestinian civilians there, and continued, particularly
in early 2008, to use excessive force against the

8

population, deepening the tragic humanitarian situation
in Gaza. Here, we repeat that there is no justification
whatsoever for such illegal collective punishment of a
people.
We have appealed to the Council on several
occasions to act to compel Israel to cease its military
attacks, ensure protection of the civilian population and
cease the illegal, punitive measures by which it is
deliberately causing a human catastrophe in the Gaza
Strip. This has included repeated calls for the opening
of the border crossings and implementation of the
Agreement on Movement and Access. But the
international community has only been able to provide
desperately needed humanitarian assistance, which the
occupying Power also continues to obstruct with
impunity, and has failed to act decisively on the
political front to address this crisis and bring Israel into
compliance with its obligations under international law,
including humanitarian and human rights law.
Immediately after Annapolis, it was also revealed
that Israel was pressing on with its colonization
campaign, in grave breach of the Fourth Geneva
Convention. Indeed, contrary to United Nations
resolutions and the commitments made at Annapolis
and despite repeated calls by the Quartet for respect of
the Road Map obligation to freeze settlements and
dismantle outposts, Israel has done the exact opposite,
escalating the construction and expansion of
settlements and the wall, particularly in East
Jerusalem.
This obviously requires a concrete response by
the Quartet, which should put in place a mechanism to
bring Israel into compliance with the call to freeze all
settlement activities, including natural growth. The
inability to do so has sent the wrong message to the
occupying Power, on the one hand allowing it to
intensify settlement activities and on the other
providing fertile ground for the escalation of settler
terror, violence, harassment and intimidation against
Palestinian civilians and properties, as recently
witnessed in the appalling recent events in Al-Khalil.
Another area where the absence of such a
mechanism has undermined the process is the issue of
the checkpoints and movement and access restrictions.
Despite the Annapolis commitments and the Quartet’s
numerous calls for the easing of movement and access,
we have witnessed an intensification of Israeli
restrictions under the pretext of security, with an

08-65913

S/PV.6049

increase of at least 100 more obstacles in the West
Bank and the isolation of East Jerusalem in particular.
Paradoxically, this has occurred at the very same time
that reports from all concerned parties are praising
Palestinian Authority efforts to promote law and order,
particularly in cities like Jenin, in fulfilment of our
obligations and underscoring the importance and
benefits of such progress and cooperation on the
security front. Also, even as this cooperation continues,
Israel is still carrying out raids and arrests, which
undermine our efforts and which, despite the recent
release of some prisoners, ensures the continued
imprisonment of at least 11,000 Palestinians.
On the ground, all of this has resulted in further
fragmentation of the occupied Palestinian territory, the
imposition of deeper socio-economic deprivation on
the Palestinian people, the heightening of frustrations
and tensions, and a weakening of hope and belief in the
peace process.
With the persistence of such complexities and
behaviour completely contradictory to that required for
a just resolution, it is imperative to ask: how can we
bring the peace process to a successful conclusion in
the year 2009? We believe that that the responsibility
falls upon the Quartet and the Security Council to
devise a practical mechanism to address these issues in
a situation where one party repeatedly fails to respond
to calls and to fulfil its obligations, miring us in a
cyclical process with no end in sight. Such a
mechanism is necessary to help us overcome the
current obstacles and stagnation, avoid the same
mistakes and deterioration, and allow the peace process
to advance to a successful conclusion.
We have tried to be constructive by identifying
what has prevented us from achieving a peace treaty in
2008 and by calling for serious efforts to address the
issues that have repeatedly hampered the peace
process. This will be the greatest contribution in
support of the peace process and to assisting the parties
to advance their ongoing bilateral negotiations. This is
what we believe will enhance our chances for avoiding
the disappointment, failure and despair that the
continuation of this conflict would bring and for finally
realizing peace in 2009.
Thus, even during the current transitional period,
while we maintain our high expectations and hopes for
the Annapolis process, we expect the Security Council
and the Quartet to uphold their responsibilities and to

08-65913

exert the needed practical measures to ensure that
obligations are met and that the parties refrain from
any steps undermining confidence or prejudicing the
outcome of negotiations.
In this regard, we reiterate our hope that the
ceasefire will continue to be upheld and will be
extended to the West Bank. Moreover, we express
appreciation to our Egyptian brothers and also for the
most recent Arab ministerial meeting for the efforts
exerted to help us achieve Palestinian reconciliation.
We will continue to work cooperatively with our
Egyptian brothers to regain Palestinian national unity
in all its aspects, a goal that is so essential for our just
cause.
In conclusion, I express our deep hope that 2009
will indeed be the year in which we bring an end to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the tragedy of our
peoples with the achievement of a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace, the cornerstone of which is the
two-State solution. We look forward to the day when
the Palestinian people will exercise their inalienable
rights, including their right to self-determination; live
in freedom and dignity in their independent State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital; and when
we can together open a new chapter of peace, security
and coexistence in our region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Ms. Shalev (Israel): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your leadership of
the Council for this month, which has been demanding
and complicated. I also wish to thank Mr. Robert Serry
for his informative and important briefing.
As we approach the end of 2008, we look back on
a year that has witnessed substantial progress in the
framework of the Annapolis process. In fact, this year
has been a most constructive year for the peace
process.
Allow me to begin by congratulating the Security
Council on its adoption of resolution 1850 (2008) just
two days ago. This resolution expresses unequivocal
support for the direct bilateral negotiations between
Israel and the Palestinians in the framework of the
Annapolis process. According to the principles agreed
by the parties themselves and presented to the Quartet,
any agreement will be subject to implementation of the

9

S/PV.6049

Road Map, first and foremost to the principle requiring
the dismantling of the terrorist infrastructure.
Further, resolution 1850 (2008) includes
additional important principles. The resolution
endorses — for the first time — the three Quartet
principles as the basis for international legitimacy and
support for any Palestinian Government. In so doing,
the international community has delivered a clear
message to Hamas in Gaza.
The resolution supports the moderate elements in
the region. We must not let radicals in the region hijack
the agenda for their extremist purposes. The resolution
rightly notes that lasting peace can only be based on
ending terror and incitement and on a commitment to
the two-State solution. Additionally, resolution 1850
(2008) calls for the States of the Middle East to create
an environment conducive to bilateral negotiations.
That includes promoting mutual recognition and
peaceful coexistence in the region, in parallel with
progress in the bilateral process.
The real test now lies with the parties on the
ground. Let us not forget that Israel is operating on two
major tracks. On the one hand, Israel is trying to
promote peace with the moderate, responsible
leadership on the Palestinian side. On the other hand,
Israel is fighting the extremist Hamas terrorist
organization in the Gaza Strip.
In spite of the efforts by those who promote
incitement, fear and terror, Israelis and Palestinians in
the region have demonstrated increasing courage
during the past twelve months of negotiations. These
negotiations have resulted in important changes on the
ground.
Let me mention several key developments. There
exists growing cooperation between Israeli and
Palestinian security forces. In this regard, Israel has
facilitated the deployment of Palestinian police forces
in Jenin and the area around Hebron, as well as the
opening of 20 additional Palestinian police stations.
The city of Jenin — once a breeding ground for suicide
terrorism — is now a model for security cooperation in
the West Bank.
That progress is important but must be considered
in the wider context of the capacity-building of the
Palestinian security forces. The United States, the
European Union, and certain Arab States play an
important role in this regard. In the past year alone,

10

Palestinian wages in the West Bank have increased
almost 25 per cent; trade and commerce between Israel
and the West Bank have jumped 35 per cent.
All of these developments are important.
However, much work remains to be done to build the
effective Palestinian capacity to fully implement
Palestinian responsibilities. Ongoing terrorist activity
in the West Bank remains a threat to Israel and requires
us to act accordingly.
Israel remains committed to doing its part to
create a positive environment on the ground, one that
encourages moderates in the region. In honour of Eid
al-Adha and as a confidence-building measure towards
the Palestinian Authority and its leadership —
Mahmoud Abbas and Salam Fayyad — the Israeli
Government has released, this week, 230 convicted
Palestinian prisoners.
Through this latest gesture, Israel seeks to
intensify its continuing dialogue with partners who are
both committed to negotiations and diplomacy and
opposed to terrorism. But confidence-building
measures by Israel must be met by the Palestinians, as
well as by the wider Arab world. The Arab world has a
responsibility, namely, to engage in measures that will
facilitate the negotiations between the parties,
including a clear message against any incitement of
and support for terrorism.
While the efforts of Israel and the Palestinian
Authority
have
led
to
some
important
accomplishments, serious and dangerous challenges
and obstacles remain. This month has witnessed yet
another onslaught of rockets and mortars fired at
civilians in Israeli towns and cities. This year my
country has been the target of a record number of
attacks; over 2,900 rockets and mortars were fired from
the Gaza Strip into Israel. The same day on which the
Security Council adopted resolution 1850 (2008), 11
rockets were fired at Israel. Yesterday alone, 25 rockets
were fired from Gaza into Israel, one of which landed
at the entrance of a busy supermarket.
The incessant attacks by Hamas also target border
crossings, fuel depots and other vital routes that
normally enable the flow of goods and humanitarian
aid into the Gaza Strip. Nevertheless, Israel
acknowledges the need to provide humanitarian aid to
the Gaza Strip, and we do our utmost to facilitate the
work of the international community.

08-65913

S/PV.6049

At this very moment, Corporal Gilad Shalit has
remained in Hamas captivity for 910 days and nights.
As a human being and as a mother, I was appalled to
hear about a rally that took place in the centre of Gaza
City celebrating 21 years of the establishment of
Hamas. 150,000 people gathered and cheered for a
show that mocked the misery of Gilad Shalit, the
suffering of his family and the compassion of the
people of Israel and people around the world. We
expect the international community to do its utmost to
bring Gilad Shalit home safely.
The Hamas terrorists of Gaza who relentlessly
attack Israel do not act alone. Iran remains the
epicentre of Hamas’ ongoing terrorist work. Iran, like
Syria, actively trains, funds, and equips Hamas, as well
as Hizbullah to our north, and many other radicals in
the region. Israel also remains deeply concerned by the
rearmament and redeployment of Hizbullah in
Lebanon — both north and south of the Litani River —
in violation of relevant Security Council resolutions.
Israel is fully committed to the peace process. We
hope that 2009 will enable us to further the cause of
peace in our region. Peace remains the salient goal for
the State of Israel. To all of my colleagues at the
United Nations, I would like to offer my delegation’s
sincere wishes for the holiday season and a fruitful
New Year.
Mr. Sawers (United Kingdom): My delegation
thanks the Special Coordinator for his briefing today.
We listened very carefully to the very full contributions
from Ambassadors Mansour and Shalev, and I thank
them for their statements.
This debate comes very soon after the Security
Council discussions on Tuesday. Today is an
opportunity to hear the views of the parties and other
Member States, as we ourselves made clear in the
earlier Council debate. But, let me begin, as others
have, by welcoming the adoption of resolution 1850
(2008).
Since the last ministerial meeting to discuss the
Middle East last summer, we have seen momentum
steadily build towards a greater Security Council role
in the Middle East peace process. Resolution 1850
(2008) is an important milestone in a series of
resolutions, including 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397
(2002) and 1515 (2003). Taken together, these
resolutions set out the goals of the peace and the
framework for the peace process. Resolution 1850

08-65913

(2008) serves to underline the key points that we
believe are essential for progress towards a lasting
settlement.
First, let me stress the importance of building on
the current negotiations, including both the IsraelPalestine and the Israel-Syria tracks. Secondly, both
parties need to fill their commitments under the Road
Map. For Israel, this means taking action to freeze
settlement building and improving conditions for
Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza. For
Palestinians, it means finding a way to reunite around
negotiations and non-violence, with Hamas ceasing
their rocket attacks and moving towards the Quartet
principles.
Thirdly, it sets out the need for a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace, with all States in the region and
the wider international community working to build an
atmosphere conducive to the negotiations. We welcome
the specific reference in the resolution to the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Arab engagement on the peace
process that lies behind that initiative. As Foreign
Secretary Miliband said in his intervention on Tuesday,
resolving the Middle East conflict will require more
than a two-State solution; it will require Israel and all
Arab States to live side by side in security.
The Security Council resolution follows the
recent and highly significant letter from the Arab
League to President-elect Obama calling for a
comprehensive solution to the Middle East peace
process and signalling the willingness of the Arab
world to work with the new United States
Administration on this issue. And the resolution also
follows the European Council declaration made on 12
December setting out strong European Union support
for and participation in the efforts to achieve a
negotiated
solution.
Taken
together,
those
developments give us momentum to make real progress
in 2009 and we look forward to an early commitment
from the next United States Administration to
sustaining the peace process from the start of its term
in office.
The political process is inseparable from the
situation on the ground. We welcome the emphasis that
resolution 1850 (2008) gives to the development of
Palestinian capacity and the development of the
institutions of a Palestinian State. The United
Kingdom, along with the European Union, continues to
support the Palestinian Authority in improving its

11

S/PV.6049

security forces and in building up its economy, both of
which we believe will lead in time to better security for
Israel and a lessening of tensions.
Insecurity in the wider Middle East region, not
least the activities of Iran, makes the need for progress
in peace negotiations between Israel and its neighbours
ever more urgent. The United Kingdom supports the
statement made by the Quartet this week and their
continued work in engaging with the parties and
galvanizing the international community. The United
Kingdom will continue to work closely with those in
the region and beyond to reinforce the peace process
and we will work within the Security Council to build
on the authority and direction that the Council
engagement has given and will continue to give to the
peace process.
Mr. Mantovani (Italy): I would like first of all to
thank Special Coordinator Serry for his very
informative briefing today and to acknowledge the
presence here with us of the Permanent Observer of
Palestine, Ambassador Mansour, and of the Permanent
Representative of Israel, Ambassador Shalev. I also
wish to align my statement with the one that will be
delivered by France on behalf of the European Union
later on.
Italy welcomes the landmark adoption of
resolution 1850 (2008) last Tuesday. We commend the
United States and the Russian Federation for their
leadership, and we are fully aware of the importance of
the strong message of support to the negotiation
process that has come from this Council. Resolution
1850 (2008) gives a key message: the Annapolis
Process is irreversible; there is no way back. It is
absolutely essential that a comprehensive agreement be
reached in the form of a peace treaty to be
implemented without further negotiations based on the
Road Map principles.
We devoted our statement on Tuesday to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Therefore, I will not repeat
what I said on that occasion regarding the situation on
the ground. I should like only to recall our belief in the
importance of supporting and promoting a constructive
approach by all the States of the region to every track
of the peace process and to underline in this context the
great potential of the Arab League’s Peace Initiative.
I will now turn to Lebanon. We are pleased with
the encouraging developments in the national
reconciliation process in Lebanon. We are aware,

12

however, that the country’s stability is still fragile
owing to the ongoing security problems and a
substantial lack of progress in fostering reconciliation
between the Christian factions. The upcoming elections
are thus a crucial step in the process of stabilizing
Lebanese democracy. It is our hope that they will take
place in the framework of a peaceful and democratic
electoral campaign. The presence of electoral observers
could help to reduce tensions and assure the proper
conduct of both the pre-electoral phase and the
elections. Italy is ready to contribute to a possible
European mission, should one be requesting by all the
Lebanese political forces and receive unanimous
agreement from the Siniora Government.
Italy reiterates its hope that the pending territorial
issues between Israel and Lebanon will be solved
promptly. In this context, it is particularly urgent that
Israel withdraw from the northern part of the village of
Gajar, so as to end the ongoing tensions in the area and
improve Israeli-Lebanese political relations, which is a
prerequisite for constructively tackling the remaining
open issues between the two countries. We thus believe
it necessary for the plan outlined by the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) to be implemented
as quickly as possible. We encourage both sides to
continue cooperating with UNIFIL in the framework of
the tripartite mechanism so as to solve problems on the
ground, prevent incidents and proceed with the
demarcation of the Blue Line. Italy will continue to
contribute its contingent to UNIFIL to ensure the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) and the
maintenance of the ceasefire. We believe that the
presence of UNIFIL remains decisive for the stability
of Lebanon and the security of Israel.
We also hope that Syria will formally recognize
Lebanon’s sovereignty over the Sheba’a Farms area by
providing written confirmation in response to the
Secretary-General’s request. We also hope that Syria
and Lebanon will quickly follow up on their
commitments by exchanging ambassadors and
demarking their shared borders so as to place the
newly-established relations between the two countries
on a sound footing in a manner based on mutual
respect for independence and sovereignty.
Mr. Wolff (United States of America): I would
like to join others in thanking Special Coordinator
Serry for his detailed briefing on the situation in the
Middle East today.

08-65913

S/PV.6049

I would like to make two main points regarding
our discussions. First, we welcome the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1850 (2008). It is a
positive and forward-looking document that has put the
Security Council and the international community on
record as confirming the irreversibility of the bilateral
negotiations and endorsing the parties’ efforts to
achieve an agreement. As the Quartet stated on
15 December, a lasting peace will results from the
parties’ mutually reinforcing efforts on the political
track in building the institutions of the Palestinian
State, improving conditions on the ground and in
implementing their Road Map obligations. The
resolution reiterates the importance of fulfilling those
obligations and stresses that neither party should
undertake any activity that contravenes those Road
Map obligations or prejudices the final status
negotiation. The United States has made very clear its
view on settlement activity and on the Palestinian
Authority’s obligation to dismantle the infrastructure of
terror in its territories, reform security services and end
incitement.
On 15 December, the Quartet called for
negotiations to be intensified in order to put an end to
the conflict and to establish as soon as possible the
State of Palestine, living side by side in peace and
security with Israel. In parallel, the resolution
underlines that a solution to the conflict should be
aligned with efforts to achieve a broader regional peace
and notes the importance of the Arab Peace Initiative.
As Secretary of State Rice told the Council on
16 December, “as Arab States should reach out to
Israel, so should Israel reach out to Arab States”
(S/PV.6045).
The second point I would like to underscore
today is our continuing concern for the welfare of the
innocent people of Gaza and in the towns and cities of
southern Israel. As the Quartet made clear at its
meeting this week, a lasting solution to the situation in
Gaza can only be achieved through peaceful means.
Restoring Palestinian unity based on the commitments
of the Palestinian Liberation Organization, the
legitimate and internationally recognized representative
of the Palestinian people, to non-violence, recognition
of Israel and acceptance of previous commitments and
obligations are central to this process.
The Quartet, again in its 15 December statement,
expressed its concern that the Egyptian-brokered calm
in Gaza has been challenged, condemned the

08-65913

indiscriminate attacks against Israel and called for a
cessation of violence, including attacks against
commercial crossings that prevent the import of
humanitarian supplies and basic commodities without
which the people of Gaza will continue to suffer.
As the largest single-State contributor of aid to
the Palestinian people, the United States is deeply
committed to seeing through the delivery of
humanitarian aid. The United States calls for the
continuous provision of humanitarian supplies to the
people of Gaza.
Nonetheless, the Council should not lose sight of
the root cause of the current situation. While the vast
majority of the people of Gaza simply want to get on
with their lives, Hamas, which usurped control from
the legitimate Palestinian Authority, and other groups,
continue to instigate violence, launching more than 200
rocket and mortar attacks in the past two months
against Israel and humanitarian aid crossing points into
Gaza, as we heard earlier this morning from Mr. Serry.
The United States calls for an immediate and
permanent end to these attacks, which present an
ongoing threat to international peace and security. We
also call for the full dismantlement of the infrastructure
of terrorism, according to the agreed Road Map
obligations. The United States also calls for the
immediate release of Corporal Gilad Shalit.
Continuing progress in Jenin, and the successful
deployment of the Palestinian security services to
Hebron are strong counter-examples to the violence in
Gaza. These developments demonstrate that Israelis
and Palestinians can work together to advance the
cause of peace.
Finally, I would like to say just a short word on
Lebanon. Full implementation of Security Council
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006) is vital to a
peaceful and secure Lebanon. As with the
establishment of the Special Tribunal, under Security
Council resolution 1757 (2007), to try those
responsible for the assassination of former Lebanese
Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri and others, the United
States strongly supports the full implementation of
these resolutions. We also urge that additional funds be
pledged by Member States for years two and three of
the Special Tribunal which should become fully
functioning on 1 March 2009.

13

S/PV.6049

The Secretary-General’s latest report on
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006) clearly
expressed the importance of Hizbollah disarmament
and of ending arms smuggling across the LebaneseSyrian border. As the national dialogue in Lebanon
progresses, we look forward to continuing efforts to
implement these core elements of the resolutions.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I, too, would like to thank Mr. Serry for his briefing
and the representatives of Palestine and Israel for their
statements.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU) and would like to stress a few
major points with regard to the peace process.
First, we welcome the adoption on Tuesday of
resolution 1850 (2008), in which the Security Council
once again addressed the Israeli-Palestinian issue.
The European Union shares the belief reflected in
that resolution that the Israeli-Palestinian negotiation
process, which has been under way since the Annapolis
conference, is irreversible and must be given the
strongest possible support in order to conclude a
comprehensive peace agreement as soon as possible.
This agreement must provide for the creation of a
Palestinian State that includes the West Bank and Gaza
and is viable, independent, democratic and sovereign,
living in peace and security side by side with Israel
within secure and recognized borders, with Jerusalem
as the capital of both States.
To this effect, the European Union calls for interPalestinian reconciliation. To achieve this, we support
Egyptian mediation efforts and would support any
Government that respects the Palestinian Liberation
Organization’s commitments, would strongly support
peace negotiations with Israel and whose policy and
actions reflect the Quartet’s principles.
The second issue of major importance is that, like
its European Union partners, France subscribes to a
comprehensive approach to settling the Arab-Israeli
conflict, as reflected in the resolution. We welcome in
this regard the indirect peace talks between Israel and
Syria under the auspices of Turkey and encourage the
two parties to open direct talks.
We also welcome the Arab Peace Initiative,
which we believe provides a solid and relevant basis
for peace in the Middle East. It will also help us to
include the Syrian and Lebanese tracks in our thinking,

14

which we believe to be essential. In our view, the
initiative calls for a continued, broad and constructive
commitment from all parties involved.
However,
this
commitment
presupposes
strengthening mutual trust, which brings me to my
third point. There is only one path towards mutual
trust — quick and significant change on the ground, in
compliance with the commitments entered into under
the Road Map, the importance of which is quite rightly
reiterated in the resolution.
In this regard, the Palestinian Authority has made
major efforts with respect to security, governance and
rule of law, especially in Jenin, Nablus and Hebron. It
is clear that much remains to be done to stop terrorism
and violence, irrespective of the perpetrating party.
Nevertheless, the progress made by the Palestinian
Authority in terms of security is undeniable.
We believe that this progress calls for reciprocal
gestures from Israel, starting with the settlements issue.
Accordingly, the European Union recalls that it is
necessary and urgent to put an end to the settlements,
which includes natural expansion, as well as expansion
into East Jerusalem. Any other policy would damage
the credibility of the negotiators and prejudge the
outcome of the talks.
Restrictions on travel to and within the occupied
Palestinian territories must be lifted, mainly to
encourage economic development. The humanitarian
situation in Gaza requires radical improvement,
through the continuation of the truce, the reopening of
the crossings and the provision of goods and services
for the population.
The ability of the agencies responsible for
providing assistance, especially the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees in
the Near East, to do their jobs must be assured. Lastly,
it is important that as many Palestinian prisoners as
possible be released, with the initial priority given to
minors.
The European Union condemns all forms of
violence, especially in Gaza, as well as the firing of
rockets against Israel, which must be halted. The fight
against terrorism must continue unabated. Corporal
Gilad Shalit must be unconditionally released.
Fourthly, the parties are naturally not the only
ones with responsibilities. It is equally desirable for the
international community as a whole to mobilize in

08-65913

S/PV.6049

support of the Palestinian Authority. The European
Union has done more than its fair share by continually
increasing aid. Total EU aid to the Palestinian people,
including
humanitarian
and
non-humanitarian
assistance, will exceed €540 million this year, meaning
that once again the EU and its member States make up
the Palestinian Authority’s largest contributors.

were any agreements or possible agreements during
that period.” However, everyone is aware of what has
been taking place on the ground, which clearly
indicates the political will and serious resolve to bring
an end to the occupation and the continued suffering of
the Palestinians, which has lasted for more than 60
years.

It is important to continue the work which began
in Paris last December at the Donors’ Conference for
the Palestinian State. Budgetary aid totalling
€1.7 billion has been paid so far and it is the
responsibility of donors to meet their commitments.

Many people have cited statistics. Very briefly, I
would like to cite a few statistics of my own to remind
us of what has taken place on the ground since
27 November 2007. Over the past year, Israeli attacks
against Palestinians increased by 300 per cent. The
Israeli army carried out more than 1,700 operations in
the West Bank and more than 1,363 in the Gaza Strip,
195 of them during the calm period. Those operations
claimed the lives of 544 persons, including 71 children,
and left more than 2,362 injured. The Israeli authorities
destroyed 332 Palestinian homes and in turn authorized
the construction of 2,210 dwellings in the West Bank
settlements. The number of barriers restricting the
movement of Palestinians in the West Bank increased
from 581 to 630. Israel continued to build the wall,
with all that that entailed in terms of the confiscation
of Palestinian land — including recently the land of the
village of Azzoun — given that 84 per cent of the wall
is located in the territory of the West Bank. The
Judaization of Al-Quds Al-Sharif was intensified;
Israeli authorities continued to detain more than 11,000
Palestinians, including hundreds of children. It is
regrettable that only one case of an Israeli detainee was
highlighted but not those of thousands of Palestinians.
While it is true that Israel freed 990 Palestinians during
the same period, it also imprisoned another 4,950.

The role of the international community is also
political in nature. The European Union is determined
to work to strengthen the Quartet’s monitoring role on
the ground, in collaboration with the United States and
other Quartet members. In order to promote a lasting
settlement, the European Union, without becoming
involved in the negotiations or prejudging their results,
has once more demonstrated that when the time comes,
it is prepared to help implement a final peace
agreement. The European Union recalls the importance
of a continued, broad and constructive commitment by
its Arab partners.
Lastly, as was emphasized by the heads of State
and Government in the European Council declaration
of 11 and 12 December, “We urge the United States,
under its new Administration, to join us in making the
Middle East peace process an immediate and central
priority.”
The European Union is convinced that to be
sustainable, peace must be comprehensive. The
European Union reiterates its commitment to resolving
all aspects of the Arab-Israeli conflict, in accordance
with the terms of reference of the Madrid Conference,
especially the principle of land for peace, the relevant
Security Council resolutions and the Road Map.
Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): As I believe that this is the first open debate of
the Security Council on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question, since the
Annapolis conference was held a year ago, perhaps it
might be useful for us to consider the negotiation
events of the past year and to draw certain lessons from
them.
As Mr. Qurai’, head of the Palestinian delegation,
said about the negotiations, “I do not know if there

08-65913

Those are only a few statistics. Unfortunately,
they do not tell the whole story, so I shall make a
number of clarifications, relying on Israeli testimony as
appropriate. First, what Palestinians in the West Bank
are experiencing in their daily lives are humiliation and
mistreatment, restrictions on their movement, attacks
by the Israeli army and settlers, and racial
discrimination. Here, I shall quote from an account by
an Israeli human rights organization: “The
discrimination practiced by Israel in the West Bank
increasingly recalls the apartheid system that prevailed
in South Africa”. That is a quote from an Israeli source.
Here is a quote from another Israeli source:
“In the areas occupied in 1967, the concentration
of settlements in the occupied territories and the
policies being implemented have created a

15

S/PV.6049

situation of apartheid and discrimination in the
institutions, and the principle of equality has been
annihilated in the region. Two groups of citizens
under the same legal authority experience two
different systems of law: one group enjoys all its
civil rights, while the second group is deprived of
its rights. Thus, Israel has created a huge modern
road network in the West Bank, but that network
is for the use of Israelis alone, while Palestinians
are forced to travel on dangerous and tortuous
roads. The Israeli planning agency imposes
restrictions on construction in Palestinian towns
and villages, in contrast to the flexibility given to
Israeli settlements. While the amount of water
supplied to the settlements makes it possible to
plant grass and fill pools, many Palestinians have
to buy drinking water.”
Therefore, we wonder: what is the objective of
those practices in the West Bank, if not to make life
impossible for Palestinians so that they must leave,
joining the 6 million other Palestinian refugees, thus
creating a reality that would make it impossible to
establish a Palestinian State? These are not my words;
they come from an Israeli human rights organization,
which says, “The great change brought about by Israel
in the mapping of the West Bank precludes any real
possibility for the establishment of a Palestinian State.”
Secondly, with regard to the total siege imposed
on Gaza by the Israeli authorities, we all know that the
general calm achieved in June was fully respected by
the Palestinians. On 4 November, the Israeli army
carried out an incursion into eastern Gaza, killing six
Palestinians in an attack, so it was only natural that
there should be a reaction from the Palestinians. Since
5 November, Israelis have openly imposed a total land,
air and sea siege against Gaza, even denying entry to
trucks of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. And perhaps
members heard today’s announcement that assistance
to more than 750,000 Palestinians was being suspended
because of an interruption in supplies. Of course, it is
true that Israeli authorities open certain crossing points
from time to time, but we wonder if that is only for
propaganda purposes.
As a result of the siege, there has been a total
paralysis of economic activity. Eighty per cent of
Palestinian families now live below the poverty line.
There has been a total collapse of drinking water and
sanitation services; drinking water stations and

16

sanitation facilities cannot function properly, and the
Council can imagine the result. There is an almost total
shortage of medical supplies in hospitals. There are
also obstacles to the proper functioning of the banks
and electricity stations that provide about 50 per cent
of Gaza’s electricity requirements. How can they call
those actions and practices? They are what the Special
Coordinator has described as “a flagrant violation of
human rights” in Gaza, and I think that is the truth.
Over the course of the year, we witnessed
something that we had not seen before — restrictions
imposed on Palestinians and attacks against
Palestinians. There are 650 settlers in Hebron — a
town whose population includes more than 150,000
Palestinians — and that town is experiencing nearly
daily attacks against Palestinians by settlers who
destroy their homes and their property and do whatever
they want under the protection of 2,000 Israeli soldiers.
That is an outline of the results of Annapolis — the
expansion of settlements, the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation, human rights violations and
increased violations of international law on the part of
the occupation. All of that is unfolding within the
silence of the Council, which can be understood by the
victims only as a form of collusion, discrimination,
bias or double standards being used against them.
Those practices and the silence of the Council can only
fuel hatred, frustration and despair. How can we follow
the path to peace and coexistence in that manner?
If the Council seeks to guarantee the minimal
conditions for peace in the region, the very least it
could do would be to condemn the occupation and the
settlements and halt their expansion; lift the siege on
Gaza; stop extremist settler activities in Hebron,
protect the Palestinians, and take into account the
words of Bishop Desmond Tutu and Richard Falk that
all of those who have committed crimes against
humanity must be brought to justice.
Mr. Tiendrébéogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in
French): I, too, would like to thank Mr. Serry for his
briefing. My delegation is also grateful to the
representatives of Palestine and Israel for their
contributions.
Only two days ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1850 (2008) on the situation in the Middle
East. That important resolution invites the parties to
continue negotiations within the framework of the
Annapolis process, but it can achieve its objectives

08-65913

S/PV.6049

only with the decisive involvement of the parties and
the international community. With resolve and
determination, Israelis and Palestinians can succeed in
achieving peaceful coexistence and comprehensive
peace, having been able to maintain regular contact
during 2008.
Along with the Annapolis agreements, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Quartet Road Map, there is
now a framework for the process and a means to
achieve the goals. The commitment of each of the
parties is well known and their responsibilities are
known as well, especially when it comes to
strengthening mutual trust. For its part, the
international community must support them decisively
and continue its efforts for the socio-economic
development of Palestine, including by strengthening
its institutional capacities and providing assistance to
Palestinian refugees and to the population of Gaza.
In the regional sphere, we welcome the general
calm currently prevailing in Lebanon as a result of the
efforts of the Lebanese people and parties. It will
continue and gain in strength so long as the Doha
Accord is fully applied. We urge the parties, in
particular, to overcome their differences in order to
prepare the legislative elections of May 2009 in a
peaceful manner. At the same time, improving relations
between Lebanon and its neighbours would help to
strengthen peace and stability in the country and
throughout the region. For that reason, we welcome
and encourage the initiatives undertaken in that
respect. We urge Israel and Syria to become part of that
same process in order to ensure the success of the
indirect negotiations undertaken under the auspices of
Turkey.
The countries of the region are destined to live
together and must therefore take the necessary
measures to facilitate a coexistence that would
guarantee peace and security for each and for all. In
that respect, the role of the United Nations will remain
crucial. Notably, the United Nations is making a
valuable contribution to stability in the Middle East
through the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force and the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon. We appeal once again to all of the parties to
cooperate fully with those Forces.
The year that is coming to an end has seen some
progress in the resolution of major crises in the region.
However, many challenges remain. Primarily with

08-65913

respect to the Palestinian question, we express the wish
that 2009 will keep the spirit of Annapolis alive with
the objective of creating a Palestinian State living side
by side with the State of Israel in peace and security.
With the adoption of resolution 1850 (2008), the
Security Council should be in a position to support the
parties and the process in a more committed, more
visible and especially more tangible manner.
Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to thank Mr. Serry for his very useful and
detailed briefing and my Israeli and Palestinian
colleagues for their statements.
Two days after a debate focused on the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, and despite our ongoing concern
over the humanitarian and security situation on the
ground, especially in and around the Gaza Strip, I will
avoid repeating the detailed position of Belgium on the
issue, especially since it was broadly reflected in the
statement made by the representative of France on
behalf of the European Union, to which my delegation
fully subscribes. I would rather take advantage of the
briefing we have received to forecast the opportunities
and challenges in the Middle East that await us in
2009.
The first observation is that we are seeing
international commitment at a level unseen since the
beginning of the millennium. There have been five
summit meetings of the Quartet in a single year,
including a meeting with the direct briefing of the
parties on the status of negotiations. That included the
direct involvement of the international community with
Israel and the Palestinian Authority, already reflected
in the reactivation of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
and in the discussion of Palestinian reform plans.
In support of those two forums, four successive
ministerial conferences have been convened in
Annapolis, Paris, Berlin and London to give the
greatest possible political and economic support to the
negotiations, alongside the investment conferences in
Bethlehem and London and the economic recovery
plan of Tony Blair, Representative of the Quartet.
Finally, after having been too long the symbol of
paralysing disagreement on the part of the international
community, the Security Council — our Security
Council — recalled last Tuesday that it remains seized
of the matter. We thus welcome the adoption of
resolution 1850 (2008), in that it confirms the

17

S/PV.6049

Council’s responsibility to help in the realization of the
solution of two viable States living side by side in
peace and security.

these Arab efforts, and we encourage Hamas to have a
sense of responsibility for not depriving Gazans of the
peace dividends.

In a period of transition that is inevitably more
fragile, Belgium, along with its European partners,
advocates maintaining this international commitment.
We could begin by seeing to it that the adoption of
resolution 1850 (2008) does not remain window
dressing without a future. On the contrary, it should
strengthen the ability of our Council to shoulder its
responsibilities in accordance with the Charter and see
to it that its previous resolutions are implemented.

In this context, Belgium welcomes the
confirmation of the organization of an international
meeting in 2009 in Moscow. Without prejudging the
progressive stabilization of various hotbeds of regional
tension, we hope that that meeting will allow for the
identification of the way in which we can integrate
them into a comprehensive and mutual stabilization in
the Middle East. Already, together with our European
partners, we are prepared to work with the parties in
order to offer them the international safeguards
necessary for making progress in this direction.

Our second observation touches upon the
reaffirmation of the regional commitment in the quest
for stabilization and a complete, just and lasting peace
with Israel. Resolution 1850 (2008) recalled the
importance of the Arab Peace Initiative. We can once
again hail the commitment of the sponsors of the
Initiative to reaffirm it at the Riyadh summit in March
2007. But the sense of responsibility of the regional
players does not stop there.
Under the aegis of Turkey, indirect negotiations
have begun between Israel and Syria. There has been a
renewal of contacts after eight years of silence. We
hope that a fifth session will soon bring them close to
direct discussions with a view to a peace agreement.
In Lebanon, after violence that we feared would
lead to a new civil war, mediation by Qatar helped in
the election of a new President and in renewing
national dialogue. Since then, a constructive dialogue
has begun with Syria. We encourage the fulfilment of
the commitments entered into in Damascus for the
normalization of bilateral relations, including the
establishment of diplomatic relations. Beyond that, and
in view of the impact on regional peace and security,
we emphasize increased cooperation for the monitoring
of the Lebanese-Syrian border and respect for the arms
embargo approved in resolution 1701 (2006). On this
specific item, and more generally because of its role in
the region, we call upon Iran to use its influence
constructively and in support of peace.
Finally, with regard to Palestinian reconciliation,
Saudi Arabia, Yemen and Egypt have successively
shown the Arab commitment to reunifying the Gaza
Strip and the West Bank within the fold of the
Palestinian Authority. Based on the observation that we
cannot have a lasting peace without involving the
entire Palestinian people, we urge the continuation of

18

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Secretariat and the
United Nations Special Coordinator, Mr. Serry, for the
briefing given us on the situation in the Middle East.
We agree with his evaluation of the recent events in
Palestinian-Israeli relations and also on the SyrianLebanese track.
The position of the Russian Federation with
regard to the situation in the Middle East was given by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Sergey Lavrov, in
his statement to the Security Council on 16 December
(see S/PV.6045). Therefore, I shall limit my statement
to a few remarks.
Of course, near the end of 2008, we would like to
have obtained more results from the Annapolis process,
and we agree with the concern over the humanitarian
situation in the Palestinian territories and the continued
settlement activities. We are also concerned over the
rocket attacks into Israel. But it is still important that,
in taking stock of the past year, the international
community be able to make some important
observations.
Russia is pleased with the results of the
ministerial meeting of the Quartet that took place on
15 December and its declaration, and Council
resolution 1850 (2008), adopted on 16 December. We
are grateful to those Member States of the Security
Council that supported this resolution, drafted by the
Russian Federation and the United States. In both
documents, we see set forth the primacy and the
irreversibility of the peace process in the Middle East,
which was designed to ensure the existence of two
States, Palestinian and Jewish, living in goodneighbourliness, peace and security. We are convinced

08-65913

S/PV.6049

that the parties must continue their painstaking work in
seeking mutually acceptable solutions to all essential
items on the bilateral agenda.

Minister, Mr. Elias Al-Murr, with whom there was also
discussion of issues of further development of
cooperation between our countries.

We cannot allow the political process in the
region to stall. Therefore, the Quartet and the Security
Council have reaffirmed their commitment to continue
and intensify joint efforts, which include regard for the
recently reaffirmed Arab Peace Initiative, which was
designed to establish the best possible atmosphere for
continuing the Arab-Israeli dialogue on all tracks in
2009.

Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): I wish to begin by
joining previous speakers in thanking Mr. Robert Serry,
the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, for his important briefing. We
welcome the convening of this open debate, which
provides the opportunity for the general membership of
the United Nations to express its views on an issue of
great importance.

It is incumbent upon the international community,
and particularly the Quartet, to help to ensure that the
negotiation process continue without interruption.
Russia unswervingly upholds a policy that favours the
Quartet’s consistent fulfilment of the mission for which
it was in fact created.

Despite many critical developments on the
ground that have taken place in the region, the Security
Council has, in the past few years, been fraught with
silence in response to the Middle East conflict. It is our
fervent hope that the adoption of resolution 1850
(2008) two days ago will signal the new beginning of a
Council being able to assume its Charter-mandated
responsibilities with respect to the situation in the
Middle East.

The Quartet must energetically tackle the issues
of the establishment of a just peace and security in the
region, especially in the current serious circumstances.
We will in future try to enhance the effectiveness of the
Quartet and to support the efforts of Special
Representative Blair and the development of its close
cooperation with the League of Arab States in finding a
comprehensive Arab-Israeli settlement, including the
organization of an international conference on the
Middle East in the capital of Russia in 2009.
One of the priority issues in the context of a
Middle East settlement is the restoration of an intraPalestinian agreement on the basis of the observation
of the criteria set forth by the Quartet. That and other
urgent issues related to progress in the peace process in
the Middle East will be discussed in the course of the
forthcoming visit to Moscow of the President of the
Palestinian Authority, Mr. Mahmoud Abbas.
Russia firmly and energetically supports the
efforts of the President of Lebanon and the
Government of National Unity to strengthen
agreement, State institutions and the constitutional
order in that country on the basis of a dialogue between
the leading political forces and the ethnic and religious
communities. We are prepared to continue to promote
the strengthening of the sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity of Lebanon, and also its peaceful,
democratic and crisis-free development, which is in the
interest of the Lebanese and the Middle East region as
a whole. In fact, these ideas were imparted during a
recent to visit to Moscow by the Lebanon’s Defence

08-65913

Once again, as the parties proceed in their
negotiations, we wish to underscore the need for the
critical challenges on the ground to be urgently
addressed.
The situation in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank
remains a matter of profound concern. The
humanitarian consequences of the Israeli siege of the
Gaza Strip and the closures of the Gaza crossings have
been grave and intolerable. The briefing by the Special
Coordinator just now chronicled the sufferings endured
by the civilian population in the Gaza Strip. The siege
must be lifted immediately in order to allow the
civilian population in Gaza to have access to water,
employment, commerce, medical treatment and
education — essentially, access to their basic needs. It
is also imperative that the Egyptian-brokered
maintenance of calm in the Gaza Strip and southern
Israel be maintained.
Steps that could undermine confidence or
prejudice the outcome of negotiations must be stopped
and reversed. It is critical that any actions, activities or
statements that could undermine or hamper the peace
efforts be avoided. In that connection, Israeli
settlement activities in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, that contravene international law and the
principles of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of
territory by force must end. The construction of walls
on Palestinian land, which is in contrary to the

19

S/PV.6049

Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice,
must cease and the walls be removed.

with all the relevant Security Council resolutions
relating to the Lebanese and Syrian tracks.

We draw some encouragement from the recent
release of 227 Palestinians by the Israeli authorities.
However, my delegation remains concerned over the
fate of thousands of other Palestinians still imprisoned
by Israel and calls for their similar release.

The Middle East conflict has endured for far too
long, and ending it warrants our serious efforts. My
delegation consistently believes that finding a peaceful,
just, lasting and comprehensive settlement to the
Middle East conflict is of primary importance.
Indonesia will remain committed to its role and
contribution, within and beyond the Security Council,
to the efforts to attain comprehensive and sustainable
peace in the region, based on the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), the Madrid
terms of reference and the principle of land for peace.

Ending the Israeli occupation of Palestinian
territory and the creation of an independent, viable and
democratic Palestine are central to the creation of
peace in the region. In anticipating the creation of a
Palestinian State, we underline the importance of
international assistance to the institution-building
activities in Palestine, including facilitating economic
development through an improvement of conditions on
the ground.
My delegation also cannot overemphasize how
incredibly important unity among Palestinians is. We
support all efforts to achieve that end. We are aware
that the inter-Palestinian dialogue planned for
November was postponed and has been rescheduled for
December 2008. We are hopeful that the dialogue can
be fully implemented as planned.
We recognize the vital role that Quartet has been
playing in the promotion of solutions to the conflict in
the Middle East that are acceptable to all parties. We
welcome the regular consultations among the Quartet
principals, including the recent meeting in New York.
My delegation also commends the League of Arab
States and individual countries in the region for their
important contributions to the Middle East peace
efforts. We attach particular importance to the Arab
Peace Initiative.
With regard to Lebanon, my delegation welcomes
the overall political stability in the country as the new
unity Government continues to function. We attach
primary importance to the continued efforts to promote
dialogue and reconciliation involving all Lebanese
factions across political, religious and ideological
lines.
We look forward to the implementation of the
15 October 2008 agreement between Lebanon and
Syria on formalizing the diplomatic relationship
between the two countries. My delegation also
underlines the importance of the indirect talks between
Israel and Syria. Israel is called upon to fully comply

20

Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First I wish to thank Mr. Serry for his briefing.
The Chinese delegation welcomes the convening
of this open debate. The Security Council has just held,
on Tuesday of this week, a ministerial meeting on the
situation in the Middle East, at which it adopted
resolution 1850 (2008). At that meeting, China’s Vice
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. He Yafei, fully set out
the position and views of the Chinese Government (see
S/PV.6045). Today I shall just stress the following four
points.
First, China welcomes the Council’s adoption of
resolution 1850 (2008). At a time when the Middle
East situation is at a crucial juncture and faces many
uncertain elements, the resolution sends a strong and
clear signal for maintaining the momentum of political
negotiations on the question of the Middle East. That
demonstrates the Council’s determination to push for a
lasting peace in the Middle East and its firm support
for political negotiations between Palestine and Israel.
It also reflects the broad consensus in the international
community in support of the peaceful coexistence of
two States, Palestine and Israel. We are confident that
the resolution, together with other relevant Council
resolutions, will become part of the legal framework
for a just solution of the Middle East question.
Secondly, we support the view expressed by some
countries that what is more important than the actual
adoption of the resolution is to ensure that it is
implemented. Israel and Palestine should live up to the
expectations of the international community by
persevering in and intensifying the political negotiation
process, as is called for in the resolution. We expect

08-65913

S/PV.6049

both sides to overcome any obstacle to ensure that the
negotiating process is irreversible.
The Council also faces tests in that regard. The
Council should play its due role on the question of the
Middle East, especially in ensuring that its resolutions
are respected and implemented. We hope that the
Council will be more active in supporting the
negotiating process between Israel and Palestine. We
also hope that the Quartet will further strengthen
communication and coordination with the Council.
Thirdly, efforts to push for political negotiations
should be accompanied by efforts to improve the
situation on the ground and to strengthen the
Palestinian capacity. We urge Israel, as the occupying
Power, to take responsible action on the matter of
settlements. We are concerned at the plight facing the
Palestinian population in the West Bank and Gaza. We
call on the international community to continue to
provide
Palestine
with
assistance,
including
humanitarian, development and technical assistance. In
Gaza the immediate task is to ensure that the period of
calm is respected and extended. In the longer term, the
more important task is to vigorously seek ways to
strengthen the internal unity of Palestine.
Fourthly, a lasting peace in the Middle Ease is by
necessity a comprehensive peace. Achieving peace
between Syria and Israel, and between Lebanon and
Israel, is an important component of the Middle East
peace process. We expect Syria and Israel, and
Lebanon and Israel, to improve their relationships
through peace negotiations. We call on the
international community to exert greater diplomatic
efforts in that regard. The Arab Peace Initiative of 2002
has further, untapped potential. We expect the League
of Arab States and the countries of the region to play
an important role in pushing for a solution of the
Middle East question.
Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation wishes to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate. We also wish to thank, as
other delegations have done, the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Robert Serry,
for presenting his report, and the representatives of
Israel and Palestine for their statements.
The Security Council’s consideration of the
situation in the Middle East in 2008 culminated in the
adoption of resolution 1850 (2008). We hope 2009 will
bring the results that many of us had hoped for in 2008,

08-65913

and that the Council will be preparing to become an
effective part of the solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict.
Costa Rica believes that it is the parties’
responsibility to implement the provisions of the
resolution. Full compliance with Security Council
resolutions and international law, in particular
international humanitarian and human rights law, as
well as with the outcome of the Madrid Conference,
the principle of land for peace and the Arab Peace
Initiative is the right way to consolidate an
independent, democratic and viable Palestinian State
living side by side with Israel in peace and security.
In this time of political transition, we can only
continue to support the bilateral negotiation process
between senior authorities of Israel and Palestine so
that they can agree on the core issues in the context of
genuine and constructive negotiations. We must
therefore isolate and weaken extremists wherever they
may be.
I reiterate Costa Rica’s conviction that there is a
strong link between political prospects for peace and
the socio-economic and humanitarian situation on the
ground. Only yesterday, we were told that crossings
between Gaza and Israel remain closed. Costa Rica
understands Israel’s concern for its own security, and
in that respect has appealed emphatically for an end to
the rocket and mortar attacks on southern Israel. We
also vigorously condemn any statement undermining
Israel’s existence as a State or threatening its right to
exist. It is nevertheless unacceptable that Israel should
cite its valid security concerns to justify measures that
indiscriminately effect an entire people, in
contravention of international humanitarian law.
My delegation takes this opportunity to urge the
parties to extend the fragile calm achieved in Gaza and
southern Israel thanks to the good office of Egypt,
which has played a very constructive role in this
matter. Costa Rica welcomes Israel’s recent release of
227 Palestinian prisoners, which we believe represents
a gesture of support for President Abbas and for those
who, like him, distance themselves from all
unproductive extremism and are working hard to
achieve a stable and sustainable peace in the Middle
East. The international community must support and
strengthen the voices of moderation in Israel, Palestine
and the wider region calling for the building of peace,
and not those that clamour for war and violence.

21

S/PV.6049

We remain optimistic that we shall see the
renewal of indirect peace talks between Israel and the
Syrian Arab Republic in 2009, under the auspices of
Turkey and in a climate of positive and constructive
discussion. We therefore hope that senior officials of
those countries will begin direct conversations that will
help to build a bridge leading to a comprehensive
solution encompassing all aspects of the question of
the Middle East.
With respect to Lebanon, Costa Rica hopes that
the parties will continue to demonstrate political will
fully to implement resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701
(2006). We also hope that the Special Envoys of the
Secretary-General
will
pursue
their
ongoing
consultations with Governments that can persuade the
Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias in Lebanon to
cooperate peacefully in the disarmament process.
In conclusion, Costa Rica expresses the hope that
2009 will be the year that reveals the truth of the adage
that the night is always darkest before the dawn.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Two days ago, this
Council, after almost five years, finally adopted a
resolution on the situation between Palestine and
Israel. At that meeting, my delegation acknowledged
that the resolution that we adopted was not perfect
because it ignored many significant issues that this
Council must address. These include the continuing
illegal settlement activity in the Palestinian territories,
including Jerusalem. The siege of Gaza continues. In
Hebron, Israeli settlers have attacked Palestinian
homes and farms. Violence against Palestinian and
Israeli civilians has not ended.
However, what the resolution did was to remind
the parties of their previous undertakings and to
recommit them to the obligations that they had
previously undertaken. Palestinian and Israeli leaders
alike have already committed to what they see as the
final outcome of their negotiations — a settlement that
will result in the emergence of an independent,
democratic and viable Palestinian State living side by
side in peace and security with Israel and its other
neighbours. That settlement will resolve the IsraeliPalestinian conflict and end the occupation that began
in 1967. That commitment has been made in the past
and continues to be the basis of the current
negotiations.
New declarations and undertakings are no longer
required. What remains is the need to implement the

22

steps taken to reach such a settlement — a settlement
that will be based on the undertakings of the parties,
their neighbours and the international community, such
as the Arab Peace Initiative. It is thus imperative that
both
sides
ensure
that
their
actions
and
pronouncements be calculated to advance the quest for
peace. Unjustified and illegal acts by Israel — such as
its siege of Gaza; continued incursions into the West
Bank and, recently, in Gaza; and the expansion of
illegal settlements, military checkpoints and the
separation wall — contribute to the continuing cycle of
violence.
We recognize the legitimate security concerns of
Israel, but we do not condone the disproportionate use
of force to achieve that security. Israel’s right to selfdefence does not entitle it to violate the rights of
innocent civilians, particularly those who have been
living in inhumane conditions under its military
occupation for more than 40 years.
As we said two days ago, the resolution we
adopted will face two crucial tests. The first will be
whether the parties will implement its provisions; the
second test will be for the Council to ensure that its
resolutions are implemented. If its resolutions should
be ignored, that would further erode the credibility of
this Council.
Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, allow me to thank you, Sir, for having convened
this meeting. I also thank the Ambassadors of Israel
and Palestine for their respective statements. I further
thank Special Coordinator Serry for his consistently
comprehensive and balanced reports.
Panama has stated on various occasions and
reiterates today that even though a solution to the
conflict in the Middle East, in particular the conflict
between Israel and Palestine, may not necessarily lead
to the resolution of all other conflicts in the world, it is
nevertheless true that unless that conflict is resolved
with agreement among the parties, the conflicts in the
rest of the world are unlikely to be solved.
Likewise, we have said and we repeat today that
the framework of a peace agreement between Israel
and Palestine is generally well known and supported by
a large part of the international community, as reflected
at the Annapolis conference. That framework includes
the existence of Israel and Palestine as two
economically and politically viable States living side
by side and with their neighbours in peace and

08-65913

S/PV.6049

security; the return to the borders of 1967, except in
the case of a specific agreement between the parties;
and West Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and East
Jerusalem as the capital of the Palestinian State.
Furthermore, it will be necessary to reach agreement
on the future of Palestinian refugees and the use and
exploitation of natural resources in the region, in
particular water.
However, if that agreement is to be successful,
the parties must achieve the following as soon as
possible, if not immediately. The Palestinians must
reach a political agreement among themselves that
would make it possible to consolidate a single and
sustainable Government structure for the whole
Palestinian territory. The Israelis must suspend the
construction of illegal settlements in the occupied
territories and begin removing those settlements,
whose existence is unjustifiable and clearly violates
international law. Extremist Palestinian groups must
stop their acts of violence against innocent Israeli
civilians. The Palestinians and the Arab countries must
give Israel the necessary and reliable guarantees of its
security as a State. Until those conditions are met, the
peace efforts in the Middle East are bound to fail.
In that regard, Panama reiterates once again its
deep concern at and condemnation of the situation of
the people of Gaza under the Israeli blockade of that
territory. We condemn equally strongly the terrorist
attacks on the Jewish people by extremists based in the
Gaza Strip. We recognize the State of Israel’s inherent
right to self-defence in accordance with the Charter
and international law, in proportion to the threat and in
full respect of the human rights of the innocent civilian
population.
In conclusion, we trust that those who believe
that neither the Palestinians nor the Israelis wish or are
able to reach a peace agreement are wrong.
Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): I join previous
speakers in thanking Mr. Robert Serry for his
informative and detailed briefing.
As the Council is reviewing a month that saw a
wide array of developments across the region, my
delegation recognizes the commitment of Palestine and
Israel to carrying forward bilateral negotiations into
2009, the strengthened efforts of the Palestinian
Authority in preparation for statehood, the recent
decision of Israel to evacuate illegal settlers from
Hebron and release more than 200 Palestinian

08-65913

prisoners, and the continued cooperation between both
parties in enhancing the rule of law and security sector
reforms in Jenin.
We take note of the affirmation by the Quartet in
its statement of 15 December 2008 that a final treaty
and a lasting peace would be reached through
simultaneous and mutually re-enforcing efforts on the
basis of peaceful negotiations, the institutional building
of a Palestinian State and the implementation of the
obligations of both parties under the Road Map and the
Annapolis joint understanding.
We welcome resolution 1850 (2008), adopted two
days ago by the Council, the first resolution on the
situation in the Middle East after a gap of almost five
years. We consider it, despite its understandable
imperfections, a good basis on which all relevant
parties can overcome setbacks and achieve further
concrete results. Thus, if and when the resolution is
strictly implemented, it will contribute practically to
realizing the vision of an independent, viable and
sovereign State of Palestine, living side by side and in
peace with Israel and the wider Middle East, whose
constituent nations remain at peace with each other and
with the world at large.
An honest assessment of the current situation
regrettably reveals the extent of obstacles ahead. My
delegation fully shares Mr. Robert Serry’s recognition
of and grave concern over the many problems still
prevailing in the region. In that context, it is our view
that the success of the peace process will require
prompt effort by the international community to rectify
the aggravating situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory and commit Israel to its obligations under the
Road Map and related provisions of international law,
including, inter alia, an immediate end to all settlement
activities, the removal of obstacles to freedom of
access and movement, and the reopening of border
crossings to end the humanitarian crisis in Gaza.
The parties concerned must also refrain from any
act that may vitiate the atmosphere for a result-oriented
dialogue based on mutual confidence and trust, and
explore every possible way to maintain constructive
negotiations so as to arrive at a just and sustainable
solution in keeping with resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008), the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative,
the Road Map and the other agreements that have been
concluded.

23

S/PV.6049

While the resolution of the six-decade tragedy of
Palestine would have a profound impact on the
situation in the Middle East, peace in the region also
requires forward movement on the other axes of the
peace process. In that regard, we commend regional
efforts facilitated by Turkey to re-energize the SyriaIsrael track and those to resume good-faith negotiations
on the Syrian and Lebanese tracks. We call upon the
international community to support in the coming
months the positive steps taken by the Lebanese
Government to fully assert authority over its territory
and to promote the national course of reconciliation,
political stability, socio-economic development and
regional and international integration.
We urge all the parties concerned to strictly
observe resolution 1701 (2006), put an end to those
acts that may further complicate that process, including
the targeted attacks against Lebanese civilians and
personnel of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon, violations of Lebanese airspace, the
continued detention of prisoners and the unresolved
status of the Shab’a Farms. While we know that much
remains to be done, at the same time we have
confidence in the wisdom and determination of the
Lebanese people and in the cooperation and assistance
of the United Nations, the Quartet, the League of Arab
States, regional countries and the international
community in ensuring that the tragic past of Lebanon
is never repeated.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Croatia.
Today’s meeting comes at the end of an eventful
year marked by a number of encouraging developments
in the Middle East. Croatia joined the Council at a time
that was marked by renewed hope for reaching
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. Under strong
United States leadership, we have witnessed the
development of a comprehensive, direct and resultoriented Israeli-Palestinian negotiation process within
the framework set out in Annapolis a year ago.
The parties have built a solid framework for
negotiations and have direct, serious and substantive
talks regularly and at all levels. We applaud their
unwavering commitment to peace.
On the regional front, important regional tracks
have opened between Israel and Syria and between
Syria and Lebanon. In Lebanon, the adoption of the
Doha Agreement led to developments that hold the

24

promise of a renewed era of democracy, genuine
national reconciliation and stabilization.
A series of high-level meetings this week
reaffirmed the international community’s commitment
to the shared goal of a two-State solution and lasting
peace in the Middle East. Two days ago, the Council
adopted resolution 1850 (2008), an important
benchmark in the peace process that endorsed those
achievements and expressed support for the
irreversibility and continuation of the Annapolis
process and its guiding principles. To complement that
process, it also urges an intensification of efforts to
foster mutual recognition and peaceful coexistence in
the region.
The resolution came at a critical point when all
efforts should be channelled into preserving
momentum and establishing an environment that will
enable the parties to continue to build on the progress
achieved while being guided by the principles and the
mutual understanding reflected in resolution 1850
(2008) and in the Quartet’s statement of 9 November
2008.
We recognize the challenges that the parties face
on their journey, even more so now as they embark
upon a sensitive period of political transition. We
understand that the political and diplomatic processes
remain inextricably linked with the situation on the
ground, and hope to see tangible changes in accordance
with the obligations to which both parties have
committed themselves under the Road Map and
reaffirmed in Annapolis.
The deterioration of the humanitarian and
security situation in Gaza and the renewed rocket
attacks on southern Israel, including dozens this week
alone, which have an impact of the activities of United
Nations agencies and humanitarian assistance
operations, remain a serious concern.
Furthermore, we understand that development
and peace are mutually reinforcing and that economic
development is an essential part of a lasting solution.
That is why the continuing international engagement
remains critical, to stimulate both Palestinian economic
renewal and the reform processes, notably in the sphere
of security and the rule of law. We hope to see the
success of Jenin, Nablus and Hebron replicated
elsewhere. The ability of the Palestinian Authority to
build credible institutions and a security infrastructure
that is willing and able to combat terrorism and other

08-65913

S/PV.6049

threats is both an essential element of Palestinian Statebuilding and a legitimate expectation on the Israeli
side.
While respecting the integrity of the bilateral
negotiations, we should not forget the regional
dimension of the process. The efforts of responsible
regional partners to secure just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East, including the
Arab Peace Initiative, are a valuable complement to the
ongoing peace process.
In many of its aspects, the Arab-Israeli conflict
remains a defining conflict of our time. Tensions in the
region reverberate globally. That makes the
irresponsible and threatening rhetoric coming from the
Iranian leadership all the more alarming.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our belief
in the ongoing peace process. To quote Prime Minister
Ivo Sanader of Croatia and others, this is the best
chance we have. The parties have set into motion a
momentum that we cannot afford to lose. They deserve
our full support on their journey. We have a clear
shared goal to turn into reality the vision of two States,
a democratic and peaceful Palestine living side by side
with a democratic and secure Israel, and to advance the
momentum towards just, lasting and comprehensive
peace in the Middle East.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to express my
gratitude to you, Mr. President, for presiding over the
Security Council this month. I would also like to thank
the Permanent Representative of Costa Rica and all the
members of his delegation for having guided the work
of the Council last month with great skill and wisdom.
I also wish to thank Mr. Robert Serry, United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for the briefing he has given us.
Syria has chosen peace as a strategic option and
has expressed its readiness to achieve it since its
participation in the Madrid Conference, 17 years ago.
We did so also in the run-up to the 2002 Arab summit
in Beirut, which launched the Arab Peace Initiative.
That Initiative illustrates the clear desire of Arab States
to achieve peace once Israel demonstrates genuine

08-65913

readiness to comply with the just peace requirements,
including by withdrawing from all occupied Arab
territories to the 4 June 1967 lines and enabling the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State, with
Al-Quds as its capital.
At the Arab summit held in Damascus on
29 March 2008, Arab leaders reiterated the need to
achieve a just and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East on the basis of resolutions of international
legality, the Arab Peace Initiative and the principles of
the Madrid Conference. The Council may recall that,
when the Arab Peace Initiative was launched in Beirut
in 2002, Israel’s response was to invade the West Bank
and to carry out massacres in and lay siege to Jenin and
Nablus, while also killing unarmed Palestinian women
and children, desecrating places of worship and
implementing a scorched-earth policy, in addition to
detention and collective punishment.
Israel has continued to build settlements despite
the repudiation of the international community. It is
also continuing construction of its apartheid wall of
separation on occupied Palestinian territory, in blatant
disregard of the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice. Having lately and abruptly discovered
its virtues, Israel also responded to the Arab Peace
Initiative by brazenly attacking Lebanon in the summer
of 2006 in an attempt to undermine all efforts at peace.
Israel has also continued to reject calls to withdraw
from occupied Arab territories, including the Syrian
Golan, while increasing settlement activities therein.
As we meet again today, the entire world is
witness to what Israel, the occupying Power, is doing
to the Palestinian people in Gaza and the West Bank:
imposing a siege, causing hunger and starvation,
destroying property, carrying out extrajudicial killings,
detaining Palestinians and forcibly displacing them at a
rate unprecedented in modern history. It is doing so
through its use of organized State terrorism against
unarmed Palestinians. Before the eyes of the occupying
Power, settlers continue to attack Palestinians, Muslim
and Christian alike, as well as their holy places.
On 25 November 2008, on the instructions of the
President of the Syrian Arab Republic in his capacity
as chair of the Arab summit in Damascus, the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Syria sent identical letters to the
Secretary-General and the President of the Security
Council calling on the United Nations to assume its
responsibilities with regard to Israel’s inhuman and

25

S/PV.6049

immoral actions in Gaza. The Minister recalled that
Israel’s siege of the Gaza Strip, including the complete
closure of all crossing points, is a collective threat to
the lives of Palestinians that has led to a grave
deterioration of all aspects of life in the Gaza Strip,
including the humanitarian situation, thereby
increasing the suffering of Palestinians. That collective
punishment includes the cutting off of potable water,
electricity, food, medical supplies and fuel; and has led
to an increase in poverty, hunger and unemployment.
Despite the efforts of the Secretary-General and his
repeated calls to the occupying Power to put an end to
such practices, it has not yet responded.
Thus, my country, the Syrian Arab Republic,
stated in its message to this Council that it looks
forward to immediate measures to be taken by the
Council to address this humanitarian crisis, which is no
less dangerous than other humanitarian catastrophes.
The United Nations should act quickly in this crisis and
pressure Israel to open the crossing points immediately.
The Syrian Arab Republic would like once again
to reiterate its continuous and firm support for the right
of the Palestinian people to the restoration of their
occupied territory and to the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State, with Al-Quds as its
capital. The Syrian Arab Republic emphasizes the
importance of restoring Palestinian national unity
through national dialogue and reconciliation in order to
strengthen the Palestinian negotiating position, support
the will of the Palestinian people and end Israel’s
attempts to attack the Palestinian people and their
aspirations. The Syrian Arab Republic, as chair of the
Arab summit, is attempting to achieve that.
Israel continues, as the Council knows, its
occupation of the Syrian Golan, flouting international
law and resolutions, including resolution 497 (1981),
which declared Israel’s decision to annex the Syrian
Golan as null and void and having no legal merit. Israel
continues to disregard General Assembly resolution
62/85, which states that the ongoing Israeli occupation
and annexation of the Syrian Golan as a fait accompli
hamper the achievement of a just and comprehensive
peace in the region, and calls on Israel to withdraw
fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the lines of
4 June 1967, in implementation of the relevant United
Nations resolutions.
Israel continues to plunder the natural resources
of the Golan, including its water resources, and to plant

26

mines, which have led to 589 injuries, including 17 to
children. Israel, the occupying Power, continues to
bury nuclear waste in our occupied Golan.
We have identified these important and serious
issues to the various specialized United Nations
agencies, and we are still waiting for those agencies to
take the necessary action, in keeping with their core
mandates under the United Nations Charter.
It seems to us that the clearest possible
expression of the truth, as stated by President Bashar
Al-Assad, is that peace is not the major preoccupation
of the Israeli Government. Its major preoccupation is
security, in its narrowest sense: their security, which
cannot be achieved, from their point of view, except at
the expense of our rights and our security. It is
unacceptable and illogical that we, the Arabs, should
be called upon to provide evidence of our desire for
peace, despite the fact that we have proclaimed it
repeatedly and called for it on many occasions, in
particular since the holding of the Madrid Conference
in 1991. It is time for the Israelis to provide evidence
of their desire for peace, to express, through their
actions, their readiness to bring about peace and to
convince us, the Arabs, of that readiness. The Israelis
are the ones who are occupying our territory,
committing aggression against our people and
displacing millions of our people, and not the other
way around. They undertake all these actions, and then
they ask for protection and guarantees and use these as
a smokescreen in order to pursue their extortion and
obtain more concessions from us.
Despite all of this, the withdrawal of Israel from
our occupied Syrian Golan to the 4 June 1967 lines and
the achievement of peace is a national priority for the
Syrian Arab Republic. We have therefore entered into
indirect talks with Israel, through Turkish mediation,
which we are thankful for. We would have liked to
have agreed on a basis to start direct negotiations under
the auspices of multiple international partners, but the
matter requires an American will to make peace in the
Middle East one of its top priorities. The United States
must abandon the deliberate disregard and neglect that
have been its practice for nearly seven years and led to
the deterioration of the situation in the region.
Worse still, the United States occupation forces in
Iraq committed an aggressive act against the Syrian
Arab Republic on 26 October 2008, targeting a civilian
building in the town of Abu Kamal. Labourers inside

08-65913

S/PV.6049

the building were shot, eight Syrian civilians were
killed and one was injured. This aggression was
unjustified and constitutes a serious violation of Syrian
sovereignty and of the principles and purposes of the
United Nations Charter. It demonstrates the insistence
of the current United States presidency to pursue its
policies until the last day of its administration. Those
policies have led to nothing but death and destruction
in the region and have only contributed to the rise of
tensions, destabilization and chaos there.
The Syrian Arab Republic, which upholds
international law, has appealed to the United Nations
and the Security Council in particular to shoulder their
responsibilities to prevent the repetition of this serious
violation and to lay the responsibility for the killing of
innocent Syrian civilians squarely on the aggressors in
order to maintain security and stability in the Middle
East.
Developments in the Middle East require the
Security Council to assume its responsibility to
maintain international peace and security, restore
occupied territory to its legitimate owners and stop the
Israeli aggressors from achieving their objectives. That
is the only way to bring about a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East and to restore
stability to that very important part of the world.
In conclusion, I believe that the representative of
Israel has today once again used the forum of the
Security Council to falsify the facts concerning the
Israeli practices of organized State terrorism over the
decades in the region. The representative of Israel
believes falsely that by including the name of my
country in her statement, she can divert attention from
the root cause of the problem of violence and terrorism
in our region, which is the Israeli occupation of Arab
territories and the crimes against humanity that have
been perpetrated by successive Israeli Governments
against the unarmed people of Palestine in their
occupied land, as described by the Special Rapporteur
on the situation of human rights in the Palestinian
territories occupied since 1967, Richard Falk. The
whole world knows that Israel is imposing an unjust
siege and carrying out a sadistic and pathological
holocaust against more than 1.5 million people in Gaza
and a similar number in the West Bank. The occupying
Israeli authorities have done nothing to stop the
aggressive terrorist attacks committed by Israeli
settlers against the Palestinians in Hebron and in other
parts of the West Bank. Despite all of this, the

08-65913

representative of Israel tells us that the evacuation of
one house of those hooligan settlers in Hebron is a
great accomplishment that rises to the level of
inventing the wheel or even landing on the surface of
the moon.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Lebanese Republic.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Today,
we meet once more for the monthly briefing of the
Security Council on the situation in the Middle East
and primarily the question of Palestine. The most
significant aspect of our meeting today is that the
Council, after a long absence, acted to adopt resolution
1850 (2008) two days ago, which the Council has
sought as a new framework for the negotiation track
that started in Annapolis. The resolution was adopted
despite its shortcomings, in the hope that it will
provide the proper momentum.
It is important to note that the resolution
mentions and reminds us of the main terms of
reference for the establishment of a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East, in particular
the United Nations resolutions, the principles of the
1991 Madrid Conference and the Arab Peace Initiative,
but, most importantly, it reactivates the role of the
United Nations, and specifically the Security Council,
in order to achieve the desired peace, a just and
comprehensive peace. While we welcome the planned
Moscow conference, we must also note that the
resolution lacks a specific timeline for the achievement
of peace and also lacks a clear call to put an end to
Israeli occupation and a clear denunciation of Israeli
practices against Palestinian civilians.
While the international community and the Group
of Arab States, based on the Arab Peace Initiative, are
seeking a political process that restores the land to its
rightful owners and guarantees peace for everyone,
Israel continues in the opposite direction. The situation
on the ground provides ample evidence of that.
Israel allows continued construction and
expansion of settlements. The number of new housing
units in the settlements this year alone has grown by
3,000 units. Also, Israel continues its policy of
confiscation of land and water resources in the West
Bank. Israel continues its construction of the separation
wall, in contravention of the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice, and continues to

27

S/PV.6049

dismantle and divide the West Bank through hundreds
of checkpoints and barriers.
Even more dangerous is the increased violence of
settlers, as occurred, for example, in the bloody events
in Hebron, where settlers burned houses and fired
weapons at Palestinian civilians. All these practices are
not only grave violations of international law, but also,
and more specifically, of Israeli commitments under
the Road Map.
In this context, we heard the recent statement by
the Israeli Minister of Foreign Affairs, Tzipi Livni,
where she brought to mind something similar to the
policy of transfer. I would also mention the decision of
the Israeli authorities to detain for 30 hours
Mr. Richard Falk, the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Palestinian territories
occupied since 1967 and to remove him forcibly and
prevent him from carrying out his mission as mandated
by the United Nations itself. That is in addition to the
continued blockade of Gaza and the subjection of its
residents to the policy of collective punishment, which
has been denounced internationally. The least that can
be said of all of those practices is that they have
escalated an already dangerous situation.
Israel continues to head in the opposite direction
to peace, not only through its practices in Palestine and
the continued occupation of the Golan, but also in my
country. Despite the passage of more than two years
since the adoption of resolution 1701 (2006), which
ended the systematic destruction of Lebanese villages,
infrastructure and civilian facilities in the summer of
2006, Israel continues its stubborn refusal to fulfil all
its obligations under that resolution. It continues to
violate the sovereignty of Lebanon. The total number
of violations by Israel of Lebanese airspace over the
last four months was more than 1,100 violations.
The Secretary-General of the United Nations has
denounced those actions in paragraph 8 of his most
recent report (S/2008/715) on the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006) and called them a violation of
Lebanese sovereignty and of that resolution. We call
for an immediate cessation of those violations. After
the Lebanese Government had approved and accepted
the proposal of the United Nations concerning the
Israeli withdrawal from the northern part of al-Ghajar
village, which gave Israel three months to respond, the
response was to continue to violate Lebanese
sovereignty and the contents of resolution 1701 (2006).

28

Also, the Shaba’a farms and the Kfar Shouba
Hills are still under Israeli occupation. It is time for the
United Nations, based on the provisional demarcation
line determined by its own expert, to launch a new
diplomatic initiative that allows the restoration of the
land to its rightful owners and puts an end to the
occupation. Additionally, Israel still refuses to provide
maps showing the locations of millions of cluster
bombs that they dropped in South Lebanon, bombs that
daily cause suffering and claim hundreds of victims,
including children.
Israeli officials continue to issue various threats
against my country, including the statement of the
Israeli Prime Minister, in which he threatened to
destroy Lebanon, as well as statements by the Minister
of Defence and military officials, which were the
subject of a letter from my Government to the
Secretary-General denouncing such statements as
challenges to the international community and the
work of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) in the area south of the Litani River.
The Council is well aware of Lebanon’s
commitment to and fulfilment of its international
obligations, especially those emanating from resolution
1701 (2006). The Lebanese army deployed forces in
the south and cooperates fully with UNIFIL, and we
have welcomed the recommendations of the
independent group for the evaluation of conditions
along the borders. We continue with technical
cooperation to strengthen monitoring mechanisms in
order to control the borders.
We have abided by the choice of a comprehensive
and just peace based on the Arab Peace Initiative. We
therefore choose to see the glass as half full, in the
form of the Security Council adoption of resolution
1850 (2008). The Council now has the opportunity to
assume the role that we wish for it — the role actually
required by the Charter of the Organization.
In the name of the peace that the people of our
region have longed for since the establishment of the
United Nations itself and in order for the Organization
to rise to the level of the legitimate expectations we all
have of the United Nations, we appeal to the Council
not to allow this new opportunity to become another
lost opportunity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.

08-65913

S/PV.6049

Ms. Viotti (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this timely meeting. I also wish to thank
the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, Robert Serry, for presenting a thorough
briefing on the situation in the region.
Brazil has long maintained close and multiple ties
with countries and peoples in the Middle East.
Approximately 10 million Brazilians find their roots in
Arab lands, of which 6 to 7 million are the descendants
of Lebanese or Syrian immigrants. The cooperation and
friendship between my country and Israel, which dates
back to the latter’s creation, have also been recently
strengthened. In Brazil, all communities live side by
side in harmony and are fully integrated into society.
We believe that this is also possible in the Middle East.
It is our shared history and the wealth of our
political, economic and cultural relations with the
Middle East that provide the foundation for our
growing presence in and involvement with the region.
Brazil was the first Latin American country to join the
Arab League as an observer. In 2005, at the initiative
of President Lula, the first South American and Arab
Countries Summit was held in Brasilia, with a view to
identifying and exploring synergies. The next summit
will take place in Doha this coming March. In 2007,
the Common Market of the South (MERCOSUR)
signed a free trade agreement with Israel. It is this
robust relationship with the Middle East that leads
Brazil to contribute to international efforts designed to
help Israelis and Palestinians end their conflict and to
alleviate the plight of those living in the occupied
territories. We attended the Annapolis conference, as
well as the Palestinian Donors Conference in Paris a
month later. On the latter occasion, we pledged $10
million, in addition to $3 million over three years,
through the India-Brazil-South Africa Fund and offered
enhanced technical cooperation to the Palestinian
National Authority. We received over one hundred
refugees from the Ruweished camp in Jordan, and only
last week we disbursed a contribution of $200,000 for
the Nahr el-Bared camp in Lebanon.
Brazil is convinced that there will be no peace in
the Middle East before a just, lasting and
comprehensive settlement of the Palestinian question is
reached on the basis of the Quartet Road Map, the
Madrid terms of reference, the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and relevant United
Nations resolutions. We deeply regret that the
Annapolis peace process will not be completed in the

08-65913

timeframe originally envisaged. However, we were
encouraged by the Quartet’s statement of 9 November,
according to which the Israelis and Palestinians could
set up “a solid negotiating structure for continued
progress in the future”. We were also reassured by the
commitment of both parties to “vigorous, ongoing and
continuous negotiations”. This is crucial.
Brazil supports the Security Council in its
commitment to the irreversibility of the bilateral
negotiations, as stated in resolution 1850 (2008). The
Council must ensure that such words are turned into
deeds. The political leaders of Israel, the Palestinian
Authority and the United States bear a special
responsibility in assisting the Council in that
formidable task.
We also join the Quartet’s call for negotiations to
be intensified. Brazil listened carefully to the
resolution’s call for all States to contribute to the
negotiations and to the well-being of the Palestinians.
Once again, we renew our readiness to cooperate fully
and effectively with the parties and the international
community.
It is imperative that Israelis and Palestinians fulfil
their obligations under the performance-based Road
Map, as stated in the Annapolis Joint Understanding.
The parties must also refrain from any activity
inconsistent with a future agreement based on the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council. Settlement
in the occupied territories must cease. It is also
indispensable that all violence be stopped, including
that committed by settlers. Humanitarian law must be
strictly observed by all parties, in all cases.
We express our grave concern regarding the
plight of Palestinians in the Gaza Strip. We support the
Secretary-General’s call that a steady and sufficient
supply of fuel and humanitarian assistance be allowed
into Gaza and that the work of the United Nations be
facilitated. Not only are several such measures required
under international law and existing political
commitments but they are also needed to ease
negotiations. The peace process will be greatly
strengthened if substantial improvement occurs in the
situation on the ground, including in the West Bank. As
we have done in the past, we condemn the launching of
rockets against Israel this week.
Progress must also be made on other crucial
tracks on which efforts are under way to decrease
tension and eventually reach a comprehensive solution

29

S/PV.6049

to the interwoven challenges to peace and security.
Palestinian reunification is indispensable and we praise
Egypt for its good offices in this domain. Dialogue and
understanding between Israel and Syria are also
necessities. We commend Beirut and Damascus for
recent steps toward the normalization of bilateral ties.

failed attempts to bring peace and stability to the
Middle East risk eroding the credibility of the entire
international community, as recently recalled by former
President Martti Ahtisaari. We need just, lasting and
comprehensive results and we need them now. Brazil is
ready to continue making its contribution.

Resolution of the question of Palestine has eluded
the international community for simply too long. Our
inability to address this challenge effectively has had a
negative impact and made it even more difficult to
solve other problems in the region. Years and years of

The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. I
intend, with the concurrence of the members of the
Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.

30

The meeting was suspended at 1.05 p.m.

08-65913
