S/2021/528

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 June 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 3 June 2021 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
In its resolution 2534 (2020), the Security Council requested me to present a
review of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hudaydah Agreement (UNMHA)
at least one month before the expiration of its mandate, on 15 July 2021. The Mission,
established pursuant to paragraph 1 of resolution 2452 (2019), supports the
implementation of the Agreement on the City of Hudaydah and the Ports of Hudaydah,
Salif, and Ra’s Isa, as set out in the Stockholm Agreement ( S/2018/1134, annex).
Since my last review, submitted on 15 June 2020 (S/2020/524), and following
the suspension by the Government of Yemen of its participation in the Redeployment
Coordination Committee in April 2020, UNMHA has undertaken sustained engagement
at all levels towards the resumption of joint mechanisms established in furtherance of
the Agreement. The Mission has further continued its efforts to support the parties in
their implementation of the ceasefire. This notwithstanding, the Mission’s efforts
have been stymied by limitations on its freedom of movement, coupled with the
ongoing suspension of the Government’s participation in the Coordination Committee
and related joint modalities and continued fighting along the front lines in Hudaydah
Governorate. After a period of reduction with regard to the Mission’s footprint
beginning in April 2020 as a coronavirus disease (COVID -19) prevention measure,
UNMHA has worked since September 2020 to re-establish its operational capability in
a highly challenging environment, so as to advance effective mandate implementation,
while remaining in strict alignment with COVID-19 protocols. UNMHA has
continued to engage stakeholders and partners to leverage maximum influence and
ensure a unified understanding and approach in supporting the parties in their
implementation of the Hudaydah Agreement.
Despite the significant challenges faced over the reporting period, the Hudaydah
Agreement and the related ceasefire have continued to be characterized by: (a) an
overall and firm reduction of violence across the governorate despite the continuation
of fighting; (b) the safety and partial functioning of the Red Sea ports, enabling the
receiving and offloading of vessels; and (c) conditions conducive to continued growth
of economic activity within the city of Hudaydah and increased humanitarian access
to areas of need. While challenges persist with regard to efforts to resume the
Redeployment Coordination Committee framework, the Agreement and a United
Nations presence in Hudaydah remain cornerstones of the broader peace process and
are essential to ensuring the continued safety of the Red Sea ports and enhanced
stability within Hudaydah Governorate.

21-07311 (E)

110621

*2107311*

S/2021/528

Military and political developments
During the reporting period, the situation on the ground has continued to evolve,
affected by complex shifts and dynamics at the local, national, regional and
international levels. Overall, while ceasefire violatio ns and spikes in hostilities have
persisted across six major hotspots identified within the Hudaydah Governorate, there
has been a continued reduction in reported violence across the board, especially in
the city of Hudaydah. Significantly, there have been no major territorial shifts
between the parties, and the front lines have continued to remain largely static, except
for in the Hays and Durayhimi districts, where, in early October 2020, significant
hostilities occurred, leading to a break in the siege of Durayhimi city and some shift
in the front line in that area. That escalation represented an increase in the level of
violence across the governorate that had not been seen since the Stockholm
Agreement came into force, revealing the potential fragility of the ceasefire. Across
the governorate, air and drone strike activity heightened at the start of October 2020,
from the end of November to the end of December 2020 and, most recently, in March
and April 2021. That activity has been focused largely in the Salif and Bajil districts
to the north of the city of Hudaydah, in Durayhimi city during the October 2020
escalation and in the Tuhayta’ district in the south.
Within the city of Hudaydah itself, since the outset of 2021, the eastern front -line
area, which serves as an economic hub and access point to the rest of northern Yemen,
has witnessed most ceasefire violations in the city. That has coincided with efforts by
the Houthi movement (who also call themselves Ansar Allah) to militarize the Hudayda h
airport located in the south-eastern part of the city. The focus of hostilities in the
governorate has otherwise been centred primarily in the southern districts that have been
impacted by political and military shifts in the coastal districts of neighbo uring Ta‘izz
Governorate. The Hays district, the communications hub of the south, has been an
epicentre of military activity over contested infrastructure and strategic intersections.
The Tuhayta’ district has also been an enduring military focus, as a result of efforts by
the Houthi movement to interdict Government of Yemen supply lines running from
Mukha’ in the south, along the coast to the city of Hudaydah in the north.
Ceasefire violations have continued to have a significant impact on the local
population. A pattern of violations directly affecting residential areas has become
especially pronounced since the beginning of 2021.
During the reporting period, fighting has led to an estimated 104 civilian
casualties and 33 deaths, including 9 women and 7 children. Of those, 29 casualties,
including 13 deaths, have been attributed to 27 incidents related to landmines, improvised
explosive devices and explosive remnants of war, located primarily on the fringes of
the city of Hudaydah and in the southern districts of Durayhimi, Tuhayta’ and Hays.
During the same period, the Mission has publicly condemned that loss of life,
consistently and regularly, through its significantly strengthened strategic communications
capabilities and platforms. The Mission has further stressed the responsibilities of the
parties with respect to their obligations to adhere to international humanitarian law,
including the protection of civilians.
Ongoing fighting in areas beyond the Mission area, including Ma’rib, has led to
an overall relative de-escalation in the Hudaydah Governorate. However, should
broader military dynamics shift and attention return to the western coast, it would likely
have significant implications, especially in the absence of a national ceasefire. A
resurgence in fighting in and around Hudaydah would seriously jeopardize the fragile
ceasefire on the western front and, in turn, threaten the vital port access for commercial
and humanitarian goods. These conditions underscore the significant need for a return
to fully functional joint mechanisms to prevent or reduce the potential of future
escalation on the western coast. The Mission continues to closely coordinate with the
2/7

21-07311

S/2021/528

Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen with regard to the
national situation and efforts to secure a broader ceasefire and political settlement.
The situation on the western coast has also been affected by shifts in the political
landscape, in particular during the first half of 2021. In March 2021, Tareq Saleh, leader
of the National Resistance Forces/Guards of the Republic, formed a political bureau on
the western coast and increased his engagement with a range of international diplomatic
representatives. Those efforts have potential implications for the coordination and
delivery of humanitarian assistance on the west coast and have given rise to tensions
within the various components of the joint forces of the Government of Yemen, which
have resulted in clashes between forces aligned with Saleh and those of the Tihamah
Resistance, each of which are participants in the Redeployment Coordination Committee.
Redeployment Coordination Committee and its joint mechanisms
To secure a sustained resumption of the Redeployment Coordination Committee,
the most significant implementation and coordination mechanism of the Hudaydah
Agreement, the Mission has focused on: (a) bringing the parties back to dialogue
through a proposed joint face-to-face meeting as the most immediate objective; and
(b) addressing issues raised by the Government of Yemen with respect to Agreement
implementation, including to ensure that the Mission has the ability to equally access
the territory of both sides in Hudaydah.
In September 2020, following an easing of COVID-19 protocols on Mission
activities, UNMHA returned to patrol and liaison activities, undertaking a series of
bilateral face-to-face meetings with the parties and conducting visits to the front lin es
in southern Hudaydah. Those efforts were aimed at building support for the
reactivation of the Redeployment Coordination Committee and its joint mechanisms
and at advancing mediation efforts to de-escalate tensions, such as those that occurred
in early October 2020 in the Durayhimi and Hays districts.
In coordination with both parties, the Mission also compiled an inquiry report
on the death of a Government of Yemen liaison officer as a result of the shooting
incident that occurred on 11 March 2020 at a front-line observation post of the city
of Hudaydah. The incident precipitated the suspension of participation by the
Government of Yemen in the Redeployment Coordination Committee and its joint
mechanisms. The resulting inquiry report included recommenda tions for both sides
to improve and strengthen the operations of the joint mechanisms, so as to reduce
risks to personnel involved and avoid a reoccurrence of such an incident in the future.
At the outset of 2021, recognizing the continued challenges to r esuming the
Redeployment Coordination Committee, the Mission, in cooperation with the Office
of the Special Envoy and United Nations Headquarters, developed a political
engagement strategy in support of that aim. The strategy is focused on a range of key
objectives and required engagement at all levels to build confidence between the
parties and garner support for the resumption of the joint mechanisms. On the basis
of that strategy, and following sustained shuttling between the parties and engagement
with regional and international interlocutors, UNMHA was able to significantly
narrow the gap between the parties and reach agreement that a joint meeting was of
the essence in order to move forward and address concerns.
In February 2021, the Government of Yemen indicated its willingness to attend
a joint meeting, provided that issues previously raised were addressed, with the
primary concern being the relocation of UNMHA headquarters to a location equally
accessible to the territory of both sides. Subsequently, Houthi representatives also
undertook to attend such a meeting. Further bilateral discussions led to agreement on
a proposed location and date for the meeting; however, at the last moment, after

21-07311

3/7

S/2021/528

logistical preparations were made in April 2021, both parti es expressed their
unwillingness to proceed. Several reasons were put forward for the decision by each
party, including uncertainty on outcomes within the broader political process, leading
to the adoption of a “wait-and-see” position.
Following the deferral of the joint meeting, UNMHA resumed its bilateral
shuttling between the parties. This action advanced discussion on the proposed new
location of the Mission’s footprint, with a proposal for a headquarters at the Hudaydah
airport, on the basis of initial concepts shared with the parties on 17 October 2020.
The aim of the proposal is to achieve the following objectives: (a) the ability for UNMHA
to equally access and provide support to both parties; (b) the ability of both parties to
gain access to UNMHA headquarters, including in support of the future re-activation
of the joint operations centre and other ceasefire enhancement and de -escalation
mechanisms; (c) the opening of access across the front lines for humanitarian actors
to facilitate the delivery of aid; and (d) the ability of UNMHA monitoring and patrols
in the territory controlled by both parties to strengthen ceasefire implementation,
confidence and stability on the ground.
Monitoring of the ceasefire
The Mission has continued to monitor the ceasefire throughout the reporting
period. This has, however, been subject to considerable obstacles, stemming largely
from the suspension of the Redeployment Coordination Committee and de -escalation
mechanisms (see above) and the resulting receipt of daily on-the-ground reports from
Houthi counterparts only. To build a balanced monitoring picture, the Mission has
focused on a careful assessment of information from the widest possible range of other
available sources, including third-party providers and other partners and stakeholders
on the ground.
On 30 September 2020, after the lifting of COVID-19-related restrictions that
had led to a pause of six and a half months, UNMHA resumed its patrols to the ports
of Hudaydah, Salif and Ra’s Isa. The Mission’s ability to monitor and patrol has,
however, been subject to significant limitations owing to restrictions on its freedom
of movement put in place by the Houthi de facto authorities. Such restrictions have
stopped the Mission from undertaking city patrols ( since November 2019) and from
accessing hotspots and locations that have been subject to significant ceasefire
incidents. The Mission has engaged with the parties and conducted advocacy
activities at all levels, including through diplomatic channels, to advance its freedom
of movement, which is critical to effective on-the-ground monitoring and support for
ceasefire implementation. After extensive engagement, the Mission was able to
undertake visits on two separate occasions, following significant incide nts in Houthicontrolled territory in March 2021. UNMHA continues to make every effort to engage
both sides, in order to enable access to locations as incidents occur, in addition to
conducting regular visits to governorate hotspots.
Redeployment of forces
The sustained functioning of the Redeployment Coordination Committee and its
de-escalation modalities are key requirements for achieving the redeployment of
forces as envisaged within the Hudaydah Agreement. While the Mission continued to
push for agreement on a revised concept of operations to govern the technical phases
of redeployment at the start of the reporting period, engagement with the parties since
September 2020 has been primarily focused on securing the resumption of the joint
mechanisms. Ultimately, the joint mechanisms will play a critical role in any
implementation and oversight of the redeployment of forces, in accordance with the
Agreement.

4/7

21-07311

S/2021/528

Coordination with stakeholders of the Stockholm Agreement
The absence of a fully functional Redeployment Coordination Committee has
frustrated the Mission’s ability of to support humanitarian efforts in Hudaydah.
Notwithstanding those challenges, UNMHA has continued to advocate, through its
engagement with the parties, in favour of humanitarian passage to areas of need, in
full coordination with the United Nations country team. In coordination with the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), UNMHA has also contributed to
the advancement of advocacy in favour of the provision of int ernational support to
the Yemeni Coast Guard, through the strengthening of technical skills and access to
enhanced equipment and infrastructure.
The Mission has also continued to engage with United Nations partners on the
viability of rehabilitating and improving port assets and infrastructure in Hudaydah,
Salif and Ra’s Isa. In coordination with those partners and other humanitarian actors,
the Mission has also advocated with Houthi counterparts in favour of the provision
of access to existing water pipelines, so as to enable repairs to damaged pipelines and
enhanced water distribution across the governorate.
Cooperation with and support for the activities of the Yemen Executive Mine
Action Centre has remained an important element of UNMHA efforts to add ress
issues relating to explosive remnants of war, in close coordination with UNDP.
Through UNMHA patrols to the Red Sea ports, the Mission has been able to verify
the status of known minefields and areas of unexploded ordnance that continue to
pose a threat to the safety of port personnel and operations. Through engagement with
Houthi representatives on the Redeployment Coordination Committee and with the
Mine Action Centre, UNMHA has continued to advocate effective maintenance of the
marking of hazardous areas and to ensure the provision of support and access to the
Mine Action Centre to aid their removal. UNMHA has also worked with UNDP to
advocate access for the Mine Action Centre to mine action equipment, owing to the
current embargo on provision of such items in Houthi-controlled areas. Advancing
mine action initiatives, especially within residential locations, has become a matter
of urgency, considering the high number of civilian deaths due to landmines,
improvised explosive devices and explosive remnants of war across Hudaydah.
Operations during the pandemic
Since September 2020, following a period of complete lockdown and a
significant drawdown of UNMHA staff as a preventive measure to mitigate the impact
of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Mission has worked to incrementally increase its
operational posture and capabilities in line with United Nations country team and
World Health Organization protocols and guidelines. Increased restrictions on
movement and on the ability to engage local stakeholders given the surge in COVID-19
cases in Yemen since March 2021 have continued to affect the Mission’s operations.
Despite those limitations, UNMHA has successfully implemented a series of mitigating
measures that have allowed for overall business continuity. The Mission continues to
liaise with the United Nations Resident Coordinator Office on the roll -out of
vaccination options for UNMHA personnel to aid in the gradual further easing of
COVID-19 risk mitigation measures and ensure the safety of its staff.
Observations
More than two years since the signing of the Hudaydah Agreement, it remains a
cornerstone for broader peace efforts in Yemen. Although setbacks have occurred in
the past year, the Agreement has continued to remain critical to maintaining stability
in the city of Hudaydah and to ensuring the sustained protection and operation of its
ports and the reduction of violence across the governorate.
21-07311

5/7

S/2021/528

Despite persistent challenges in advancing the resumption of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee mechanism and its supporting structures, the presence of the
Mission and its ongoing efforts to sustain and expand engagement with the parties
and support Agreement implementation have had a tangible moderating impact on the
ground, in particular within the city of Hudaydah and the three ports, thus preserving
a major import lifeline into Yemen. With that in mind, the presence of the Mission
remains critical to preserving hard-won gains and maintaining relative stability
around what is a key strategic area for both economic and humanitarian purposes,
thereby significantly reducing the risk of the destabilization of Hudaydah and the Red
Sea ports.
When the Hudaydah Agreement was reached in December 2018, it was envisaged
as a stepping stone towards efforts to resume the political process in Yemen. Its fate
cannot be divorced from broader political and military dynamics, and its success,
including the ultimate objective of redeployment, hinges on the political will of the
parties. The heightened international focus on, and renewed sense of diplomatic
momentum towards, achieving a political settlement to the conflict in Yemen has
generated both opportunities and pressure points for the parties in Hudaydah. This
has created an atmosphere conducive to encouraging the parties to re-engage under
the auspices of the Redeployment Coordination Committee. It is critical, however,
that uncertainty about peace prospects on the national level do not stand in the way
of the commitment of the parties to re-engage with the Committee and to advance the
implementation of the Agreement, which remains central to the cessation of hostilities
in Hudaydah.
While vested with essentially military oversight functions, the ability of
UNMHA to deliver on its mandate rests on the political will and commitment of the
parties and the Mission’s engagement at the political level. High-level engagement
with the political leadership on both sides, along with regional and international
stakeholders, with the support of and in coordination with the Office of the Special
Envoy, is critical to achieving that objective, as demonstrated by the efforts undertaken
to defuse the major escalation of hostilities in the governorate in October 2020.
Sustained engagement on the political and regional levels, along with continued
efforts to reactivate the joint mechanisms have been and will continue to be key to
preventing escalation along the western coast.
Adjusting the footprint of UNMHA to enable access to the Mission for both
parties across front lines is also vital to its ability to effectively cover its area of
operations and provide impartial support to both sides, including through on -theground liaison, monitoring and patrols. This is paramount to any sustained solution
and/or effort to effectively advance implementation of the Hudaydah Agreement.
While the proposal of a headquarters at the airport – or indeed elsewhere – is not without
obstacles, a joint meeting and ongoing dialogue aimed at reaching agreement on the
Mission’s ability to access and establish the site and addressing issues on
demilitarization and demining, will be critical.
Lastly, the Mission’s ability to carry out mandated tasks and to provide support
for effective ceasefire implementation hinges on the freedom of movement afforded to
it by both parties. While UNMHA resumed weekly patrols to the ports of Hudaydah,
Ra’s Isa and Salif in September 2020, there is an urgent need to enable the Mission
to carry out its city patrols and to conduct frequent and unimpeded visits to hotspot
locations and areas following significant incidents on the ground. This is critical to
allowing the Mission to verify and assess the impact of incidents for the purpose of
ensuring oversight on ceasefire implementation and veracity in reporting and as a
measure to build confidence among the local population. An unequivocal
commitment from both parties to the freedom of movement of UNMHA is vital to its

6/7

21-07311

S/2021/528

ability to effectively carry out its core mandated tasks. UNMHA will continue to
advocate improved access, through bilateral and collective engagement with the
parties and regional stakeholders, and counts on the support of the Security Council
in its efforts to achieve that aim.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

21-07311

7/7
