S/PV.9110

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9110th meeting

Monday, 15 August 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Zhang Jun. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Meirelles Reis Sotero de Menezes
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mrs. Kamboj
Ms. Moran
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Kvalheim
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-46151 (E)
*2246151*

S/PV.9110

The situation in the Middle East

recapitulate where we stand to date in terms of the
implementation of the current truce.

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Hans
Grundberg, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen, and Ms. Ghada Mudawi, Acting Director,
Operations and Advocacy Division, United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Grundberg.
Mr. Grundberg: Two weeks ago, the parties agreed
to extend the truce in Yemen under the same terms for
another two months, until 2 October. I commend the
parties for taking that step, which allows for the longest
pause in fighting since the war began to continue. It
also allows for the benefits of the humanitarian and
economic measures in the truce agreement to unfold.
Along with the truce extension, the parties
committed themselves to using the next two months
to continue negotiations to reach an expanded truce
agreement by 2 October. An expanded agreement would
include additional elements that have the potential of
further improving the daily lives of Yemeni men and
women. It would also allow for further steps towards
ending the conflict. As I work with the parties to
achieve that goal, we all need to remind ourselves that a
failure to reach an agreement to extend the truce would
lead to renewed cycles of escalation and violence, with
predictable and devastating consequences for Yemen’s
population. Yemen urgently needs avoid that scenario.
I call on the parties to make the choice to build the
necessary confidence to avoid a return to war and to
begin to build lasting peace.
Before I delve into the elements of the expanded
truce proposal and explain the tangible impact it would
have for Yemeni men and women, allow me to first
2/18

15/08/2022

Four and a half months in, the truce continues
to broadly hold in military terms. No major military
operations or changes to front lines have occurred,
and there have been neither confirmed airstrikes
inside Yemen nor cross-border attacks emanating from
Yemen. We continue to see a significant decline in
civilian casualties, with the first week of August seeing
the lowest civilian casualty count since the start of the
truce and since the beginning of the war. Most civilian
casualties continue to be a result of explosive remnants
of warfare, including landmines and unexploded
ordnance. A worrisome development is the increase in
child casualties, which now constitute about 40 per cent
of reported civilian casualties. One particularly horrific
incident occurred in Taiz on 23 July, when a mortar
was fired into the residential Zaid Al-Mushki district,
killing one child and injuring 10 others. I condemn all
such acts of violence. Civilians must be protected at
all costs.
My Office continues to receive reports from both
sides regarding the same types of alleged incidents as
reported in the last months. As the truce does not include
an independent monitoring mechanism, I encourage the
parties to make use of the channels established under
the truce, such as the Military Coordination Committee
(MCC), to manage those alleged incidents.
The Military Coordination Committee is an
important outcome of the truce. Maintaining that
channel is of the utmost importance. The fourth meeting
of the MCC is expected to take place during the last week
of August in Amman. The parties have also agreed to
meet as part of a technical working group to establish a
joint coordination room, which would support the MCC
by managing incidents through de-escalation at the
operational level. The Chair of the MCC, my principal
military adviser, just concluded a two-week visit to
Aden, Sana’a and Taiz, where he held constructive
discussions with MCC representatives as well as other
security, political and civil society representatives.
Road openings in Taiz and other governorates
continue to be at the forefront of my efforts. Members
of my Office recently spent time on both sides of
the front line in Taiz, where they engaged with
local authorities as well as with local mediators and
civil society organizations. Several proposals, with
different sets of roads and sequencing options, have
22-46151

15/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East

been presented to the parties. It is regrettable that,
despite those efforts, there has not been more progress
achieved on road openings to date. For the sake of the
people of Taiz, the wider population and the economy,
the parties need to agree on opening roads as soon as
possible. Road openings are mainly a humanitarian
issue, and the truce provides a conducive environment
for the parties to swiftly deliver on this issue, as they
have done with other elements of the truce that are
improving the humanitarian situation. The people of
Taiz and across Yemen deserve to see the truce deliver
for them in all its aspects. One of those elements is the
flow of fuel imports to the port of Al-Hudaydah, which
is continuing with the extension of the truce. A total of
33 ships have been cleared to enter Al-Hudaydah port
since the start of the truce, bringing in almost 1 million
metric tons of various fuel products. I would once
again like to register my appreciation for the pivotal
role played by the United Nations Verification and
Inspection Mechanism in facilitating those imports of
fuel products, and I reiterate my concern that funding
shortages could result in its closure.
Another key element of the current truce agreement
serving to improve the lives of Yemeni men and
women is the opening of Sana’a’s international airport
to commercial flights. To date, 31 round-trip flights
have operated to and from Sana’a, transporting more
than 15,000 passengers, and my Office continues to
work with the Egyptian authorities to facilitate regular
flights to and from Cairo. Since my last briefing to the
Security Council (see S/PV.9088), and as a result of
the extraordinary support provided by the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, there has been an increase in the
frequency of commercial flights to three flights a week
operating between Sana’a and Amman. I hope to see the
number and frequency of flights increase even further
to enable Yemeni men and women to reunite with their
families and seek medical treatment and educational
opportunities abroad.
From the beginning, I have made it clear that
the truce is an interim measure that aims to halt the
hostilities and address urgent humanitarian and
economic needs. Ms. Ghada Mudawi, Acting Director
of Operations and Advocacy of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, will speak in
more detail about these humanitarian and economic
needs in her briefing. In my discussions with the
parties, they continue to emphasize the need to build on
the existing truce to achieve a wide array of economic

S/PV.9110

and security priorities and move towards more durable
solutions for issues with political implications.
For that reason, I have been seeking to mediate
an expanded truce agreement in the past few weeks.
My proposal for it includes, first, an agreement on a
transparent and effective disbursement mechanism
for the regular payment of civil servants’ salaries and
civilian pensions; secondly, the opening of additional
roads in Taiz and other governorates; thirdly, additional
destinations to and from Sana’a airport; and fourthly,
a regular flow of fuel into Al-Hudaydah port. An
expanded agreement would provide for movement along
a multitrack process to address additional humanitarian
and economic issues and create an environment more
conducive to starting discussions on a durable ceasefire
and preparing for a resumption of a Yemeni-led political
process under United Nations auspices.
Both parties have provided substantive feedback
on my proposal. While a zone of potential agreement
was discernible, more time was needed for them to
discuss the details of an expanded truce agreement.
The latest truce extension therefore allows us to
continue to work expeditiously towards an expanded
truce agreement, and I am intensifying my efforts to
support the parties in resolving the outstanding issues.
Given the complexities of the issues being addressed
and the time constraints we face, I urge the parties to
demonstrate flexibility and respond positively if I ask
them to convene to reach an agreement.
During the next few weeks I will continue to count
on the support of the international community for the
implementation, extension and expansion of the truce.
I am particularly thankful for the concerted support of
the Council, as well as that of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia and the Sultanate of Oman. We have a joint
responsibility in helping Yemen and its population to
take the necessary and decisive steps towards peace.
We need to end the conflict, not merely manage it.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Grundberg for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mudawi.
Ms. Mudawi: Like the Special Envoy, we welcome
the recent extension of Yemen’s truce. We hope it will
lead to an expanded truce agreement along the lines of
what Mr. Grundberg has just described. We also hope
the extension will see rapid progress in reopening major
roads in and around Taiz, where civilians, commercial

22-461513/18

S/PV.9110

The situation in the Middle East

traffic and aid agencies have faced intolerable
movement constraints for years, and we hope to see
a more comprehensive end to the violence in Yemen.
Although the fighting and civilian casualties have
decreased sharply since April, they have never stopped
entirely. On 23 July, for example, shelling in Taiz
city killed one child and injured 10 more. According
to open-source reports, more than 150 civilians have
been killed since the truce began in April, so while
we welcome the truce and its extension, we must
also be clear-eyed about its limitations. The ongoing
violence and civilian casualties inside the country are
one such limitation. Yemen’s massive humanitarian
crisis is another. The truce alone cannot be expected
to resolve that crisis, including the risk of famine that
is threatening some areas. As we have said recently,
three major issues are shaping Yemen’s humanitarian
outlook — the economy, the operating environment for
aid agencies and humanitarian funding. Let me review
where that stands.
First, with regard to the economy, where alarming
conditions persist, the exchange rate is now worse
than it was before the truce. All the immediate posttruce gains were short-lived, and now fewer people can
afford to buy food or other shared essentials, nearly all
of which must be imported. Food supplies inside the
country are currently fairly stable, but the food supply
chain, which depends on commercial imports, remains
precarious. In July, commercial food imports fell for the
fourth month in a row, coming in at 30 per cent below
the 12-month average. Serious concerns are looming
for commercial imports bound for Al-Hudaydah and
Saleef, all of which are inspected by the United Nations
Verification and Inspection Mechanism (UNVIM) prior
to arrival. In July, Al-Hudaydah and Saleef brought in
about 60 per cent of all food imports to Yemen and
about 50 per cent of all fuel imports. Commercial
imports are an essential lifeline, and the Security
Council has often stated its commitment to facilitating
them through all ports, most recently in resolution 2624
(2022). But UNVIM will likely have to stop its work
in just a few weeks. It needs $3.5 million to pay for
operations through December. That is a modest sum
compared to the enormous impact of enabling Yemen’s
private sector to continue bringing in the food, fuel and
other goods that millions of people need to survive. If
Member States choose to let UNVIM lapse, it is difficult
to predict the consequence for commercial imports. We
hope there are clear plans in place to ensure that those
4/18

15/08/2022

imports continue without disruption, recalling the
Security Council’s commitment on the issue.
Aid agencies continue to deliver assistance
across the country, reaching an average of more than
11 million people every month. The agencies often face
serious constraints in doing so, which is my second
point. We appreciate the efforts of the Government
of Yemen to work with aid agencies to address
insecurity. In recent weeks, the incitements against
aid agencies on social media and in other forums have
also decreased somewhat. In Houthi-held areas, there
may now be a way forward to resolve the challenges
we reported last month regarding the travel abroad
of Yemeni aid workers. The discussion surrounding
women’s full participation in humanitarian action is
also continuing. We will keep the Council informed as
the discussion progresses.
Despite those positive steps, aid work remains more
difficult and more dangerous than it should be. Aid
agencies reported 532 access incidents in the second
quarter of this year, which is an improvement over the
first quarter but still equivalent to about six incidents
every day, a majority of them due to movement
restrictions. Insecurity is still a problem. In Lahij,
agencies have faced at least three carjacking attempts
in the past two weeks. In Sana’a, Houthi authorities are
still detaining the two United Nations staff members
they promised to release last November, and five
United Nations staff members abducted in Abyan in
February are still missing. We repeat our urgent call for
all detained aid workers to be released right now. We
would also appreciate direct engagement and support
on the issue from Member States.
My last point is about funding for aid operations,
where there is some good news. Last month, the
United States allocated an additional $431 million to
the United Nations response plan in Yemen, bringing
its total funding this year to more than $1 billion and
making it by far the largest humanitarian donor to
Yemen this year. The new contribution from the United
States is expected to help the World Food Programme
increase rations for millions of hungry people whose
food aid was cut in recent months. It will also provide
support for other key sectors. With that contribution,
the humanitarian response plan is now 41 per cent
funded, a 14 per cent jump since last month. We thank
all donors for their support and urge others to consider
increases that will help keep aid programmes running
through the end of the year. Funding gaps, particularly
22-46151

15/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East

in chronically underfunded sectors such as water,
sanitation and shelter, are still a challenge. Over the
past month, unprecedented flooding has affected more
than 200,000 people but so far agencies have been able
to help only about 30,000 people, mainly due to the lack
of funds.
On a related note, the United Nations is also still
working to raise money for the FSO SAFER tanker
project. Members are all deeply familiar with the
risks and urgency of that work. Several contributions,
totalling $5.4 million, were announced in the past
month, bringing the total pledges to approximately
$63 million. The United Nations needs $144 million
to implement the fuel operation plan for the tanker,
including $80 million to start the emergency work of
transferring the oil from the tanker as soon as possible.
We remain deeply concerned about the humanitarian
outlook for Yemen. By taking action on all the issues
I have just outlined, strengthening the economy,
supporting the United Nations Verification and
Inspection Mechanism, advocating for humanitarian
access and closing the funding gaps for the response
plan and the FSO SAFER, Member States can prevent
further disaster, reduce suffering and strengthen the
resilience of millions of Yemenis.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ms. Mudawi for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Envoy Grundberg and Ms. Mudawi for their briefings.
On behalf of the United Kingdom, I would like to pay
tribute in particular to Mr. Grundberg’s continued
leadership, which has been critical in securing the
two-month extension to the truce. That is a significant
achievement by the United Nations and the parties. For
the Yemeni people, it means an additional two months of
relative peace and a chance to keep benefiting from the
confidence-building measures. Fuel prices for ordinary
Yemenis have eased thanks to the delivery of 720,000
metric tons of oil into Al-Hudaydah port during the
past four months. Yemenis have been accorded renewed
freedom of movement, thanks to the commercial roundtrip flights out of Sana’a.
While the extension of the treaty is welcome, we
recognize and today have heard about the challenge
of the two months ahead. We urge the parties to

S/PV.9110

continue their constructive engagement with the
Special Envoy and to abide by their commitments.
Continued cooperation and an expansion of the truce
are in the interests of all the parties and the Yemeni
people. Only peace can resolve the severe humanitarian
crisis. Despite the truce’s tangible benefits for Yemeni
civilians, rising global commodity prices and a dearth
of humanitarian funding have meant that their suffering
continues. Analysis by the World Food Programme in
June showed some of the highest levels of inadequate
food consumption ever recorded in Yemen. In this
cycle, the shortage of funding will lead to 3 million
fewer Yemenis receiving the rations they need. The
funding deficit is undermining the humanitarian
response. Without a further disbursement of funds
from donors, the crisis will only deepen and undermine
the benefits of the truce. Indeed, without humanitarian
access, no amount of funding can serve those in need.
The people of Yemen deserve to live peacefully without
the looming threat of famine.
While we welcome the progress associated with the
truce, the threat of a spill from the FSO SAFER tanker
continues to loom over Yemen and the region. Action
must be immediate as a failure to intervene will result
in an environmental and humanitarian catastrophe. The
United Kingdom was pleased to announce on 18 July
a further £2 million pledge to the United Nations
operation, but we urge our colleagues to bridge the
funding gap and commit immediately before it is
too late.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): At the outset, let me
thank Special Envoy Hans Grundberg and Ms. Ghada
Mudawi for their briefings.
As Ghana reiterates its endorsement of the parties’
renewal of the truce for two months beginning on
2 August, we are encouraged by their resolve to deepen
their negotiations to reach an expanded truce and believe
that such an expansion, if carried through, will mark a
turning point in the history of the seven-year conflict.
We therefore reiterate our call to the parties to seize
this favourable moment and give peace a chance by
considering the proposals for Special Envoy’s expanded
truce, which has the potential to be transformed into
a nationwide ceasefire and to create the environment
needed for a resumption of the Yemeni-led political
process under the auspices of the United Nations. We
commend the Special Envoy and his entire United
Nations team for their admirable persistence, as well
as all the other stakeholders involved in the negotiating

22-461515/18

S/PV.9110

The situation in the Middle East

15/08/2022

process, and encourage the further work required to
bring peace, security and development to Yemen. In
that regard, we urge the Special Envoy and his team not
to relax their efforts but to continue to be resolute in
their pursuit of peace and to focus on the requirements
of peace to the benefit of all Yemenis. We stress the
importance of the full, effective and meaningful
participation of Yemeni women in all stages of the
peace process and applaud their long-demonstrated
willingness and capacity to engage in communal and
national efforts aimed at resolving the conflict.

of the truce, the humanitarian situation in Yemen
has remained severe. According to the World Food
Programme, approximately 17.4 million Yemenis are
food insecure — a number that is projected to rise to
19 million by the end of the year. Sadly, the plight of
the population affected is exacerbated by the current
global rise in food prices. We call for sustained support
from donors to help bridge the funding gap in the
Yemen humanitarian response plan to ensure continued
assistance in the amounts necessary for the people
in need.

The benefits of the truce are manifestly visible
for all to see. Thanks to it, 26 fuel ships carrying
approximately 720,027 metric tons of fuel derivatives
entered Al-Hudaydah port in the space of less than
four months, compared to 470,000 metric tons for the
whole of 2021. In addition, thanks to the truce, flights
have been resumed between Sana’a and Amman as of
21 July, and the flights between Sana’a and Cairo have
transported more than 8,000 passengers. Above all, the
truce has resulted in a decrease in civilian casualties
of as much as 60 per cent. Those statistics are worth
highlighting to remind the parties of the enormous
opportunities that await the people of Yemen if they can
maintain their choice to engage constructively and in
good faith in the United Nations-facilitated negotiations
towards a resolution of the conflict.

Furthermore, the high risk of a catastrophic oil spill
from the FSO SAFER in the Red Sea, and the likelihood
of a major humanitarian and ecological disaster resulting
from such a spill, remains a matter of grave concern
to us. We acknowledge the ongoing international
efforts that have mobilized about $65 million for the
first phase of the operation, whose cost is estimated at
approximately $80 million. We call on the international
community to support the United Nations fundraising
campaign aimed at addressing this threat, in order to
avert a major ecological and environmental disaster
with global consequences. As has been pointed out, a
failure to do so in good time will require more funds to
do the clean-up than the amount that is currently being
sought, in addition to the environmental damage that a
spill from the tanker would cause.

Nevertheless, in that context, we remain concerned
about the fact that people in Taiz and other governorates
are unable to enjoy the full benefits of the truce
because their right to free movement continues to be
curtailed by the continued blocking of roads to the city.
That unfortunate development has brought immense
suffering and hardship to the people of Taiz and the
governorates affected. It is incumbent on the parties to
follow through on their commitments under the terms
of the truce in order to meet, without further delay
and under the auspices of the United Nations, on the
modalities for the reopening of all the blocked routes.
We also know that notwithstanding the general lull in
military activities by the warring factions inside Yemen
and across its borders, there was a reported attack
in Taiz that left 11 children injured on 24 July. We
condemn those attacks in no uncertain terms and call
on the perpetrators to desist from such action, which
tends to undermine the truce and reverse the marginal
progress that has been made.
Even as we have been seeing significant
reductions in civilian casualties since the beginning
6/18

In conclusion, we call on the conflicting parties
in Yemen to fully honour their obligations under the
terms of the truce and to redouble their efforts towards
an agreement on the expanded truce proposal of the
United Nations Special Envoy for the benefit of the
Yemeni people.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank Mr. Grundberg and Ms. Mudawi for
their comprehensive briefings on the political and
humanitarian developments in Yemen.
The United Arab Emirates welcomes the extension
of the humanitarian truce for an additional two months
in accordance with the terms of the initial agreement
and the initiative of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
announced in March 2021, to end the crisis in Yemen.
We appreciate the Special Envoy’s efforts, as well as the
regional and international endeavours, accompanied by
visits and contacts, during the last few days preceding
the extension of the truce, especially those of the
Sultanate of Oman.
22-46151

15/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Despite the continued obstacles that the Houthi
militias have put in the way of the extension and
expansion of the truce, the determination of our
brothers in Yemen and the Presidential Leadership
Council to prioritize Yemen’s national interests, along
with the strong desire of regional and international
stakeholders to preserve the calm and gains achieved
by the truce, has effectively contributed to reducing the
violence and alleviating the human suffering. With the
extension of the truce, there is still an opportunity for
the Houthis to cooperate with the international efforts
to reach a permanent solution to the crisis and to end
their daily violations of the truce in the governorates of
Al-Hudaydah, Taiz, Dhale, Hajjah, Saada, Al-Jawf and
Ma’rib, including the indiscriminate bombing of the
Al-Rawdah neighbourhood in the city of Taiz, which
resulted in casualties among children. Additionally,
the Houthi militias’ siege of Taiz must end, as well as
their recruitment of soldiers, mobilization and holding
of military parades. That behaviour clearly shows their
disregard for the suffering of the Yemeni people and
the absence of sincere intentions on their part to choose
peace. We reaffirm that the security and stability of
Yemen is integral to the security and stability of the
region. From that perspective, it is important to ensure
that the latest extension of the truce does not end
without progress being made on the outstanding issues,
especially those of a humanitarian nature, such as the
opening of the roads leading to Taiz and an exchange
of detainees in accordance with the all-for-all principle.
Despite the importance of the truce and its positive
impact on the situation in Yemen, we must remember
that it is not an end in itself but rather a means to
achieve the ultimate and most important goal, which is
a comprehensive and sustainable peace across Yemen.
We therefore call for intensifying the efforts to reach
a comprehensive ceasefire and create conditions
conducive to launching political consultations between
the Yemeni parties, based on a set time frame.
We note the difficult humanitarian situation in
Yemen, especially with regard to food security. Along
with our partners, in particular Saudi Arabia, we have
continued to address the situation through the provision
of economic and humanitarian support to Yemen
in various areas, including by stabilizing exchange
rates, given that Yemen is reliant on imports to cover
90 per cent of its food needs. We stress in that regard
the importance of ensuring that the Houthis deposit
revenues in the Central Bank of Yemen to enable civil

S/PV.9110

servants’ salaries to be paid. We also note the need to
unify all the national efforts to restore security and
stability in Yemen. We appreciate the role played by
the Presidential Leadership Council in promoting
consensus and ending internal divisions.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates renews its
commitment to standing by our brother people of Yemen
and their legitimate aspirations for security, development
and prosperity. We also support Yemen’s restoration of
its natural role within its Arab environment.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I would like to thank Special
Envoy Grundberg and Acting Director Mudawi for
their briefings, and I welcome the participation of the
representative of Yemen in this meeting.
Kenya joins others in welcoming the extension of
the truce for a further two months, and we commend
the efforts of the Special Envoy and other stakeholders
in that regard. The truce has certainly brought some
reprieve to millions of Yemenis, and we therefore
urge for intensified efforts by all parties to implement
their commitments, in particular by opening the
roads in Taiz. We caution against the truce being
used as an opportunity to reconfigure or strengthen
military postures to influence any future negotiations.
In that regard, genuine efforts must be made to
create a foundation for lasting peace, including a
comprehensive ceasefire.
We condemn the attacks in Taiz on 24 July, which
resulted in the death of a child and injured several
others. We are also concerned about the recent reports
of fighting in Shabwa governorate, which resulted in at
least 35 fatalities. We urge for maximum restraint on
the part of the parties concerned to avoid any further
escalation of tensions. Most importantly, we remind the
warring parties of their obligation under international
humanitarian law to protect civilians, particularly the
vulnerable, including women, children, the elderly and
people living with disabilities.
As we heard during our last briefing (S/PV.9088),
the truce alone is not enough to address the humanitarian
crisis, which was recently exacerbated by heavy rains
that resulted in flooding affecting many. As we have said
before, there is an urgent need for pragmatic approaches
that can adequately and sustainably equip humanitarian
action programmes with necessary resources.
Meanwhile, national and local actors in Yemen
must allow unhindered access to humanitarian workers

22-461517/18

S/PV.9110

The situation in the Middle East

and aid in line with international humanitarian law.
The reported cases of intimidation and incitement
against aid agencies must come to a stop. Progress on
political, military and economic cooperation under the
Presidential Leadership Council and the extension of
the truce create an opportunity to enhance investments
in development projects that will improve the economy
and reduce reliance on external support.
In that regard, we welcome United Nations
Development Programme projects such as the Qat-toCoffee for Climate Resilience and Human Security in
Yemen initiative, which aim to promote sustainable
coffee value chains as a high-value alternative crop
so as to reduce groundwater exploitation, enhance
livelihood opportunities and empower women. If this
project is successfully implemented, it can serve as a
good model for similar development projects.
As time passes, the risks emanating from the
deteriorating FSO SAFER tanker continue to increase.
We appreciate the generous contributions made to date
and once again urge the international community to
redouble its efforts to enable the project to commence
without further delay.
In conclusion, Kenya reaffirms its commitment
to supporting the ongoing United Nations efforts
aimed at facilitating a Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned
comprehensive and lasting peace and stability.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to start with an expression of
condolences to our brotherly Armenian people on
the deaths that resulted from the fire at the Surmalu
shopping centre in Yerevan and to the brotherly
people of Egypt following the terrible fire at the Abu
Sefein church in Giza. We would like to express our
condolences to all the friends and the family of those
who were lost, and we wish all those who have been
injured a swift recovery from these tragic events.
We would like to thank the Special Envoy for
the Secretary-General Hans Grundberg, and the
Acting Director, Operations and Advocacy Division
of the United Nations Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Ghada Mudawi, for
their briefings on developments on the political and
humanitarian situation in Yemen.
We welcome the decision by the official authorities
of the Republic of Yemen and the Ansar Allah
movement to extend the truce in the country for a
8/18

15/08/2022

further two months with the same terms. This provides
real opportunities for further stabilization. We trust
that it will facilitate the transition to direct full-format
negotiations between the parties, including in the area of
security and the economy. We hope that the remaining
disagreements between them will be overcome.
In that regard, we highly commend the efforts of
Mr. Grundberg, as well as Saudi Arabia, the United
Arab Emirates and Oman, which have played a key role
in establishing intra-Yemeni contacts in order to extend
the truce. From our side, we will continue to provide
all possible comprehensive assistance to international
mediation work in Yemen. We maintain contacts with
all leading political parties and forces, and we actively
urge them to adopt a constructive approach and
find compromises.
We see no alternative but to hammer out necessary
political decisions as part of the broad intra-Yemeni
dialogue with the involvement of all parties to the
conflict. We trust that a lasting and long-term ceasefire
will help to shore up the positive steps taken to find
solutions to the protracted Yemeni conflict. This will
depend first and foremost on the Yemeni protagonists
supporting constructive cooperation with the United
Nations in order to implement the current provisions of
the truce. It will also depend on the potential expansion
of the truce’s contours with a focus on achieving a
comprehensive settlement in long-suffering Yemen.
Unfortunately, one of the main sticking points — the
parameters for reopening roads around Taiz — has still
not been resolved. In this regard, we urge the parties
to show additional flexibility, continue substantive
discussions on this important issue and find mutually
acceptable solutions.
We are pleased to note that the truce, in force since
April, is being broadly observed, with an insignificant
number of violations. This gives ordinary Yemenis
long-awaited breathing space and is grounds for hope
that life will return to normal. The leading Yemeni
political forces are well aware of the danger of slipping
back into armed confrontation, and they are trying to
prevent such a scenario. We welcome the ongoing work
of the Military Coordination Committee in monitoring
the conditions of the truce.
For the first time over the four months of the
truce, there has been a significant improvement in
the humanitarian situation for civilians in Yemen. We
note the joint steps to ensure fuel deliveries through
22-46151

15/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9110

the ports of Al-Hudaydah and to support commercial
flights from Sana’a.

proper use of fuel-shipment revenues should be arrived
at quickly.

Nonetheless, the socioeconomic situation in
the country is still extremely serious. There is a
need to normalize and get the provision of basic
goods — primarily of foodstuffs, medications and basic
necessities — to Yemenis up and running regularly and
on a non-discriminatory basis. Any restrictions on the
delivery of basic goods and any obstacles in the path of
humanitarian workers are unacceptable.

It is indeed unfortunate that the current truce
has not brought the expected humanitarian relief to
many Yemenis who are in dire need of such support.
Actual delivery of aid had to be scaled down, owing to
a lack of funds for aid operations and global inflation
in commodity prices. We hope that the situation will
soon be reversed with the increased funding received
in recent weeks.

In conclusion, we would like once again to draw the
Security Council’s attention to resolution 598 (1987) and
other initiatives focusing on regional stability, including
the renewed Russian collective security concept.

As far as India, a long-standing friend of Yemen, is
concerned, we have always prioritized the humanitarian
needs of Yemen. India has extended humanitarian
assistance to Yemen through the supply of medicines
and food commodities in the past. Our hospitals have
received thousands of Yemenis for medical treatment,
even during the coronavirus disease pandemic. India
has also exported more than 250,000 tons of wheat to
Yemen since April to mitigate the adverse impact of
supply changes in the global commodity markets on
Yemen. We remain committed to doing so in the future
as well.

Mrs. Kamboj (India): I thank Special Envoy Hans
Grundberg for his briefing and commend him for his
efforts in securing the renewal of the truce for an
additional two months. I also thank Ms. Ghada Mudawi
for her briefing on the humanitarian situation in Yemen.
India welcomes the renewal of the truce, which
indeed comes as a relief to the people of Yemen,
whose lives have been devastated by the seven-yearold conflict. The most tangible benefit of the truce is
the significant reduction in the loss of precious human
lives owing to an overall reduction in violence.
The extended truce notwithstanding, recent
months have witnessed some serious violations of the
truce agreement, including the 24 July attack in Taiz
that resulted in deaths and injuries to children. We
condemn such attacks and urge all parties to adhere to
the truce agreement.
We are also concerned by the limited progress
on opening roads in Taiz and other governorates. An
understanding on opening roads through Taiz, which
was also part of the Stockholm Agreement, remains
largely the unimplemented provision of the truce
agreement. The people of Taiz have suffered immensely
from the blockade of roads, and they deserve to benefit
from the current truce. Progress in the opening of roads
is an urgent humanitarian imperative. In addition, the
lopsided implementation of the truce agreement does
not augur well for its long-term sustainability.
Further, continued progress on the other provisions
of the truce agreement is important. This should be
further expanded as it benefits the people of Yemen.
Mutually acceptable solutions to issues related to their
implementation, such as travel documents and the

However, humanitarian aid alone will not solve the
current crisis in Yemen. Urgent international support is
also required to stabilize Yemen’s economy and prevent
the deterioration of basic services.
So far, the truce has provided the longest period
of relative calm in Yemen since the eruption of the
conflict. That must be prolonged, consolidated and
further expanded into a durable and lasting ceasefire.
Such a ceasefire would build more confidence among
the parties and provide a favourable environment for
the political track.
We have no doubt that only a robust and inclusive
political solution that meets the legitimate aspirations
of all Yemenis can end the conflict in Yemen. We urge
the Yemeni parties to work towards such a solution
and engage with the Special Envoy constructively in
that regard.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Let me thank Special Envoy Grundberg and
Acting Director Mudawi. I want to express my gratitude
to them both for their unwavering commitment to
bringing peace and humanitarian relief to Yemen.
Thankfully, we now have an opening for a sustained
peace due to the recent truce extension. We appreciate
the central role played by regional partners to make

22-461519/18

S/PV.9110

The situation in the Middle East

that possible, including Saudi Arabia’s leadership and
Oman’s efforts to promote dialogue between the parties.
Thanks to the leadership of the Presidential
Leadership Council, Yemenis continue to tangibly
benefit from the truce. Fifteen thousand Yemenis have
flown from Sana’a airport for the first time since 2016,
and five times more fuel is entering Al-Hudaydah per
month as compared to 2021. Such a truce extension
also provides an important opportunity to transition
to a stronger, more comprehensive agreement that
meaningfully expands benefits for Yemenis and allows
for a durable resolution to a conflict that has gone on
for far too long.
We therefore call on the parties to intensify and
expedite negotiations to finalize an expanded agreement
based on the proposal shared by the Special Envoy. An
expanded agreement would allow for discussions to
secure a comprehensive nation-wide ceasefire and pave
the way for resuming a Yemeni-Yemeni political process.
Let us be clear: such a political process must include
meaningful input from women, civil society leaders
and members of other marginalized communities.
The first step to securing an expanded agreement
is Houthi action with regard to Taiz — a long overdue
humanitarian imperative. We call on the Houthis to
accept the Special Envoy’s proposal and open roads to
Taiz without delay. In addition, the parties must make
progress on salary payments for civil servants.
We also demand that the Houthis unconditionally
and immediately release the current and former United
States and United Nations locally employed Yemeni
staff whom they detained in Sana’a. I have to repeat
this: we demand their unconditional and immediate
release. Holding those individuals, as well as other
humanitarian workers, is unacceptable, and it is
long past time that the Houthis end such outrageous
behaviour. We are closely tracking the recent instability
in Shabwah and urge Yemenis to work through their
differences peacefully in order to focus on building on
the United Nations-mediated truce.
Before I conclude, I want to talk about efforts to
support humanitarian needs and recovery on the ground.
For our part, we have provided more than $1 billion
in humanitarian aid for Yemen in 2022 and nearly
$5 billion since 2014, making us the largest donor to
those efforts. We call on the international community
to join us and the rest of the world in addressing the
world’s worst humanitarian crisis. But Yemen needs
10/18

15/08/2022

more than just humanitarian assistance. We also call
on donors, particularly regional donors, to increase and
expedite economic support, which will help to bolster
the efforts of the Republic of Yemen’s Government to
stabilize the economy and strengthen basic services.
Other urgent needs include funding for the United
Nations emergency project to prevent a spill from the
FSO SAFER oil tanker. Such a spill would cause an
economic, humanitarian and environmental disaster in
the Red Sea and would cost tens of billions of dollars
in clean-up costs and lost revenue. Again, we therefore
call on donors, including from the private sector, to step
forward now.
Finally, the United Nations Verification and
Inspection Mechanism also faces a funding gap of
$3.5 million this year, and it will suffer a lapse in
operations next month if donors do not step up now.
The Mechanism’s efforts are essential to continuing
the flow of commercial goods into Yemen, preventing
further deterioration of the humanitarian situation and
sustaining the truce.
This is a critical moment for Yemen. The United
States and the international community stand ready to
support Yemen’s peace and recovery process, but, first,
the Yemeni parties themselves must choose peace. The
fact that the truce in Yemen continues to hold is cause
for hope. It has significantly reduced violence; it has
saved lives and improved freedom of movement; and
it has created momentum towards peace. We must now
take the next step forward.
Mr. Meirelles Reis Sotero de Menezes (Brazil):
Our delegation would like to begin by thanking Special
Envoy Grundberg and Acting Director Mudawi for
their comprehensive and informative briefings. We also
welcome the representative of Yemen to this meeting.
I would like to start by commending the parties’
commitment earlier this month to extending, for a
second time, the nation-wide truce initiated in April.
We also thank Special Envoy Grundberg and his Office
for their sustained efforts in that regard.
As was repeatedly highlighted, the truce is a
significant achievement, and each of its provisions
delivers real benefits to common Yemenis, including
easier access to fuel, medical treatment and family
reunions. The cessation of major military operations
means that thousands of Yemenis are alive today who
would not be otherwise.
22-46151

15/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East

However, the terms agreed to in April must be
fully implemented, including the reopening of roads
in Taiz and other governorates. The Special Envoy has
presented a number of proposals on that issue, and the
Security Council has repeatedly called for flexibility
on that matter. We expect those calls to be heeded.
As we heard, the truce must also be expanded. There
are a number of issues currently outside the truce’s
provisions that are essential in ensuring stability in the
short term, such as the regular payment of Government
salaries. The expansion proposal presented by the
Special Envoy addresses that and other issues, and it
will hopefully form the basis for an enhanced agreement
at the end of the current extension.
An expanded truce is also a necessary step towards
the ultimate goal of reaching a comprehensive and
sustainable political settlement, with the meaningful
participation of all groups in Yemen’s diverse society,
including people with disabilities, youth and women.
If the parties do not build upon the foundation
provided by the truce, episodes of violence and
escalation will be increasingly common and will
eventually reignite the spiral of violence in Yemen.
Incidents such as the 24 July attack on Taiz, which
killed one child and injured another 10, are completely
unacceptable. Reports of clashes in Shabwah are also
very concerning.
As highlighted by the briefers, children have paid
a terrible price in this war. More than 10,000 children
were killed or injured, and children have also been
victims of recruitment, abduction, sexual violence and
the denial of humanitarian access by different parties
to the conflict.
Last April, Ansar Allah signed an action plan on the
protection of children. We are dismayed about reports
that the recruitment and indoctrination of children is
still ongoing in Ansar Allah-controlled areas, and we
call on them to urgently comply with the plan of action.
We have just heard from Ms. Mudawi with regard
to the humanitarian situation, which remains desperate.
We are, however, encouraged to hear that after months
of financial strain, new and significant contributions
have been announced. Brazil has sought to do its part,
including by making consistent contributions during
pledging events over the past few years. We hope that
new contributions will also be forthcoming with regard
to other urgent matters, such as the financing of the

S/PV.9110

United Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism
and the response plan for the FSO SAFER tanker. The
delivery of foreign financial aid packages announced in
April would also contribute significantly to stabilizing
exchange rates and fighting food insecurity in Yemen.
We should once again emphasize that while humanitarian
assistance is fundamental, it is unsustainable in the
absence of progress towards economic stability. We urge
the parties to refrain from measures that might deepen
economic fragmentation and to work to re-establish
national economic institutions and structures.
In conclusion, we reiterate that after seven years of
conflict, the truce represents Yemen’s best chance of
achieving peace. We encourage the parties not to waste
the opportunity, to put the needs of Yemenis first and
engage productively over the next few weeks. There is
no shortage of challenges to overcome, and the Yemeni
people have suffered far too much for far too long.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me thank Special Envoy
Grundberg and Acting Director Mudawi for their
updated information on the current situation in Yemen.
I would like to join other members of the Security
Council in welcoming the truce extension of 2 August
for another two months, as well as the commitment of
the parties to working on an extended truce agreement.
That continues to be the right path towards a sustained
solution for Yemen, as we all agree that despite the
ongoing serious challenges detailed earlier by both
briefers, the Yemeni people are benefiting from such a
positive development after years of war.
We commend the work of the Special Envoy and
his team on the new extension, as well as his efforts
to expand and deepen the arrangement. We call on the
parties to continue to constructively engage with him in
that regard. We want to believe that the parties are fully
aware of the importance of this crucial moment in the
ongoing peace efforts and that they will acknowledge
that only through a nationwide comprehensive
ceasefire can they create the conditions necessary and
pave the way for resuming a dialogue for a Yemeniled and Yemeni-owned political solution under United
Nations auspices. Albania commends the outstanding
role played by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the
Sultanate of Oman, as well as the other regional actors,
in the recent truce extension.
When agreements are signed, they must be
implemented. We commend the leadership of the
Government of Yemen in continuing to fulfil its

22-4615111/18

S/PV.9110

The situation in the Middle East

commitments, with the opening of Al-Hudaydah port
to fuel ships and Sana’a airport for commercial flights,
as part of the truce. We call on the Houthis to engage in
good faith and adopt a reasonable approach to opening
the roads to Taiz and exchanging detainees. The
citizens of Taiz should not be deprived of the benefits
of the truce and the prospects of a peace path for all
Yemenis. In that context, we express our deep regret for
the attack of 23 July in a residential neighbourhood in
Taiz. The protection of civilians is an obligation under
international law for all parties to conflicts.
With regard to the security track, we welcome the
meetings of the United Nations-facilitated Military
Coordination Committee to promote dialogue and
continue discussions on de-escalation, and we hope
for a positive outcome from the fourth meeting of the
Committee in Amman. We join the Special Envoy in
urging the parties to continue the process leading to the
release of all detainees in accordance with the agreement
in March. We also reiterate our condemnation of the
continued incarceration of the local former and current
staff members of the United States Embassy in Yemen,
and we call for their immediate release and that of the
United Nations staff members abducted in Abyan. All
the staff of international organizations and of local and
international non-governmental organizations must feel
safe, and their security must be guaranteed. The increase
in security incidents targeting humanitarian workers
should be properly addressed, and the intimidation of
aid agencies on social media must stop. The delivery of
humanitarian assistance must be carried out freely and
securely so that it can reach everyone in need.
Let me conclude by reiterating Albania’s support for
the work of the United Nations Resident Coordinator in
Yemen, Mr. Gressly, and his efforts to find innovative
solutions to the FSO SAFER oil tanker and to secure the
operational needs of the United Nations Verification
and Inspection Mechanism for Yemen. The past few
months have made a clear difference between the past
and present in Yemen — between the conflict and the
truce. We call on the parties to renew their efforts
to achieve a nationwide ceasefire and a meaningful
political dialogue leading to a lasting settlement, with
the full participation of women and civil society.
Mr. De La Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Special Envoy Grundberg and Acting
Director Mudawi for their briefings. We welcome the
presence of the Permanent Representative of Yemen in
this Security Council meeting.
12/18

15/08/2022

The renewal of the truce that began at the beginning
of this month is very welcome. The cessation of
hostilities, together with its supportive measures, has
provided Yemenis with temporary relief. The number
of casualties has been reduced, while at the same time
the importation of essential commodities and fuel has
been expedited. Clearly, however, a longer-term truce
with broader scope would have been a better option.
We urge for the lifting the blockade of Taiz and for
reaching agreement on resolving the issue of paying
civil servants’ salaries. We also hope for an increase
in the number of flights to and from Sana’a. We urge
the parties to respect the truce so that progress can
be made to re-establish a dialogue with a view to
achieving lasting peace. We therefore call on regional
actors to continue to support efforts to that end. My
delegation acknowledges and supports all the efforts of
the Special Envoy.
Although there has been a reduction in the level of
violence, tragic incidents continue to occur. My country
condemns the attack in the residential neighbourhood
of Zaid Al-Mushki in Taiz, which led to the death of a
child and injured 10 others. We hope that the work of the
Military Coordination Committee and the joint forces
command will enable the prevention of such incidents.
My delegation takes note of the sixth meeting of
the Supervisory Committee on the Implementation
of the Prisoners and Detainees Exchange Agreement.
We commend the progress made in facilitating the
verification of the identity of prisoners and call on
the parties to ensure the prompt release of all the
detainees, particularly those in vulnerable situations.
The economic crisis, the global increase in food and
energy prices and the adverse effects of climate change
have had a serious impact on the food security of the
Yemeni population, particularly on internally displaced
persons. In that regard, Mexico acknowledges the
recent contributions of the United States to funding
the 2022 humanitarian response plan. All actors on the
ground must respect international humanitarian law
and guarantee full access for humanitarian assistance.
We condemn all forms of threats or intimidation against
humanitarian personnel, and we call once again for the
release of and details on the location of detained or
missing United Nations personnel.
We also once again express our concern about
the threat posed by mines to the civilian population.
We acknowledge the efforts of humanitarian agencies
working on mine clearance and awareness campaigns.
22-46151

15/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Besides that, we are concerned about violations of the
arms embargo and echo the recommendation of the
Panel of Experts to strengthen border controls so that
the embargo can be implemented.
In conclusion, I urge for the need for funding the
United Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism
for Yemen. Should it fail to materialize, the Mechanism’s
operations risk ending in September.
We also call urgently for contributions to be made
so that the fuel of the FSO SAFER oil tanker can be
transferred to another vessel in order to avert an
environmental and humanitarian disaster.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank the
Special Envoy, Mr. Hans Grundberg, and Ms. Ghada
Mudawi, the Acting Director of Operations and
Advocacy of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, for their informative briefings.
I also welcome the Permanent Representative of Yemen
to this meeting.
We welcome the renewal of the truce in force until
2 October, which gives us a glimmer of hope and the
Yemeni people a rare respite in a crisis that has lasted
too long. We hope fervently that during the two months
of the new ceasefire the parties will indeed step up their
negotiations to reach an expanded truce without delay
so as to build on the opportunity to pave the way for
lasting peace. We have already been pleased to see a
significant drop in the number of civilian casualties on
the ground, the reopening of Sana’a airport to civilian
flights and an improvement in the fuel crisis.
The gains made through the renewal of the truce
are still mixed. Despite the international pressure for
a lasting peace in Yemen, sporadic ceasefire violations
persist, and there are new reports of fighting in Shabwa
province. If nothing is done to sustainably stabilize the
situation, the risk of further escalation cannot be ruled
out. In addition, the humanitarian situation in Yemen
remains worrisome, with a theatre of operations that
is seemingly one of the world’s worst humanitarian
disasters. Since the beginning of this devastating war,
a heavy toll has been exacted on Yemeni civilians,
including children, who have been killed or maimed
by landmines or forcibly recruited into armed groups.
But the high number of civilian deaths is also the
result of indirect consequences of the fighting, such
as starvation, disease and a lack of potable water. In
that regard, funding the humanitarian response plan for
Yemen is crucial and urgent. We therefore commend

S/PV.9110

the United States commitment of $431 million in
additional funding.
The economic outlook remains bleak. The exchange
rate is worse than it was before the truce. Household
purchasing power is extremely low, and energy and
food prices have increased, leading to food insecurity.
The operating environment remains difficult for
humanitarian agencies, despite the progress that has
been made. The incidence of negative messages and
disinformation has decreased slightly since the most
recent Security Council meeting (see S/PV.9088). Work
with the Yemeni authorities is under way to address
other restrictions on United Nations staff, including
humanitarian personnel.
With regard to the FSO SAFER oil taker, we note
that the emergency operation to transfer and remove
the fuel from the vessel has still not started, owing
to insufficient funding. We call for the international
community to mobilize more funding in order to avert
a large-scale environmental and humanitarian disaster.
The expansion and consolidation of the truce in
Yemen is a major issue in the resolution of the crisis. One
party’s rejection of several United Nations proposals
to reopen roads in Taiz and other governorates and
the stalemate in the talks are undermining the initial
positive momentum of the truce. We call on the parties
to show flexibility. There is also an urgent need to
revive a political process, based on a multidimensional
framework addressing political, security and economic
issues, for a comprehensive negotiated settlement of
the conflict, within an inclusive dialogue that ensures
the participation of women. We urge all the parties
to cease hostilities, exercise maximum restraint and
implement all the elements of the truce negotiated by
the United Nations.
In conclusion, we reiterate our support for
Mr. Grundberg in his tireless efforts to maintain
a dialogue between the parties in order to reach a
comprehensive peace agreement in Yemen.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank Mr. Hans Grundberg and Ms. Ghada
Mudawi for their briefings.
France welcomed the renewal of the truce in
Yemen on 2 August, for a period of two months. That
important step should help alleviate the suffering
of the Yemeni people, and the extension of the truce
should serve to commit all the parties to peace. We

22-4615113/18

S/PV.9110

The situation in the Middle East

would like to take this opportunity to commend the
continued efforts of Mr. Hans Grundberg to maintain
the truce, and we call on all the parties to the conflict
to cooperate fully with him. We also commend the
efforts of the Yemeni Government undertaken since
the beginning of the truce and call on the Houthis to
implement their commitments. We reiterate our call for
a lasting nationwide ceasefire and call on the parties to
hold comprehensive discussions under the auspices of
the United Nations. Such discussions are essential to
reaching a political agreement, which we know is the
only way to end the conflict. We also reiterate that the
participation of Yemeni women in the peace process is
crucial to achieving a lasting peace in accordance with
the provisions of resolution 2624 (2022). I would like
to welcome the recent discussions on the release and
exchange of detainees, which were presided over by the
International Committee of the Red Cross together with
the Office of the Special Envoy, in accordance with the
commitments made by the parties in March.
Despite the truce, the security and humanitarian
situations remain very worrisome in some areas.
Yemen continues to deal with a particularly serious
humanitarian crisis, and the working conditions of
humanitarian personnel remain very worrying. We
reiterate the importance of ensuring full humanitarian
access for all people in need. We also call for the
immediate and unconditional release of the United
Nations staff and humanitarian personnel held by
the Houthis.
The rapid reopening of roads serving the city of Taiz
is vital. Its citizens are living in unbearable conditions
in the absence of access. France calls on the Houthis to
make the necessary concessions and to agree to work
constructively with the Special Envoy on this matter.
We are also concerned about the recent incidents in
Shabwa governorate. We call for calm and peaceful
coexistence in the interests of the Yemeni people.
With regard to the situation of the FSO SAFER
oil tanker, France reiterates the urgency of averting a
new environmental and humanitarian disaster. We once
again call for financial contributions from States and
the private sector in order to enable the launch of the
rescue operation, in line with our efforts with other
donors, under the coordination of the Netherlands.
Ms. Moran (Ireland): I thank our briefers this
morning, Special Envoy Grundberg and Acting Director
Mudawi. We warmly welcome the renewal of the
14/18

15/08/2022

United Nations-mediated nationwide truce for a further
two months. We express our appreciation to Special
Envoy Grundberg and his team for their continued
efforts in that respect. The extension offers the parties
the opportunity to fully implement the truce and allows
Yemenis to continue benefiting from reduced civilian
casualties and displacement, increased access to fuel
and regular flights to and from Sana’a. We call on the
parties to heed the Special Envoy’s call and to come to
an agreement on the expanded truce proposal.
It remains regrettable that the Houthis have not yet
agreed to the Special Envoy’s various proposals on the
reopening of roads in Taiz. All actors must prioritize
Taiz residents and endeavour to make progress on that
critical point — which is an integral element in an
expanded truce — as soon as possible.
As we have said before, we would like to see an
expanded truce lead to a durable nationwide ceasefire
and an inclusive, Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned
political settlement under United Nations auspices. As
been discussed by the many Yemeni women who have
briefed the Council, the persistent exclusion of women
from national-level peace talks significantly damages
the prospects for realizing that peace. Women’s
indispensable role in peacebuilding across the country
must be matched by their full, equal and meaningful
participation in all stages of the peace process and at all
levels of political representation.
We welcome the recent meetings of the Military
Coordination Committee, as well as the conclusion
of the sixth meeting on the exchange agreement for
detainees. We strongly urge the parties to finalize their
lists and move swiftly to release detainees. That could
be a powerful exercise in trust-building. We remain
concerned about the reports, including at last month’s
meeting (see S/PV.9088), of both sides sending military
reinforcements to front lines. It is particularly alarming
to hear that the Houthis continue to use summer camps
to recruit and indoctrinate children. We strongly urge
them to implement their action plan to end grave
violations against children, and we call on all the
parties to abide by their commitments in that regard.
Far too many Yemeni children have paid the price of a
conflict waged by those who should be protecting them.
The 23 July attack on Taiz, which injured 10 children
and killed one, was deplorable. We are also concerned
about the recent clashes in Shabwa. We strongly
condemn those violent outbreaks and remind parties
of their obligations under international law, including
22-46151

15/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East

international humanitarian law and international human
rights law, to protect the life and health of civilians.
As we have heard from the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, regrettably,
the humanitarian situation is getting worse. Yemenis
are facing unprecedented levels of hunger, and while
fuel imports have increased, the reality is that it is still
far too expensive for many ordinary Yemenis. Over
the past month, catastrophic flooding resulting from
torrential rains has affected hundreds of thousands of
Yemenis, many of them internally displaced, and we
express our deepest condolences to those who have lost
loved ones. We encourage the Government to redouble
its efforts to stabilize the economy, and especially to
engage with the United Nations economic framework.
We also call for the immediate release of all United
Nations and non-governmental-organization personnel
who have been detained.
In conclusion, reports by the Yemen Panel of
Experts find that serious violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
continue to be committed across Yemen. We must
pursue justice and accountability in our ongoing efforts
to bring peace to Yemen. Evidence-based monitoring
and reporting are crucial. We also implore all actors to
ensure that accountability is a central element of peace
discussions going forward. Without that, lasting peace
will remain out of reach.
Mr. Kvalheim (Norway): I thank Special Envoy
Grundberg and Acting Director Mudawi for their
informative briefings. Let me begin by welcoming
the most recent two-month extension of the truce
agreement and the tireless efforts of the Special Envoy.
We appreciate the fact that the parties have agreed to
intensify negotiations on an expanded agreement. It
is now also important to intensify discussions on the
opening of roads in Taiz and other pressing issues
that the Yemeni people have demanded progress
on. Since April, the truce has brought meaningful
humanitarian gains and much-needed relief. We have
seen a reduction in the number of civilian casualties,
decreased displacement, more fuel ships coming into
Al-Hudaydah port and the opening of Sana’a airport.
However, more must still be done to end the suffering
of the people of Yemen.
We condemn the recent attack in Taiz and are
concerned about the reports of clashes in Shabwa.
In both places, civilians, including children, were

S/PV.9110

affected. We call on both sides to de-escalate, respect
the truce, cooperate more intensively with the Special
Envoy and commit to regular negotiations, coordination
and confidence-building measures. We also call
for the continued inclusion of women in all United
Nations processes, including the prisoners’ exchange
committee, the military and security committee,
and the Taiz committee. More women in all aspects
of Yemeni politics are needed. We were therefore
disappointed that no women were appointed among the
new ministers in Yemen.
As a new school year begins this August, special
attention must be given to the protection of Yemen’s
future — its children. We call on the parties to comply
with the commitments they have made to ending and
preventing the recruitment and use of children in
armed conflict.
We welcome the recent sixth meeting of the
Supervisory Committee on the implementation of the
Detainees’ Exchange Agreement, held in Jordan, and
urge parties to finalize the list of detainees with a focus
on prioritizing the unconditional release of all sick,
wounded and child detainees, as well as arbitrarily
detained persons, political detainees and journalists. We
are also deeply saddened to hear that recent flash floods
have killed dozens, damaged public infrastructure
and disproportionately affected internally displaced
people. The floodwaters have also reportedly dislodged
landmines and shifted them to new areas. Urgent and
expanded demining efforts are therefore needed to
protect civilians and enable freedom of movement.
Finally, I would again like to mention the need
for more donor funding to prevent the ecological,
environmental and humanitarian disaster that could
be caused by the FSO SAFER oil tanker. We all have
a responsibility to support the United Nations plan for
FSO SAFER.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
At the outset, I thank Special Envoy Hans Grundberg
and Acting Director Ghada Mudawi for their briefings
and welcome the Permanent Representative of Yemen
to today’s meeting.
China welcomed the further extension of the truce
by the parties in Yemen on 2 August. The truce, which
has lasted for more than four months, has brought

22-4615115/18

S/PV.9110

The situation in the Middle East

considerable positive change to the situation in the
country. The de-escalation of military clashes, the
resumption of flights at Sana’a airport, the regular
entry of oil tankers into Al-Hudaydah port and regular
communication among the parties to the conflict
through the Military Coordination Committee are all
the result of the joint efforts of the Yemeni parties,
the countries of the region and the United Nations. We
highly commend the good offices of Special Envoy
Grundberg and the active role played by Saudi Arabia,
the United Arab Emirates, Oman and other countries
of the region.
After more than seven years of conflict in Yemen,
the Yemeni people long for a swift restoration of peace.
The situation in the country is at a critical stage of
transition from chaos to order. All the parties in Yemen
should stick to the general path towards a political
settlement. The international community should play
an active and constructive role in facilitating the peace
talks and steadily consolidate and expand the truce to
create the conditions for long-term peace and stability.
First, the truce should be fully implemented. There
has been a marked drop in the number of civilian
casualties caused by military operations since the
truce began. However, in areas such as Taiz, Ma’rib
and Shabwa, peace has not prevailed, and the security
situation remains fragile. The parties concerned should
fully honour their commitment to the truce, avoid all
attacks on civilians and civilian facilities, make full use
of the Military Coordination Committee mechanism to
maintain regular communication and address issues
through dialogue and consultation.
Secondly, the gains of the truce should be
expanded. We call on all the Yemeni parties to seize
the opportunity presented by the extension of the truce
and work with one another to bring about progress in
opening roads in Taiz and other governorates, paying
the salaries of civil servants, increasing the number of
international flights at Sana’a airport and dealing with
other issues that have a bearing on people’s livelihoods
and well-being. We welcome the progress made by the
Yemeni Government and the Houthis on the exchange
of prisoners. We hope that the parties to the conflict
will fully demonstrate their political will and flexibility
and, through Special Envoy Grundberg’s mediation
efforts, step up consultations in order to reach an early
agreement on expanding the truce agreement.
16/18

15/08/2022

Thirdly, there must be greater focus placed on
improving the humanitarian situation. As a result of
shrinking international assistance and resource input,
United Nations aid projects in Yemen are facing the
pressure of funding shortfalls. Since the beginning of
the summer, many places in Yemen have been hit by
floods, leaving tens of thousands of people homeless.
The situation in refugee camps in Ma’rib governorate
is particularly acute. China calls on the international
community to take immediate action so as to provide
basic daily necessities and medical supplies to the
people affected and prevent a large-scale humanitarian
catastrophe. All Yemeni parties should also facilitate
and coordinate with humanitarian operations.
Fourthly, efforts should be made to create a
favourable regional environment. The situation in
Yemen bears on peace and stability in the Gulf region,
and the key to security and stability in the Gulf region
lies in the hands of the Gulf countries themselves. China
encourages the countries of the region to work together
in the same direction, step by step and on the basis of
mutual respect, to address their respective concerns
through consultations on an equal footing. Countries
outside the region should provide useful support for a
peaceful settlement of the Yemeni issue.
China has always advocated for respecting the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries and
abiding by the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. We will always stand by the people
of Yemen and continue to work with the countries of the
Gulf region and the international community to make
greater contributions to the Yemen peace process.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me, Mr. President, to congratulate you on
presiding over the Security Council and to wish you
and your friendly delegation every success. I also thank
Mr. Grundberg and Ms. Mudawi for their briefings. I
welcome the new Permanent Representative of India
and congratulate her on her country’s national holiday.
The Yemeni Government renews its commitment
to a comprehensive and sustainable peace based on
the terms of reference of the agreed political solution,
namely, the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and
its Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of the
22-46151

15/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East

comprehensive National Dialogue Conference and the
relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2216 (2015). My country’s Government
reaffirms its full commitment to ensure that the
humanitarian truce is successful. We will continue
to implement all of its provisions and build upon it to
ensure a comprehensive ceasefire, end the conflict,
alleviate human suffering and facilitate the lives of the
Yemeni people, who are suffering under the authority
of the Houthi militias.
Those militias have proven that they are not serious
or willing to achieve peace, while at the same time
thwarting every effort to achieve that goal. They renege
on their commitments in line with the truce and continue
to perpetrate acts of aggression and violations. There
have been more than 50 violations every day, resulting
in 187 martyrs and leaving 910 others wounded. Those
developments since the truce prove that the Houthi
militias are undermining de-escalation and peace,
instead laying siege to civilians, looting revenues and
using the humanitarian dossier as a bargaining chip to
mislead and blackmail.
Our patient Yemeni people have fallen victim to
the pressures of the destructive war, the repercussions
of which have been grave at all levels. Today we
reaffirm — as we have reaffirmed before — that
dialogue remains the best way to end the conflict. The
Houthis must seize the opportunity for peace, embark
upon dialogue and avoid further war and escalation
against the Yemenis and their neighbours in the
region so as to save our Yemeni people from further
humanitarian suffering.
The Yemeni Government had facilitated 33 roundtrip flights from and to Sana’a airport by 10 August.
Those flights have transported more than 15,000
travellers, despite the numerous stumbling blocks
imposed by the Houthi militias. Thirty-four oil
tankers had passed through the port of Al-Hudaydah
by 10 August, carrying over 1 million tons of fuel
products. The taxes and customs fees from those
products exceeded 130 billion Yemeni rials, which is
enough to cover the largest share of the salaries and
pensions of civil servants in the areas controlled by the
Houthi militias. However, those militias continued to
collect those revenues and deprive employees of their
salaries. They are using those revenues to fund their
war against the Yemeni people and prolong the conflict.

S/PV.9110

The Presidential Leadership Council is working
on a set of financial and administrative reforms to
manage, monitor and follow up on resources while
facilitating and receiving support provided by our
brothers from the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates. We are implementing a package
of projects to improve services for our citizens and to
promote State law enforcement institutions to alleviate
the human suffering caused by the war launched by
the Houthi militias. The Government looks forward
to receiving further support from the international
community for its programmes and plans to ensure
stability and economic recovery and reintegrate
development priorities and needs, while seeking to
achieve early recovery. The Yemeni Government also
appreciates the generous support provided by sisterly
and friendly countries, especially our brothers in the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, whether directly or through
the humanitarian response plan, to alleviate the human
suffering of the Yemeni people.
However, despite the support received, humanitarian
operations remain unable to reach all those in need,
whether due to funding shortages threatening to halt
relief projects or further stumbling blocks imposed
by the Houthi militias, which are diverting assistance
away from those in need. Once again, we call upon
the international community to continue to keep
Yemen at the top of its priorities and provide further
support in order to alleviate human suffering in the
country, especially in the light of current international
circumstances and the increase in fuel and food prices.
The siege on Taiz by the Iran-supported Houthi
militias has entered its eighth year. That constitutes a
war crime and a crime against humanity that needs to
be lifted immediately without delay. Those militias are
circumventing the truce as they continue to practice
all kinds of stubbornness and procrastination on the
humanitarian dossier. They refuse to open main roads
while Yemenis, including women and children, are
losing their lives at crossing points. That proves that
those militias disregard the Council’s efforts and calls
to end the suffering of more than 4 million civilians
in Taiz. Instead, they are restricting their movement,
forcing them to take dangerous mountain routes, causing
the death of dozens of them and exorbitant financial
losses. Those militias are also preventing the delivery
of relief and humanitarian assistance and goods.
The Houthi militias continue to escalate their
crimes and the deliberate killing of children in Taiz,

22-4615117/18

S/PV.9110

The situation in the Middle East

which is under siege. They did so just hours before the
extension of the truce, in blatant disdain for Yemeni
lives and non-commitment to the truce provisions,
in flagrant violation of the efforts and will of the
international community and the Security Council. The
militias continue to target civilians with snipers, drones
and missiles, even during the truce, which has led to the
deaths of dozens of civilians. Houthi militias recently
shelled a neighbourhood in Taiz, where 11 children
fell victim while the Special Envoy’s military adviser
was there to monitor the truce. That is yet another
crime committed by the Houthi militias. Sending
wrong messages about perpetrating such crimes would
encourage the Houthis to perpetrate more violations
with impunity. That crime is to be added to the list of
violations that the militias have been perpetrating over
the past seven years. We wonder before the Council how
many civilians, including women and children, need to
be killed before ceasing this war, putting an end to the
Houthi crimes, their violations in Taiz and other parts
of Yemen and holding perpetrators accountable.
We call upon the Security Council and the
international community to review how they deal
with the Houthi militias. They need to bring genuine
pressure to bear on the Houthis so that they engage with
goodwill in de-escalation efforts and achieving peace,
and so that they not use the truce for further military
mobilization or to launch the next round of escalation.
Efforts need to be redoubled to urge the Houthi militias

18/18

15/08/2022

to meet their commitments, foremost of which is opening
crossings and main roads in Taiz and other cities during
the current truce extension, while releasing hostages
and detainees pursuant to the principle of all for all and
addressing other important issues.
Currents intensify in the southern Red Sea at this
time of the year. There are also threats of deployment of
naval mines around the FSO SAFER oil tanker, which
exacerbates the threat of an explosion or an oil spill
from the tanker. Once again, the Yemeni Government
warns against the environmental, economic and
humanitarian situation that could be caused by the
tanker, which would affect Yemen, the region and the
world. The Government has expressed its support for
the United Nations-led efforts to address the situation.
However, to date, those efforts have not led to tangible
results because the Houthis continue to blackmail the
international community through this crisis. Time is
not on our side. We need to prevent this catastrophe.
The Security Council and the international community
need to work on this issue. Once again, we call for
bridging the funding gap in the United Nations plan so
as to avoid this unfortunate catastrophe.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I will now
adjourn the meeting so that the Council can continue its
discussion on the subject in closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

22-46151
