S/PV.4358

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 August 2001
Original: English

Official communiqué of the 4358th (closed) meeting
of the Security Council
Held in private in the Security Council Chamber at Headquarters
on Thursday, 23 August 2001, at 10.30 a.m.
In accordance with rule 55 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security
Council, the following communiqué was issued through the Secretary-General in
place of a verbatim record:
“At its 4358th meeting, held in private on 23 August 2001, the Security
Council considered the item entitled ‘The situation in East Timor’.
“The President, with the consent of the Council, invited the
representatives of Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Denmark,
Finland, Germany, Indonesia, Japan, Mexico, Namibia, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Portugal, the Republic of Korea and Sweden at their request, to
participate in the discussion of the item without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
“The Security Council heard a briefing under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure by Mr. Hédi Annabi, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations. Giving the details of the election arrangements,
Mr. Annabi informed the Council that the electoral campaign in East Timor so
far had been conducted in a peaceful manner. He said that political parties and
the population at large had shown strong support for the pact of national unity.
“The members of the Council, as well as the representative of Belgium
emphasized the importance of the peaceful conduct of the August 30 elections.
They believed that a peaceful, democratic process would be a major first step
towards East Timor’s independence in a complex process of stabilization in
East Timor. Speakers encouraged a spirit of peace, democracy and tolerance
throughout the electoral process and beyond, and joined the Secretary-General
in supporting the heroic efforts of the East Timorese people and in urging a
large voter turn-out.
“Mr. Annabi responded to the comments and questions.”

01-51641 (E) 230801

*0151641*
