S/PV.8006 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8006th meeting

Wednesday, 19 July 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Cardona Moscoso
Mr. Kandeel
Mr. Gebrehiwot
Mr. Teisseire
Mr. Serpico
Ms. Horiuchi
Mr. Victorov
Mr. Sergeev
Mr. Faye
Mr. Vaverka
Mr. Pavlichenko
Ms. Begum
Mr. Kris
Mr. Paolino

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Enhancing African capacities in the areas of peace and security
Letter dated 5 July 2017 from the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2017/574)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-22241 (E)
*1722241*

S/PV.8006 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I wish to remind
all speakers to limit their statements to no more than
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate their texts
in writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber.
I now call on the Minister for Food, Forestry and
Horticulture of Ireland.
Mr. Doyle (Ireland): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened today’s
important debate.
Ireland aligns itself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union (EU) this morning.
Drawing from the concept note (S/2017/574, annex),
I will briefly outline the areas we see as particularly
important in enhancing the international community’s
support for African capabilities in the area of peace
and security.
First, I turn to the many calls made for closer United
Nations-African Union (AU) partnership for action.
The foundation for an enhanced partnership is
well established. The three peace and security reviews
of 2015 underscored the need for a deeper strategic
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union. Over the past two years, the Security Council
has dealt with the issue, both through its reviews of
individual peacekeeping missions and through broader
thematic initiatives, such as resolution 2320 (2016), on
United Nations-AU cooperation, and the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security. Moreover, we have
two major agreements adopted unanimously by all
States Members of the United Nations — the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the sustaining
peace resolutions — which call on us collectively to see
partnerships as the core of our work.
We must take steps to turn this well-established
foundation into action. We must ensure that United
Nations-AU partnership is something that occurs at
an operational level, on a daily basis. That requires
ongoing review and cooperation, particularly in the
areas of planning and decision-making. We welcome
today’s debate as an opportunity in that respect.
2/27

19/07/2017

Secondly, we must learn from the mechanisms we
already have. Cooperation between the international
community and Africa in the field of peace and security
is already ongoing. We have seen it in the evolving
engagement between the African Union Mission in
Somalia and the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur and the efforts of the Peacebuilding
Commission to establish closer links with the AU.
We must look beyond that. For example, the work
of the EU’s African Peace Facility, to which Ireland is
glad to contribute, could help inform United Nations
support for the operations and priorities of the AU. The
engagement of EU regional offices with the AU and
African sub-regional organizations should offer some
valuable lessons in that regard. In assessments of joint
United Nations-AU peacekeeping missions, we must
also focus on recording and adapting best practices.
Thirdly, we must explore financing options from
within — but also beyond — the budget of the United
Nations. It is clear that the current United Nations
funding structure for African-led peace operations
is in need of reform. The role of the regular budget
of the United Nations warrants discussion. The
Secretary-General’s recent report (S/2017/574) is a
first step towards some financing options. There is
also the broader question — how can the international
community best support Africa to finance its own
initiatives for peace and security?
Neither the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development nor the AU Agenda 2063 is directly linked
to peace operations. However, if properly implemented
and supported, those frameworks can substantially
enhance Africa’s capacity to self-fund programmes and
operations for peace. The AU has already committed
to funding 25 per cent of its peace operations by 2020.
Additionally, if African States receive the right support
for their development efforts, the resulting economic
growth could well allow the AU to far surpass this 25 per
cent marker in the longer term. Successful development
will also contribute to eradicating the root causes of
conflict. If we invest in that development, Africa’s
capacity to fund peace operations will increase, while
the need for such operations will decrease.
Fourthly, we must identify mutual opportunities
and challenges. African priorities in the area of peace
and security are also the priorities of the international
community. Implementation of the women and peace
17-22241

19/07/2017

Peace and security in Africa

and security agenda, the empowerment of youth as
actors of peace, sustainable security sector reform,
and more effective conflict prevention are just some of
those shared priorities. Stronger partnerships in those
areas will therefore be mutually beneficial. The same is
true in respect of mutual challenges.
As noted earlier by the EU observer, the Secretary
General’s report highlights the importance of
compliance and oversight, particularly in the areas of
human rights and conduct and discipline. Those are
critical concerns in all peace operations, and ones we, as
a troop-contributing country, take extremely seriously.
Finally, we welcome the AU’s efforts to put in place
effective mechanisms to ensure the respect for human
rights in all of its missions and encourage further
progress in their implementation. Joint standards for
reporting, accountability and protection are critical to
ensuring robust oversight of missions.
I thank you again, Mr. President, for holding
today’s debate and for giving me the opportunity to
participate in the discussion on this important issue by
sharing Ireland’s perspective.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of New Zealand.
Ms. Roxburgh (New Zealand): We join others today
in thanking the Secretary-General and Commissioner
Chergui for their briefing. As a member of the Security
Council when resolution 2320 (2016) was adopted, New
Zealand was strongly supportive of the United Nations
and African Union (AU) taking a more structured,
complementary and integrated approach to tackling the
challenges faced by the continent.
We welcome recent developments, including the
Secretary-General’s May report (S/2017/454) and will
focus today’s remarks on two priority areas: making
meaningful African Union-United Nations engagement
an everyday habit and fixing financing for African-led
peace operations.
First, while formal engagement between the
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council is
important, in our view it is through strengthening
informal engagement that we will see the greatest
value. Regular and constructive exchanges on specific
issues would contribute to a deeper understanding of
perspectives, a greater unity of purpose and, ultimately,
a stronger partnership. Overall, we need to see more
cooperation through joint assessment missions,

S/PV. 8006 (Resumption 1)

information exchanges, training and secondments, but
every Council member can also individually help make
this change simply by thinking and acting a little more
broadly and strategically.
For our part, while New Zealand was on the
Council, we supported the inaugural elected ten Peace
and Security Council of the African Union meeting
in Addis Ababa at the start of 2015. With Spain, we
met with the Chair of the AU Council at the start of
our presidencies to discuss the joint agendas of each
body. During our presidency, after the Council’s
visit to South Sudan, we co-hosted — with the AU
Commission — Council members and senior United
Nations officials, including Special Representative
Menkerios, at an off-site meeting to discuss the United
Nations-African Union strategic framework. Those
actions did not require formal Council decisions or
consensus. We would urge current Council members,
both individually and collectively, to take similar steps
and make meaningful engagement with the AU an
everyday habit.
Secondly, we need to fix the fundamental issue of
financing for African-led peace operations. That will
not be easy, but we must agree on a new, more predictable
financing model. Fragmented, ad hoc arrangements for
each new AU-led mission are simply not sustainable.
Delays lead to longer, more expensive conflicts, and
less effective missions exact a cost in lives.
In his report, the Secretary-General laid out
pragmatic options for the Council’s consideration. We
support those options as well as the AU decision to
have 25 per cent of the cost of AU-led peace operations
financed by African States. We also are supportive
of utilizing United Nations assessed contributions to
finance AU-led missions in defined circumstances. The
Council should also adopt, in principle, the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal of an African Union-United Nations
jointly developed budget.
New Zealand stands ready to assist, including
through lending our support to any resolutions that may
come to the Fifth Committee, the General Assembly
or the Council, but we urge the Council to take action
as a matter of priority. In return, the Council will get
a strengthened partner to assist in tackling shared
challenges — likely at a significantly lower cost than
the United Nations — and will make an important
and practical, contribution to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

17-222413/27

S/PV.8006 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I thank you, Sir, for
bringing much needed focus to an issue which touches
on the ethos and character of how we do business here
at the United Nations. As new and diverse forms of
threats — some clear and present, others only dimly
perceived — test our collective resolve and call into
question the validity of existing mechanisms, it is time
to assess if we can work together on what is in our
collective interest. The briefings today have provided
insight in that regard.
Africa is unique, as the whole continent is
committed to working together on the entire spectrum
of issues, including peace and security, through the
African Union. Regional and subregional organizations
probably enjoy the advantages of language and
situational awareness and can respond more quickly as
they have a better understanding of the complexities
of the situation. Africa’s wish to play a leading role in
addressing African problems is, therefore, a work in
progress and needs to be supported. However, issues
of capacity and resource constraints do exist. On the
other hand, the maintenance of international peace
and security is one of the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations. It also entails the
collective responsibility of Member States to extend
mutual support for strengthening capacities and
capabilities to address threats to international peace
and security. I shall focus on three issues.
First of all, it is a well-known fact that despite
the deployment of large peacekeeping contingents
in Africa, their record of success has been mixed,
somewhat reflecting the complexities of geopolitics,
political will and the capacities and resources
supporting peacekeeping efforts. We should analyse
various missions for the important lessons to be drawn
from them. India has participated in most peacekeeping
operations in Africa and is ready to contribute to any
future such operations based on our limited capabilities
and capacities.
As part of our efforts to share experiences in
strengthening the capacities of African peacekeepers,
we have focused on human-resources development and
capacity-building. India has worked both bilaterally
and in tripartite partnerships to build the defence
capabilities of several African States. As we speak,
as part of our trilateral cooperation with the United
4/27

19/07/2017

States, a United Nations peacekeeping course for
African partners based on the concept of training the
trainers is ongoing in New Delhi, with the participation
of officials from 18 African nations who are deployed
in various African peacekeeping training institutions.
India is also committed to promoting gender
equality and sensitivity. Our 125-member all-women
police contingent in Liberia was the first such
deployment in a United Nations peacekeeping mission.
The presence of a female police unit has inspired
several women there to come forward to join the police
force and participate in maintaining law and order. We
should make such role models essential ingredients
of every United Nations peacekeeping operation with
police deployments.
Secondly, the importance of comprehensive
sustainable development, inclusive economic growth
and political processes in preventing conflict and
implementing effective peacebuilding efforts is broadly
recognized. The adoption by the United Nations of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
African Union Agenda 2063 represent a recognition
of the fact that the key factors for sustaining peace
are cross-cutting and interlinked. That requires longterm commitment and sustained investment, including
vastly expanded funding.
The identical resolutions on the review of the
peacebuilding architecture adopted last year by the
General Assembly (70/262) and the Security Council
(2282 (2016)) defined the concept of sustaining peace and
called for the work of the Peacebuilding Commission to
be strengthened. There has been no agreement, alas, on
increasing the funding for the Commission to even 1 per
cent of the annual total for peacekeeping operations.
As a member of the Commission since its inception,
India has so far contributed more than $5 million to the
Peacebuilding Fund.
More substantively, as part of its tradition of
South-South solidarity in development cooperation
and working within the limits of its capacities
and capabilities, India has extended concessional
credit worth $10 billion and doubled the numbers
of scholarships for African students to 50,000 over
a five-year period. India’s partnership with Africa is
based on a cooperation model that is responsive to
African countries’ needs. It is demand-driven, free of
conditions and provided in a non-prescriptive manner.
17-22241

19/07/2017

Peace and security in Africa

We firmly believe that a commitment to supporting
peacebuilding is crucial to sustainable peace in Africa.
Thirdly, the ever-expanding terror networks have
endangered peace and security in the African region in
unprecedented ways. Time and again, from Boko Haram
to Al-Shabaab, they have shown themselves to be ever
more connected to other such networks all over the
world. They pose a threat to the broader international
community in many ways. The United Nations response
to such threats continues to be unsatisfactory. The price
of such indifference is immeasurable. It is time for a
strong, effective and coherent response that reflects the
international community’s collective commitment to
defeating the scourge of terrorism.
The complex nature of modern conflicts makes it
necessary to respond to the changing needs of our times.
In the African Union, the United Nations has a willing
partner. The question that the Council should answer
is whether it is ready to do what is required to make a
difference where it matters most. I hope that today’s
discussions lead to specific steps in that direction.

S/PV. 8006 (Resumption 1)

African peace and security architecture and developing
the AU-United Nations partnership in the area of peace
and security will require great efforts on all sides. They
can count on Germany’s support during that process.
I would like to focus briefly on a few areas
where Germany supports its African partners in the
field of peace and security. First, for many years,
Germany — bilaterally, in the context of the EU and
through the United Nations — has supported African
partners in preparing military and police units for
peacekeeping tasks. We have worked with the AU and
other regional and subregional organizations to address
capacity shortages and have provided financial and
technical assistance. For instance, we offer training
to African peacekeepers through the Kofi Annan
Peacekeeping Training Centre, as well as through tailormade programmes in areas such as pre-deployment
training for specific missions.

I would like pay tribute to African nations’
contribution to peacekeeping in Africa in both Africanled and United Nations missions. Germany salutes the
courage of all the soldiers and police who participate in
what are often extremely dangerous missions, whether
in Somalia, the Lake Chad region, Central Africa or
the Sahel. With regard to the Sahel region, Germany
supports the initiative of the Group of Five for the Sahel
to deploy a joint task force in the fight against terrorism.

Secondly, Germany has put a strategic focus on
crisis-prevention and stabilization measures aimed at
supporting political processes and resolving conflicts
by creating a secure environment and improving living
conditions. For instance, together with the countries of
the Lake Chad region and other partners, including the
United Nations, we have launched the Oslo Consultative
Group on Stabilization and Prevention, which will
identify priorities and coordinate stabilization
measures. Its first meeting at the senior official level
will take place in Berlin in September. Germany also
assists African partners in the areas of early warning,
prevention and mediation activities. We are an active
partner in mediation efforts conducted under the
umbrella of the African Union in, for example, Sudan
and South Sudan. We are happy to be supporting the
African Union’s newly established mediation support
unit. In 2017, Germany will spend approximately
€100 million on prevention and stabilization measures
in Africa.

We welcome the progress that our African partners
have made in developing and implementing Africa’s
peace and security architecture. We also support the
initiative of the African Union (AU) on increasing the
financial independence of its peace operations and
strengthening the financial basis of the African Peace
Fund. And we were pleased to see the United Nations
and AU sign the Joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security. But it is clear that further strengthening the

Thirdly, the African Union has shown strong
leadership in putting the agenda on women and peace
and security into action. Germany is proud to support
those efforts, including notably the recent establishment
of a network of African women leaders. The network’s
launch in New York just a few weeks ago brought
together a large number of eminent women from
Africa’s political and public sectors and civil society.
We are excited by the momentum that this initiative has
developed. We firmly believe that women’s access to

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): I would like to thank China
for convening today’s important debate.
Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier today by the observer of the European Union
(EU).

17-222415/27

S/PV.8006 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

political leadership, particularly their participation in
peace processes, leads to better results.
Fourthly, combating the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons is a vital ingredient in both national
and regional stabilization strategies and should be
integrated into United Nations peacekeeping missions
from the start. Among others, Germany has started a
Group of Seven initiative in the extended Sahel jointly
with the African Union, with the aim of promoting
comprehensive coordination in controlling small arms
and light weapons.
In conclusion, we remain committed to supporting
the African Union, other regional and subregional
organizations and our African partners in further
enhancing African capacities in the area of peace
and security.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Denmark.
Mr. Petersen (Denmark): I am honoured to speak
today on behalf of the Nordic countries: Finland, Iceland,
Norway, Sweden and my own country, Denmark.
The threats posed by terrorism, radicalization
and instability constitute a challenge to all countries.
Addressing them requires strong cooperation between
all the parties involved. African countries are on the
front lines in meeting those challenges, along with
their partners, including the Nordic countries. The
African countries shoulder their part of the burden
when the African Union (AU) assumes responsibility
for peace operations, along with regional economic
communities; when African countries join hands to
create multinational forces, like the Multinational Joint
Task Force to fight Boko Haram in the Lake Chad
region and the Group of Five for the Sahel joint force to
combat terrorism and transnational crime in the Sahel;
and when African countries make vital contributions to
United Nations peacekeeping operations to keep them
engaged, despite very complex situations.
In the Nordic countries, we welcome those efforts
to meet the challenge of terrorism, radicalization and
instability. We believe the strengthened cooperation
on peace and security between the AU and the United
Nations is key to enhancing our efforts and address
the challenges. The next step is to ensure predictable
and sustainable support to AU operations. The report
of the Secretary-General (S/2017/454) issued on
26 May sets out useful options for support and joint
6/27

19/07/2017

decision-making. The Nordic countries strongly
encourage the Security Council to give its consent to
use, on a case-by-case basis, United Nations assessed
contributions to finance AU peace support missions
mandated by the Security Council. That will also entail
close United Nations involvement, as highlighted in the
report of the Secretary-General.
We welcome the signing in April of the United
Nations-AU Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security. The Nordic countries are
particularly encouraged by the emphasis on prevention
and root causes, strong themes in our countries’ longstanding partnerships and cooperation with African
partners. The Nordic countries have supported,
among other things, African mediation and earlywarning capabilities.
When the rule of law prevails and the voice of the
people is heard, conflict can be avoided. The peaceful
transition in The Gambia demonstrated that. Together
with Economic Community of West African States, a
number of African countries stepped in with decisive
support for a peaceful solution for the people of The
Gambia. That support is an important signal of African
unity and regional ownership of a process leading to a
more prosperous and democratic continent.
Accountability and inclusive peace processes lead
to better and more sustainable results. In the peace
processes where women and young people are included
and exert real influence, peace agreements are more
likely to be reached and the peace is more likely to
last. Where women are involved in peacekeeping, the
operations gain more trust from communities and
respond more effectively to the needs of the local
population. The Nordic countries support the AU and
many African countries in their endeavours to train
more women, and to ensure that their police forces are
responsive to the needs of women.
Enhancing African capabilities in the area of peace
and security is a key contribution to regional and global
security, and it is a key contribution to achieving the
2030 Agenda for Sustaiable Development. The Nordic
countries are supporters of the efforts of the AU in
that regard. We welcome a strengthening the peace
and security architecture of the AU and we hope it will
bring greater coherence and high-level focus to such
important issues.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kenya.
17-22241

19/07/2017

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV. 8006 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Kamau (Kenya): We thank you, Sir, for
convening this important debate and for circulating a
detailed concept note (S/2017/574, annex) to guide us.
I take the opportunity to congratulate China for its
elevation to the presidency of the Council for July and
commend you, Sir, for the manner by which you have
conducted its affairs.

provide a solid basis for further deepening the existing
relationship. We urge the Security Council to endorse
and take the necessary steps towards the financing of
the African Union peace support operations. We also
need to be open to explore other options to ensure
predictable, reliable and sustainable funding for the
peace support operations of the African Union.

We thank the Secretary-General for his detailed,
informative briefing on the issue and previous speakers
for their illuminating interventions, and we welcome
the statement by Mr. Smail Chergui, Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union (AU).

Deepening the AU-United Nations cooperation
to enhance the African capabilities in the peace and
security sphere is only one of the necessary instruments
to achieve sustainable peace in Africa. But, more
needs to be done to harness available opportunities
to achieve sustainable peace and development
that will complement the existing mechanisms for
cooperation. We believe that the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is key to
sustaining peace in Africa. It is important to harness
international cooperation in order to provide adequate
means of implementation to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals. This is how quality health and
education, decent jobs and infrastructure and good
governance and democracy will be entrenched in
Africa to enable it reap the dividends of peace through
sustained economic development.

Kenya fully supports current efforts to strengthen
the cooperation and partnership between the African
Union and the United Nations on peace and security
in Africa. The cooperation is anchored in the Addis
Ababa Declaration of 2016, which inter alia, established
a ten-year capacity-building programme for the African
Union, modalities for collaboration between the two
organizations and the establishment of a framework
and institutions to enhance the partnership. That is
how the United Nations Support Office for the African
Union, the annual joint consultative meetings, the A3
coordination group in the Security Council, the joint
framework between the United Nations Support Office
for the African Union and the Peace and Security
Department of the African Union, and the Joint Task
Force on Peace and Security all came into being.
Now more than ever before, both institutions,
the United Nations and the AU, have achieved more
coordinated response and complementary action in
dealing with evolving challenges to peace and security
on the continent, ranging from violent conflict,
humanitarian crises, violent extremism and terrorism.
However, much more needs to be done to tackle the
challenges, capitalize on available opportunities and
consolidate the gains achieved so far.
Kenya believes that a well-funded and efficient
African Peace and Security Architecture is not only
an essential African priority, but also a great global
strategic necessity. We would like to stress that the four
financing options indicated in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2017/454) on options for authorization and
support for African Union peace support operations,
namely, subvention to exceptional or emergency
circumstances, joint financing of a jointly developed
budget, the establishment of a United Nations support
office and the joint financing of a hybrid mission all

Kenya believes that important initiatives such as
the transformative Chinese One Belt, One Road on
infrastructure; Power Africa on clean, renewable energy
by the United States; the new German investment
compacts for Africa on trade, peace and governance;
and others are solid opportunities to create solid
partnerships for achieving rapid implementation of
the Sustainable Development Goals that would ensure
sustainable peace and development in Africa.
Similarly, the United Nations, including the
Council, should be at the forefront of ensuring that
illicit financial flows from Africa, which bleed over
$203 billion out of the continent, exacerbated by a few
banks in the developed world, is curtailed to ensure
African resources remain in Africa to fight poverty,
disease and ignorance and thus, sustain the peace.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Kenya’s support
for current efforts to enhance African capabilities in
the area of peace and security through the strategic
partnership between the African Union and the United
Nations. We shall continue to support peace efforts by
the African Union as attested in our role within the
African Union Military Observer Mission in Somalia
in Somalia.

17-222417/27

S/PV.8006 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

We shall continue to collaborate with other
African countries to strengthen conflict prevention,
management and resolution capacity of the African
Union regional entities, such as the East African
Community, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region of Africa and the Common Market for
Eastern and Southern Africa, all of which complement
the cooperation between United Nations and the AU
in peace and security. We support and pursue these
efforts for we are convinced that our stability and
economic well-being is closely tied to peace, stability
and economic well-being of the rest of the continent
and, indeed, of the entire the world.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Namibia.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate, which offers the
opportunity to share views on peace and security
in Africa. Let me also thank our briefers for their
invaluable contribution to this debate. Your country’s
focus on this important topic during your presidency is
highly appreciated.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
Namibia applauds the continued cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
(AU) and particularly with regional and subregional
organizations on the continent. We also welcome
enhanced cooperation in peacekeeping in Africa.
My delegation wishes to stress the need for the AU
and the United Nations to outline their roles clearly
according to their comparative advantages. Partnership
between the United Nations and the AU offices, while
essential, cannot substitute for ownership by Africa of
its challenges. It is both pragmatic and right to seek
out African views on conflict resolution and conflict
prevention through formal and informal sessions
between the two organizations.
We wish to underscore the important role that
regional and subregional arrangements and agencies
can play in the promotion of peace and security, as well
as economic and social development.
In the wake of the historic adoption of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Paris
8/27

19/07/2017

Agreement on Climate Change in 2015, peace and
security have to underpin the delivery of an environment
in which the development agenda can flourish.
The African Union has demonstrated its ability to
take the lead in the effective resolution of conflicts.
Over the years, the African Union member States
have been able to step in promptly to help maintain
peace and security. Namibia remains committed to
contributing to peacekeeping operations. Indeed it is
the presence of African peacekeepers that has provided
international peace operations with political legitimacy
on the continent.
The African Peace and Security Architecture road
map for the period 2016-2020 also remains essential
to provide legitimacy and effectiveness on the ground.
We have noted that the organs of the Architecture are
increasingly shouldering their responsibility under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
African mediation and rapid response efforts are
two areas that rely on support by partners such as the
United Nations. In order to make the African Peace
and Security Architecture more effective under the
current challenging economic and other circumstances,
it is important to make full use of available expertise
and knowledge on the ground and at regional level. It
is essential that actions taken are based upon African
programmes already developed at high-level forums.
These programmes speak directly to the needs identified
by Africans themselves, are often gender sensitive, and
will never be seen as imposed from the outside, and
thus not succeed.
Namibia values the role that the United Nations
Office to the African Union plays by providing technical
advice on matters of capacity-building and operational
support. However, further efforts to build institutional
capacity would be crucial to bringing coherence to the
consolidation of peace in Africa.
I would like to applaud the recent appointment by
the Secretary-General of former German President
Horst Köhler as his Personal Envoy for Western Sahara.
We call on all parties to offer their cooperation and
support in order to see genuine progress and resolution
of this long standing conflict.
Finally, Namibia welcomes progress made in
increasing the participation of women in leadership roles
towards resolving conflicts. Indeed, it is imperative to
integrate gender perspectives into institutional reforms
17-22241

19/07/2017

Peace and security in Africa

in post-conflict countries. We encourage Member
States in post-conflict situations to mainstream gender
perspectives in institutional reform for the protection of
women’s rights and call for the incorporation of women
in mediation processes.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the observer of the International Committee of
the Red Cross.
Mr. Ojeda: I thank you, Mr. President, for giving
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
the opportunity to contribute to this important debate.
We commend the debate’s emphasis on Africa’s global
importance. Forty per cent of ICRC resources are
invested in Africa, and we place great value on our
partnerships with African Governments.
We will focus on two key drivers of peace and
security in Africa: an end to the violence, which
damages development, and the significance of basic
services, which make development possible.
The median age in Africa today is 19. Urbanization
is expanding and land is still plentiful. The African
Union (AU) is achieving increasing traction as a
regional organization with clear development vision and
capacity. Africa’s opportunity must not be undermined
by the destruction brought by armed conflict. Peace and
security is the first priority of African development.
We urge the Council to make every effort to support
African States to end African conflicts.
But where there is no peace there must be greater
respect for international humanitarian law. Changing
the behaviour of many parties to conflict in Africa
is essential if African people are to keep hold of the
land, health, resources, businesses and education they
need to achieve the AU’s Agenda 2063. International
humanitarian law is increasingly prioritized in Africa.
Every day we work as partners with African authorities
in individual States and at the AU, enhancing their
capacities to respect and ensure greater respect for
international humanitarian law.
Progress is clear in the development of African
armed forces, and in the commitment of the AU and its
member States to high standards in the mandates, rules
of engagement and conduct of African peace operations.
Putting these policies into action in Africa’s complex
operational environments is always a challenge. Africa
and its military partners need to cooperate continuously

S/PV. 8006 (Resumption 1)

to solve problems on the ground and ensure compliance
with international humanitarian law.
Meeting people’s need for basic services is also key
to peace and security. Infrastructure and services are
vital to deliver African development. Too often, schools,
health facilities, water sources and power facilities are
destroyed or rendered unsafe in armed conflicts across
the continent. These services must be kept safe and
functioning for Africa’s people. We work constantly
with authorities in Africa to ensure the protection
and continuity of basic services but humanitarian aid
cannot do this alone. This is why we are pleased to be
working with the World Bank in Somalia.
Development actors must find ways to enhance
State capacity to maintain basic services during
conflict. Here, the Chinese Government often sets
an important example. The Kampala Convention is a
model for supporting internally displaced persons.
I hope our two suggestions add value. They are
particularly important today, when millions of Africans
face the double vulnerability of armed conflict
and drought.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Hahn Choonghee (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, please allow me to join the previous speakers in
commending the initiative and leadership of China to
convene today’s important meeting.
Ensuring peace and security on the African
continent is a high priority of the international
community. United Nations peacekeeping operations
in Africa account for the largest portions of both the
budget and personnel of United Nations peacekeeping
operations as a whole. At the same time, the Security
Council has been scaling-up efforts to strengthen its
strategic partnership with the African Union (AU).
This partnership is duly recognized as a model regional
arrangement under Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations. In addition, the African Union is
increasingly serving as a first responder to crises in
Africa before United Nations missions take over, as
seen with the African missions in Burundi, the Sudan,
Mali and the Central African Republic. The United
Nations and the African Union have also deployed a
landmark hybrid operation in Darfur.
As a result of such joint efforts, we are achieving
notable progress in securing peace and security in

17-222419/27

S/PV.8006 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

Africa. However, many countries on the continent still
face daunting challenges that have become increasingly
complex, transboundary and asymmetrical in nature.
These include terrorism and violent extremism,
transnational organized crime, climate change and
migration crises, among others. It is becoming apparent
that the United Nations simply cannot tackle such
multifaceted challenges alone. The United Nations
needs to work with all relevant stakeholders, including
Member States, regional and subregional organizations,
international financial institutions, the private sectors
and civil society.
Against this backdrop, I would now like to highlight
the following three points to provide a way forward
in our collective efforts to enhance the capacities of
African countries in promoting peace and security.
First, the United Nations should respect the
ownership of African countries in maintaining peace
and security on the continent, while helping them,
the African Union and subregional organizations to
scale-up their relevant capacities. At the operational
level, the African Union has proven its commitment
and effectiveness through its peacekeeping operations.
Furthermore, the AU has been moving forward to show
its potential as a reliable partner at the strategic level
too, as exemplified by its pledge to finance 25 per
cent of its future peace operations through the African
Union Peace Fund and the Silencing the Guns by
2020 initiative.
We must also highlight the importance of subregional
organizations, such as the Economic Community of
West African States, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and the East African Community,
given that they have played critical roles in mediation,
prevention and the resolution of tensions. However,
while our African partners should take the lead
in promoting their own peace and security, the
international community must help with predictable and
sustainable resources. In that regard, the Republic of
Korea has steadily increased its financial contribution
to the African Union through the AU Peace Fund and
the Korea-AU Cooperation Fund in recent years.
Secondly, we need to pursue a comprehensive and
integrated approach in order to achieve sustainable
peace and development in Africa. The challenges we
collectively face are difficult to solve with static ideas
and singular responses. Unless the root causes are
addressed through all stages of crises and conflicts, we
10/27

19/07/2017

will not achieve lasting peace and prosperity. In this
connection, the concept of sustaining peace, as defined
and elaborated by the historic twin General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions 70/261 and 2282
(2016) in April last year, offers a way forward.
At the same time, the activities of the diverse
stakeholders — including the African Union, the
African Development Bank, the World Bank, civil
societies and the private sectors — need to be better
implemented in a coordinated and collaborative manner
to ensure synergy moving forward. In this context,
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) can play an
important role by using its convening power to mobilize
and coordinate various stakeholders. As the Chair of the
PBC this year, the Republic of Korea has been working
to proactively leverage its unique convening power to
help The Gambia and the countries in the Sahel region
to build and sustain peace in their respective countries
and region. In addition, we have been making efforts
to strengthen the PBC’s partnership with international
financial institutions, including the World Bank.
As part of such efforts, recently a PBC delegation
visited the World Bank in Washington, D.C., and the
PBC annual session in 2017 focused on partnership for
financing and peace, and came up with an agreement
to hold a dialogue with the World Bank on an annual
basis. The Republic of Korea will continue to step up
these and other efforts throughout its tenure as the
PBC Chair, including a visit to the African Union later
this year.
Thirdly, we must bolster our efforts to listen to the
voices and grievances of local communities. As people
living in rural areas suffer disproportionally from
the instability caused by violent extremism, armed
groups and ethnic clashes, we must do more to amplify
their voices and note their perspectives and concerns.
Indeed, if vulnerable people are not heard, protected,
or provided with the prerequisite levels of support to
ensure that they have every opportunity to thrive, they
are more easily at risk of falling into the exploitative
hands of armed groups, or being indoctrinated with
extremism and terrorism. In this regard, I would like to
encourage the United Nations to further strengthen its
strategic engagements with local communities. In fact,
the Republic of Korea is financially contributing to the
development of a planning framework for improved
engagement of communities and other actors by
peacekeeping missions.
17-22241

19/07/2017

Peace and security in Africa

Before closing, I would like to reiterate that the
Republic of Korea is committed to working closely
with the United Nations, African Member States and
organizations, as well as other key stakeholders, in
order to enhance peace and security in Africa.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mminele (South Africa): Allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of July. I also thank you and the Chinese delegation
for convening this timely open debate on peace and
security in Africa, under the theme “Enhancing African
capacities in the areas of peace and security”.
South Africa aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
This debate is timely as it follows immediately on
the successful conclusion of the twenty-ninth African
Union (AU) Summit in Addis Ababa, where the African
Union considered issues that are of utmost importance
to the continent, including the African Union’s
aspirations outlined in its Agenda 2063. It is important
for the United Nations at all levels to work closely with
the African Union in achieving our common security
and developmental objectives, as encapsulated in the
African Union Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. It should be noted that the
Summit recommitted Africa to the AU Master Road
Map of Practical Steps to Silence the Guns in Africa by
the Year 2020. It also declared the month of September
of every year until 2020 as African Amnesty Month for
the surrender and collection of illegally owned weapons
and arms, in line with African and international
best practice.
At the outset, South Africa recognizes that
in terms of the Charter of the United Nations, the
Security Council has the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
However, as we have frequently reiterated, it is often
regional organizations such as the AU that are the first
responders to conflicts and deploy early in order to
stabilize conflict situations, thereby creating a more
favourable environment for the United Nations to
deploy and for peace processes to start.

S/PV. 8006 (Resumption 1)

This is by no means accidental, as regional
organizations are often better positioned to understand
the root causes of armed conflicts owing to their
knowledge of the region. This advantage benefits all
efforts to influence the prevention and resolution
of conflicts. Furthermore, regional bodies have a
comparative advantage due to their collective political
resolve to address a conflict situation and to prevent
regional instability. It is therefore imperative for
the United Nations to work closely with the AU and
the various regional economic organizations on the
continent to achieve sustainable peace on the African
continent. That would necessitate not just collaboration
on peacekeeping but also in building capacity in
mediation and peacemaking efforts, as well as postconflict peacebuilding and reconstruction.
President Alpha Condé, in his capacity as
Chairperson of the AU, has appointed my President,
President Zuma, to promote partnership between
the AU and the United Nations towards enhancing
African capabilities in peacekeeping operations. In that
regard, South Africa continues to encourage a strong
collaborative relationship between the United Nations
and the AU. In that regard, my delegation would like to
highlight the following four points.
First, the financing of AU peacekeeping operations
remains one of the biggest challenges for peacekeeping
on the continent. As far back as resolution 1809 (2008),
adopted in 2008, the Council recognized the need to
enhance the predictability, sustainability and flexibility
of financing regional organizations when they undertake
peacekeeping under a United Nations mandate. South
Africa believes that AU peace operations, authorized
by the Security Council, must be adequately funded and
resourced. In that regard, we support the AU call for the
use of United Nations assessed contributions to secure
predictable, sustainable and flexible financing for AU
peace operations authorized by the Security Council.
Secondly, the mutually reinforcing relationship
between the United Nations and the AU should extend
beyond the period of conflict, to critical areas such as
peacebuilding, and post-conflict reconstruction and
development within the paradigm of security sector
reform. The peace, security and development nexus
underscores the importance of peacebuilding and
post-conflict reconstruction and development in postconflict settings. That is in support of strengthening
the resilience of countries through a process of
institutional capacity building to mitigate the risk of a

17-2224111/27

S/PV.8006 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

relapse into conflict. The African Peace and Security
Architecture also provides the continent with conflict
prevention, resolution and management measures, as
well as mechanisms for post-conflict peacebuilding
and reconstruction. South Africa therefore calls on the
international community to strengthen the capacity of
the African Peace and Security Architecture to deliver
to the necessary assistance and support to the affected
countries to ensure long-term, sustainable peace.
Thirdly, we welcome the signing of the joint
United Nations-African Union Framework for an
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security by both
organizations this year. The Framework elevates
cooperation between the two organizations to a
higher level. The continent continues to experience
challenges, particularly in combating terrorism, piracy,
transnational organized crime and human trafficking.
We hope that continued cooperation between the AU
Commission and the Secretariat, characterized by
mutual respect and understanding, will thus expand
and strengthen cooperation on many other issues that
the two organizations face.
Finally, we are pleased that many of our proposals
are aligned with the nine areas of reform outlined
by the Secretary-General in a statement made in
early April. In that statement, the Secretary-General
committed the Secretariat to enhancing its technical
cooperation and capacity building partnership with the
African Union Commission to further strengthen the
partnership between the two organizations, especially
regarding political issues and peacekeeping operations
on the continent. He also called for that partnership to
be based on solid, predictable funding, including for
peacekeeping missions of the African Union, supported
by the Security Council.
In conclusion, South Africa emphasizes that
debates of this nature should result in practical steps
aimed towards strengthening institutional collaboration
between the Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I thank you, Sir, for having convened today’s
debate on peace and security in Africa.
12/27

19/07/2017

My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
on behalf of the European Union and would like to make
the following remarks in its national capacity.
Although the number of crises and conflicts
in Africa on the Security Council’s agenda remain
regrettably high, it is also true that over the past
few decades, peace has been restored in many of the
continent’s regions. The United Nations, the African
Union and many regional organizations played an
important role in that achievement.
There is no single model for cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union; there
are various situations. options and types of support
possible, as demonstrated by past experience and the
models highlighted by the Secretary-General in his
May report (S/2017/454). We eagerly await additional
proposals from the Secretary-General on reforms in
the areas of peace and security, which should focus
in particular on achieving greater efficiency on the
ground. We also commend the efforts of the African
Union to strengthen accountability mechanisms for
monitoring human rights, conduct and discipline within
its own operations.
The Joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for an Enhanced Partnership on Peace
and Security, signed on 19 April, is broad-based and
ambitious. It focuses on sustainable peace and covers
all aspects of conflict cycles. We believe that it is
important to maintain that broad-based approach. I
would like to underscore three points that we believe
deserve particular attention.
The first point is mediation. The African Union
and subregional organizations play an increasingly
important role in the area of mediation — and that
is a good thing. We believe that the region is often
ideally placed either to play the role of mediator or to
contribute to national or international mediation efforts.
In February, Belgium organized an international
conference on mediation. It hopes to continue the
discussion on effective mediation and intends to
organize another event in the coming months that will
focus on mediation efforts in Africa.
The second point relates to human rights. The year
2016 marked the African Year of Human Rights. It is
essential that operations mandated by the Security
Council respect the highest standards of the African
Union and the United Nations in the area of human
rights, conduct, discipline and monitoring. We
17-22241

19/07/2017

Peace and security in Africa

commend the commitments and efforts made in that
regard. The United Nations and the African Union cold
also strengthen their partnership in that area.
The third point relates to young people. More than
60 per cent of Africa’s population is under 25. Young
people are the future and investing in them is crucial
for lasting peace. Education, training and employment
are crucial to preventing radicalization and to shielding
them from being influenced by hate speech and
recruited by violent groups. It is therefore important to
continue to invest in young people and children during
conflict to prevent an entire generation from being lost
once conflicts end. As the Peacebuilding Commission’s
focal point on youth, Belgium continues to attach great
importance to that issue.
The lofty goals of the United Nations-African Union
partnership must translate to progress in operations
on the ground. In that regard, Belgium welcomes the
adoption of resolution 2359 (2017) that covers the
establishment of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel) joint force, at the request of the African Union.
This is an important stage in the implementation of the
Joint United Nations-AU Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership on Peace and Security. Alongside and in
line with the efforts of the United Nations in the region,
the G-5 Sahel joint force is a security initiative that the
region needs to counter terrorism. Belgium, along with
other countries, expects considerable action to be taken
to allow for a speedy launch of that initiative.
The establishment of the G-5 Sahel joint force
is an opportunity to be seized upon in order to move
fully towards the development of a joint framework
for planning, operations coordination, reporting
and monitoring, as stipulated in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. It will be necessary to develop the
necessary capacities in that regard. The United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) will have to work closely with the
armies of the G-5 countries. The two entities will need
to enter into a genuine partnership while respecting
the same norms, including in the area of human rights.
Besides ensuring the command of MINUSMA and that
of the European Union Training Mission in Mali, my
country is committed to promoting effective cooperation
among the African Union, the G-5, the United Nations
and the European Union. Each has its own added
value and, through optimally using the specificities
of each organization, the response of the international
community will be at its the most effective.

S/PV. 8006 (Resumption 1)

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mr. Mendonça e Moura (Portugal): I thank you,
Sir, for convening this very timely and relevant open
debate. It is with great satisfaction that I note the
increasing number of Security Council meetings and
respective outcomes on the important topic of peace
and security in Africa, which is of concern to us all.
My statement is aligned with the one delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union (EU),
but I would like to add some additional remarks in my
national capacity.
The growing number of challenges that the African
continent faces — from security to development — should
be addressed through international cooperation, while
respecting both national and regional ownership. In
addition to a number of demographic challenges — such
as the large and increasing number of young people,
who are often unemployed, and a staggering number
of internally displaced people and refugees — the fact
is that the instability in Africa is being fuelled by a
variety of complex factors, such as terrorism and the
proliferation of violent extremism, piracy, economic
hardship, social and food insecurity and political
unpredictabability. Those are threats to international
peace and security, thereby requiring a strong and
coordinated response at all levels whereby the intrinsic
and mutually reinforcing relationship between peace
and security and sustainable development must be
borne in mind. Tackling those issues is as important for
Africa’s prosperity as it is for the its security.
In that regard, we believe that it is crucial to
effectively support the work of the African Union and
the regional economic communities alongside efforts
at the national and the community levels. Moreover, it
is necessary to contemplate new cooperation dynamics
between the African Union and the United Nations, as
well as with other relevant partners. We welcome the
steps already taken in that direction, as exemplified
most recently by resolution 2320 (2016) and the Joint
United Nations-African Union Framework for an
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, signed in
April. I would like to take this opportunity to welcome
the personal engagement of Secretary-General Guterres
in that pursuit.
Portugal is deeply committed to the promotion
of peace and security in Africa and, in that regard,
to working closely with the United Nations, the

17-2224113/27

S/PV.8006 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

African Union and subregional organizations. We are
currently participating in the peacekeeping operations
in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic. At the EU level, we
are also engaged in the important areas of training
and capacitating, namely, in the European Union
training missions in Somalia, Mali and the Central
African Republic, and in the European Union capacitybuilding missions in Mali and the Niger. We are firmly
committed to continuing to do so.
While it is paramount that the African Union
carries on with its efforts in capacity-building in the
areas of peace and security, we must acknowledge that
the current level of international support for Africanled multinational peace and security programmes is
not enough. The way forward will have to involve the
diversification of funding. We believe that positive
steps in that direction include the establishment of the
African Peace Fund and Mr. Kaberuka’s report, as well
as the report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/454) on
options for authorizing and supporting African Union
peace and support operations. Any new financing
models should be predictable and sustainable, thereby
ensuring lasting funds for the foreseeable future. At the
same time, we need to ensure that any such financing
solutions do not have a negative impact on any other
key areas, such as financing African development.
Conflict prevention and sustaining peace must
remain the key priorities. While sparing no effort in
addressing the multidimensional challenges with
regard to peace and security that the African continent
faces, there should be a determined commitment to an
integrated and systemic approach to long-lasting peace.
The international community should focus on helping
develop strong and sustainable national and local
institutions, and cementing democracy, the rule of law,
respect for human rights and security for its citizens. It
is therefore essential that Africa remains a top priority
at the United Nations, namely, here in the Security
Council. African security and prosperity is essential
both for Africans and the whole world.
Lastly, I should like to add a personal note by
saying that I am very happy to be able to mark my final
intervention in the Security Council with a statement on
Africa, as it is very close to my country and own heart.
14/27

19/07/2017

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): Bangladesh thanks
the Chinese presidency for organizing this open debate.
We also thank the Secretary-General and the African
Union (AU) Commissioner for their shared vision for
enhancing African capacities for peace and security.
Bangladesh values its association with Africa and
cherishes a number of instances in which its engagement
has played an instrumental role in achieving sustainable
peace on the ground. In our role as spokesperson for
the least developed countries, we have consistently
advocated for the particular needs and challenges of the
countries affected by, or emerging from, conflicts in
Africa. Bangladesh therefore feels encouraged to see the
AU assuming enhanced responsibility and ownership
so as to prevent conflicts and promote durable peace
in the region. In the spirit of finding African solutions
to African problems, we appreciate the important
strides made by the AU-led peace support operations
in Somalia, the Lake Chad basin and the Sahel region
in particular. Bangladesh continues to express its
readiness to further cooperate with the AU, preferably
through the United Nations and in full respect of the
AU’s ownership of its mandated operations.
The joint AU-United Nations review authorized
by the Council identified a range of opportunities
and outstanding challenges inherent in the strategic
partnership that has evolved over the past 15 years. The
adoption of resolution 2320 (2016), the AU’s decisions
and overtures concerning its Peace Fund and the signing
of the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security
provide a broader context for further broadening
and deepening that partnership. The African Union’s
sustained initiatives to live up to its commitment to fund
25 per cent of the cost of its peace support activities
have added further momentum to consolidating the
partnership, including through flexible yet sustainable
financing modalities.
With
regard
to
the
Secretary-General’s
comprehensive report (S/2017/454), my delegation
wishes to underline five general points.
First, we stress the importance of improving
capacities for joint appraisal, assessment and analysis of
conflicts by the United Nations and the AU, including
in the context of the Secretary-General’s peace and
security architecture reform initiative. It remains critical
17-22241

19/07/2017

Peace and security in Africa

that such joint assessment and analysis be conducted in
an objective, consultative and inclusive manner.
Secondly, in view of the challenges of obtaining
financing through assessed contributions by United
Nations States Members, flexibility and diversity with
regard to the various options presented by the SecretaryGeneral in his report could help address the prevailing
financing gaps and the uncertainty surrounding the
trust-fund model based on voluntary contributions. It
would be advisable to exercise caution with regard to
financing models that have not been sufficiently tested.
Thirdly, in terms of mission support, we
recognize the importance of harnessing the respective
comparative advantages of the United Nations and the
AU in a flexible, case-by-case manner. The experience
of the United Nations support offices to the African
Union Mission in Somalia and of the Organization in
Somalia provides a useful template that could be further
strengthened and improvised, with the aim of avoiding
duplication and ensuring compliance and oversight.
Fourthly, the notion of doctrinal flexibility,
especially with regard to peace enforcement and
counter-terrorism, needs to be invoked on the basis of
the African Union’s ownership and decisions in that
regard. We reiterate that the support for African peace
support operations should not stretch the mandate
and competence of United Nations peacekeeping and
support missions or endanger the safety and security of
its civilian and non-civilian personnel.
Fifthly, and lastly, we reaffirm the overriding
priority of seeking political solutions to conflicts in
Africa and elsewhere as a critical precondition for
sustaining peace across the continuum of conflicts.
The importance of involving women and youth in
peace processes, including in conflict prevention and
peacebuilding, remains paramount in the interest of
enhancing inclusive national ownership.
Bangladesh appreciates the forward-looking thrust
in further strengthening the partnership between the
United Nations and the AU in the areas of peace and
security, and wishes to see further concrete decisions
by the Council later this year, while upholding the spirit
of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.

S/PV. 8006 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Suárez Moreno (Venezuela) (spoke in
Spanish): It is an honour for the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela to take the floor to speak on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM).
At the outset, on behalf of the member States of the
Movement, I extend our best wishes to the delegation
of the People’s Republic of China in presiding over a
successful month in the work of the Security Council. I
would also like to express our appreciation for China’s
efforts in preparing the concept note (S/2017/574,
annex) for this session, which serves as the basis for
guiding our discussions today. We would also like to
acknowledge the diligence with which the delegation of
the Plurinational State of Bolivia, under the leadership
of Ambassador Sacha Llorentty Solíz, led the work
of this organ during the month of June. Similarly, we
would like to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. António
Guterres, and the Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union, Mr. Smail Chergui, for
their briefings.
As rightly pointed out in the concept note for
this open debate, Africa is the continent with the
greatest development potential. Nonetheless, that
potential could certainly be lost owing to various
security and developmental challenges faced by this
vibrant continent, including, among others, protracted
conflicts, climate change and transnational organized
crime. In that regard, its worth noting that, during the
seventeenth Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement,
held in September 2016 on the Island of Margarita in
Venezuela, the NAM Heads of State and Government
reiterated their determination to build a peaceful and
prosperous world by collectively addressing existing,
new and emerging challenges and issues of shared
concern to its member States, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and the norms and
principles of international law.
As we well know, there can be no peace without
development and no development without peace,
bearing in mind how deeply those two processes are
interconnected. It is for that reason that the Movement
appreciates the convening of this open debate, aimed
at emphasizing the importance of assisting Africa
in enhancing its capacities in the areas of peace and
security. In that regard, the Non-Aligned Movement
underscores the important role that regional and
subregional bodies and mechanisms can play in
the promotion of regional peace and security and
in economic and social development by fostering

17-2224115/27

S/PV.8006 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

cooperation among countries in the region. We also
emphasize the importance of synergy between regional
and subregional initiatives to ensure complementarity
and the added value of each process in achieving their
common goals, such as political stability, economic
growth, and social and cultural development.
The member States of the Non-Aligned Movement
welcome the determination of the United Nations to
enhance its relationship and cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations, in particular with the
African Union, in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. We
also welcome the stated support for the implementation
of the 2063 Agenda, adopted during the twenty-fourth
ordinary session of the Heads of State and Government
of the Assembly of the African Union, held from 30 to
31 January 2015 in Addis Ababa, in order to promote
peace, stability and socioeconomic development
in Africa.
The Security Council has in the past committed
itself to strengthening cooperation and coordination
with the African Union. Efforts must therefore be
redoubled to further strengthen the strategic partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union
at the operational, political and tactical levels, with a
view to addressing in a holistic manner the challenges
faced in the fields of peace and security, including
the need to address the root causes of conflicts and to
promote stability and development. At the same time,
we must bear in mind that the African Union enjoys
acknowledged political authority in the region, as well
as the premise of African solutions to African problems
and the African Union’s proven experience in assisting
in the peaceful settlement of disputes through political
dialogue and consultations, thereby contributing to
lasting peace.
While recognizing the important role that youth
and women can play in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts and in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts, we would like to underscore, inter alia, the
African Youth (2009-2018) Decade Plan of Action as
a framework for multisectorial and multidimensional
engagement by all stakeholders towards the achievement
of the goals and objectives of the African Youth Charter,
including those of governance, peace and security, as
well as the African Peace and Security Architecture
Roadmap 2016-2020, including its initiative entitled
“Silencing the Guns, Owning the Future: Realizing a
Conflict-Free Africa by 2020”.
16/27

19/07/2017

Moreover, the Movement supports ongoing efforts
to strengthen African peacekeeping capabilities and
emphasizes the importance of implementing the Joint
United Nations-African Union Framework for an
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, which
was signed on 19 April, in the short, medium and long
terms in all relevant areas. The Non-Aligned Movement
also recommends enhancing an effective partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union
in order to improve the planning, deployment and
management of African peacekeeping operations. In
that regard, we stress the importance of finding ways
to secure predictable, adequate and sustained financial
support to African Union-led peace operations so that
deployed missions can maximize their operational
effectiveness on the ground.
In conclusion, it is worth recalling that, in 2004,
former Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali
stated in an interview that
“[t]here is a greater fatigue concerning the African
problem today than five or 10 years ago. The
situation now in Africa is worse than it was 10
years ago”.
Today, 13 years later, his assessment continues to hold
true. Therefore, the Non-Aligned Movement encourages
the international community to resolutely support
efforts in favour of peace, stability and socioeconomic
development in Africa, including capacity-building in
those areas.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mrs.
Gregoire-Van-Haaren
(Netherlands):
The Kingdom of the Netherlands thanks China for
convening this debate on enhancing African capacities
in the areas of peace and security.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union.
Today’s complex security challenges require
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
organizations, such as the African Union (AU). The
operationalization of those partnerships requires our
full attention. Today’s debate serves to underline the
acknowledgement by the United Nations of the need
for close cooperation with the African Union in the
areas of peace and security in Africa. We welcome the
progress made since the adoption of resolution 2320
17-22241

19/07/2017

Peace and security in Africa

(2016). The signing of the Joint United Nations-African
Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security, in April, was an important step forward.
The May report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/454), in which different modalities for future
support of the United Nations to the AU peace support
operations are explored, provides useful insights on
today’s topic. It acknowledges the need for more support
to ensure African Union peace operations, in line with
the premise that the African Union will reform and
secure human, financial and logistical resources. It also
highlights the importance of compliance and oversight,
particularly in the areas of human rights, conduct and
discipline. We acknowledge the positive steps that have
been taken by the African Union to implement reforms,
in particular the element of increased self-financing.
In today’s debate, we want to emphasize two
elements: first, the importance of operationalizing
the modalities to support the African Union’s peace
operations; and, secondly, the need to address the root
causes of conflicts with a view to sustaining peace.
We acknowledge the positive steps that have been
taken by the African Union to build its capacities to
plan, finance, sustain and oversee its own missions.
Those steps are fundamental in order to strengthen the
African Union’s capacity to address the multiple aspects
of the partnership, all while operating in accordance
with United Nations standards. Because of our shared
responsibility for peace and security in Africa, we must
stay on track to achieve a more institutionalized form
of cooperation.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes
the report of the Secretary-General on options for
authorization and support for African Union peace
support operations. It provides useful recommendations
to enhance the practical cooperation between both
organizations, including on financing, accountability,
compliance and oversight, joint planning and mandating
African Union peace support operations. As mentioned
in the EU statement, the European Union stands ready
to continue to look at how it, together with the United
Nations and the African Union, can contribute to
achieving progress in the discussion on sustainable
financing and a division of labour for peace operations
in Africa.
Peace operations are part of a broader, integrated
approach. They are an essential element in a range
of actions focused on all stages of a conflict cycle,

S/PV. 8006 (Resumption 1)

ranging from early warning and the rule of law to
humanitarian aid, stabilization and development, as
well as accountability. In the light of that, we must
address the root causes of conflict, which are often
also drivers for migration and displacement, in order to
effectively sustain peace. That is core business for the
United Nations as a whole. It makes working together
across the pillars of the United Nations a key priority.
Working on peace and security in Africa remains
a challenge on which we will keep working together
through partnership. Resolution 2320 (2016) and
the subsequent report of the Secretary-General are
important milestones that define concrete steps to be
taken to deepen that partnership. It is a partnership
based on transparency, accountability, common goals
and burden-sharing. We welcome the active approach
by Secretary-General Guterres and the Chairman of the
African Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands supports
intensified cooperation between the triangle of the
United Nations, the African Union and the European
Union. We trust that the necessary steps will be taken
in order to bring that partnership to the next level. We
look forward to contributing to the implementation of
those steps as a Security Council member in 2018 and
beyond. We will continue to strive towards a stronger
and more effective partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union for the people of Africa
and for the good of us all.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I would like to congratulate China on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of July. I wish you every success, Mr. President. I
would also like to thank the Chinese presidency for
preparing the concept note (S/2017/574, annex) on the
theme of today’s debate, namely, enhancing African
capacities in the areas of peace and security. I would
also like to take this opportunity to thank the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Antonio Guterres and the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, Mr. Smail
Chergui, for their valuable briefings.
Ensuring peace and security is undoubtedly one of
the many challenges facing our world today. Peace is
a precondition for development. In turn, development
leads to prosperity. However, many African countries
are still stuck in a vicious cycle of conflict and instability

17-2224117/27

S/PV.8006 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

due to political and security challenges, armed conflicts
and threats posed by terrorist networks, such as Boko
Haram the Lord’s Resistance Army, Al-Shabaab
and others, as well as organized crime and piracy. In
addition, the African continent faces developmental
and social challenges due to unemployment, poverty
and hunger. Among other things, those challenges
pose obstacles to peace and security in Africa. In our
capacity as partners in the international community,
we must support and help Africa to solve its problems
and build its capacities for the promotion of peace
and security across the continent. We pay tribute to
the efforts of African leaders to address peace and
security issues across the continent, as well as for their
determination to find African solutions to African
problems and their persistence in establishing a
conflict-free African continent.
The African Union (AU) and its Peace and Security
Council are role models for regional organizations
with respect to maintaining peace and security in the
countries of the region. They also play a key role in
the development of the continent through Agenda 2063.
We call for enhancing cooperation between the United
Nations, especially the Security Council, and the AU
in line with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, which calls for contributions to maintaining
peace and security in the region and the world. We would
also like to pay tribute to the important role played by
the AU in leading a number of peace operations that
have become a very important means of responding to
conflicts and crises in Africa.
In that regard, I would like to mention resolution
2320 (2016), which reiterates the importance of the
partnership between the United Nations and the Peace
and Security Council. The partnership should be
based on bilateral consultations and joint strategies, as
necessary. It should also be based on the comparative
advantages of each organization. The partnership
should incorporate burden-sharing, consultative
decision-making, joint analysis, transparency and
accountability in order to take on the joint security
changes in Africa. We reaffirm the importance of the
Security Council reviewing the implementation of all
its resolutions, especially those related to Africa and
cooperation with the African Union.
Sustainable development plays a very important
role in establishing stability in all countries. The 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development has opened new
paths to peace through a holistic scheme that addresses
18/27

19/07/2017

the root causes of conflicts and impediments to peace.
Goal 16 of the 2030 Agenda calls for promoting
peaceful and inclusive societies and access to justice
for all. Kuwait is aware of the powerful nexus between
peace and development. In 1961, we established the
Kuwaiti Fund for Arab Economic Development, which
has extended more than 500 concessional credits to
more than 50 African countries, amounting to more
than $10 billion in credits to the sectors of agriculture,
energy, transportation, industry, water, communications
and so on.
In parallel to that developmental role, Kuwait
is also keen on fostering cooperation with Africa.
In November 2013, under the theme“Partners in
Development and Investment”, Kuwait hosted the third
Arab-African Summit, which was attended by the
Presidents of 34 States, as well by delegations from
71 countries. Kuwait has worked on creating prospects
for Arab-African relations that are based on common
interests in sustainable development and that would
ensure the optimization of our natural resources as well
as realize the aspirations of the peoples of the Arab and
African regions. His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad
Al-Jaber Al-Sabah also announced concessional credits
in the amount of $1 billion.
In this regard, allow me to highlight, during the
Chinese presidency of the Security Council, the fact
that the implementation of this Kuwaiti initiative
is being carried out in collaboration with the ChinaAfrica Development Fund as well as the World Bank
and its organizations.
The aforementioned Kuwaiti initiatives and
contributions are based on our belief in the importance
of operationalizing the concept of true partnership with
the African continent and our conviction of the robust
nexus between development and peace.
Finally, Kuwait, which will be a non-permanent
member of the Security Council in 2018-2019, will spare
no effort in continuing to support the African countries
and the African Union, and will work to enhance
African conflict-prevention and settlement capacities
and for the maintenance of peace and stability.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Haidara (Nigeria): Let me begin by thanking
the delegation of China for having organized this
open debate. I particularly commend your resolve,
17-22241

19/07/2017

Peace and security in Africa

Mr. President, in deciding to personally preside over
this meeting throughout the day. This is a reflection of
China’s commitment to enhancing peace and security in
Africa. I also commend the Secretary-General and the
African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security
for their briefings, which aptly captured the essence of
our deliberations today.
Nigeria aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
As encapsulated in the concept note (S/2017/574,
annex), Africa remains the continent with the greatest
development potential. Nonetheless, efforts to harness
this potential have been hampered by the myriad
challenges facing the continent. Some of the most
urgent challenges are the spread of extremist ideologies,
terrorism and the illicit transfer and proliferation of
small arms and light weapons. Yet these contemporary
global challenges tend to be transnational in character
and are often beyond the capacity of any one country
to resolve.
While the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security resides
with the Security Council, regional actions lighten
the burden of the Council and provide an added layer
of legitimacy to multilateralism. Regional efforts
enhance the prospects for inclusivity and consensus in
addressing the challenges to global peace and security.
It is against this backdrop that we situate today’s debate,
which seeks to enhance Africa’s capacity in the areas of
peace and security.
The United Nations Charter, as adopted, foresees
a world in which the United Nations and regional
organizations would work together to prevent, manage
and resolve crises. Over the years, notable instances of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, particularly in peacekeeping and conflict
prevention, have yielded high-quality dividends. These
gains hold a lot more promise for the future.
In recognition of the foregoing, Nigeria welcomes
the determination of the United Nations to enhance its
relationship and cooperation with the African Union
(AU) and to support the full and effective implementation
of Agenda 2063. This, we believe, will contribute in
no small measure to ensuring the promotion of peace,
stability and socioeconomic development in Africa.

S/PV. 8006 (Resumption 1)

We therefore see a need to redouble efforts to
further strengthen the strategic partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union. This
will enable us to address, in a holistic manner, the
challenges faced in the fields of peace and security. In
this regard, Nigeria welcomes the signing in April of
the new landmark framework to strengthen partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union
on peace and security in order to better respond to
the changing dimensions and evolving challenges of
peace operations.
Nigeria supports the continued efforts to strengthen
African peacekeeping capabilities and emphasizes
the importance of implementing the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security. We also recommend
the enhancement of an effective partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union, in order to
improve the planning, deployment and management
of African peacekeeping operations. In this regard,
we stress the importance of finding ways to secure
predictable, adequate and sustained financial support
for African Union-led peace operations, so that the
missions deployed can effectively maximize their
operational capabilities with respect to the tasks at hand.
While the option of a jointly developed and jointly
funded budget would require additional work by the
United Nations Secretariat and the AU Commission
before it could be put into practice, Nigeria endorses the
four options outlined by the Secretary-General, and we
call on the Security Council to endorse these options.
In addition to the issue of financing, we take note of the
proposal contained in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2017/454) for a decision-making framework aimed at
making joint action more effective between the United
Nations and the African Union.
In conclusion, if indeed the primary responsibility
of the Council is to maintain international peace and
security, its work in managing international peace
and security should be viewed through the lens of
preventive diplomacy. If the United Nations is able
to assist African nations in restoring their social and
institutional fabric, and if we can also apply ourselves
to the ongoing task of providing opportunities for
people and their livelihoods within the context of the
Sustainable Development Goals, we can go a long way
towards reducing the propensity for conflict in Africa.

17-2224119/27

S/PV.8006 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

19/07/2017

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now call on the
representative of Rwanda.

of security institutions will augment their ability to
respond effectively to current and emerging threats.

Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): Rwanda congratulates
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of July and for convening
this debate on a subject of paramount importance to
our continent, Africa. We also thank the briefers, the
Secretary-General and the African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security for their earlier briefings.

Thirdly, in post-conflict situations, Rwanda
recommends that investment in institutions’ capacities
and inclusive governance systems be given priority in
development cooperation.

Today’s threats to peace and security, worldwide
and on our continent, have become much more complex,
as has been underlined by many speakers, which calls
for multifaceted interventions and stronger partnerships
with regional organizations.
The African Union is better positioned in terms
of knowledge and proximity to mobilize and respond
quickly to existing and new threats to peace and
security. We believe that the Joint United NationsAfrican Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security, which was signed in April by the
United Nations Secretary-General and the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, Moussa Faki
Mahamat, provides the necessary framework for a
much-needed closer and more focused cooperation
between the two organizations. What we now need to
do is institutionalize that cooperation.
Allow me to make specific recommendations on
the issues being considered in our debate today, which
you, Mr. President, very ably presented in your concept
note (S/2017/574, annex).
First, Rwanda believes in the value of holding
regular dialogue and consultations between the African
Union and the Security Council on all conflicts on the
continent. The information shared by both institutions
during this dialogue will, in our opinion, increase the
understanding of the context and root causes of such
conflicts and therefore help design adequate responses.
Secondly, Rwanda strongly recommends increased
investment in the African Union capacities to intervene
and respond effectively to warning signals with rapid
interventions to protect civilians and prevent conflicts
from spreading and escalating.
Often in conflict situations, the only credible
prevention is rapid action. Enhancing African
capacities in the areas of peace and security and, more
specifically, enabling the African Union to address
the deficit in the training, equipment and capacities
20/27

Fourthly, the lack of predictable and sustainable
funding remains a major challenge to the ability of the
African Union to engage more effectively and use its
comparative advantage to address conflicts and sustain
peace on the continent. In order to address that challenge,
the African Union Summit decided, at its twentyfourth Ordinary Session, held in Kigali in July 2016,
to finance 25 per cent of the African Union-led peace
support operations. The African Union Peace Fund,
established by the African Union, and Mr. Kaberuka’s
report serve that purpose. Supporting the African
Union Peace Fund, including through United Nations
assessed contributions, will go a long way in ensuring
predictable financing and contributing to the goal of
ending conflicts in Africa. The management structure,
accountability and transparency mechanisms built into
the administration of the African Union Peace Fund
will ensure value for money. However, Rwanda knows
through experience that the highest value for money
lies in the millions of lives that could be saved by
enhancing African capacities to respond to peace and
security issues.
None of the 17 ambitious Sustainable Development
Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
can be realized without peace and security. Therefore,
increased investment in Africa’s capacities in the area
of peace and security is an investment in ensuring that
the 2030 Agenda leaves no one behind, including, above
all, those affected by conflicts today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Djibouti.
Mrs. Hassan (Djibouti) (spoke in French): Allow
me to thank the Chinese presidency for organizing this
open debate on the important issue of enhancing African
capacities in the area of peace and security. I would
also thank the Secretary-General of the United Nations
and the African Union (AU) Commissioner for Peace
and Security for their contributions to this important
public debate. Finally, we thank you, Mr. President,
for the concept note drafted in preparation for this
meeting (S/2017/574, annex), which again demonstrates
17-22241

19/07/2017

Peace and security in Africa

the importance that your country attaches to the
African continent.
Djibouti aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the Movement of Non Aligned Countries.
The African continent alone accounts for 70 per
cent of the world’s current crises and two thirds of the
Security Council’s deliberations. As rightly pointed out
in the concept note and taken up by several delegations
in the Chamber today, Africa remains fragile in the
face of multiple and multifaceted crises. Terrorist
organizations — such as Al-Shabaab, Boko Haram and
others — remain a threat to the security of our continent.
The deployment of peacekeepers, made up
of 50 per cent Africans in several peacekeeping
theatres — notably in Darfur, the Central African
Republic, Mali and Somalia — clearly illustrates the
commitment of African States and the African Union
and its regional entities to contributing, alongside the
United Nations, to collective security as provided for in
the Charter of the United Nations. Each of our debates
contributes to improving the overall performance of
peacekeeping missions. It is therefore vital for the
security of the continent and for international peace
and security that long-term solutions be identified.
In that regard, my delegation would like to pay
tribute to the second Chiefs of Defense Conference,
which took place in New York on 7 July. The theme of
the meeting was how to improve the overall performance
of United Nations peacekeeping missions. Almost 100
countries were represented by their Chiefs of Staff.
That clearly demonstrates the great importance our
respective countries attach to peacekeeping operations.
The African Union has consistently demonstrated
its political will in recent years and has undertaken
major changes such as the restructuring of the
African Union Commission with a view to adapting
it to Agenda 2063. At the most recent African Union
Summit, member States highlighted the message set
out in the Master Roadmap of Practical Steps to Silence
the Guns by 2020, so as to reduce armed conflict in the
continent. There can be no peace without development
nor development without peace.
One of the strengths of the African Union is its
subregional organizations, which have devoted a great
deal of effort and resources to identifying emerging
crises and to adopting collective measures to prevent
conflicts. We welcome the efforts of those organizations

S/PV. 8006 (Resumption 1)

to reduce the tragic crises in Africa. In addition, United
Nations support for conflict management in Africa has
also increased over the past 25 years. The Peace and
Security Council of the African Union has proved to be
a reliable partner. Through that partnership, the level
of inter-organizational cooperation should inevitably
lead to the development of common strategies through
joint assessments, robust decision-making mechanisms
based on consultation and information sharing, and
monitoring mechanisms that facilitate planning and
operational cooperation throughout the conflict
cycle. Only a productive partnership can improve
collective security.
(spoke in English)
Since the adoption of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations report (see S/2015/446),
almost two years ago, we have noticed some positive
changes benefiting the two organization — the adoption
of resolution 2320 (2016); the Joint United NationsAfrican Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security, signed under the auspices of the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union; resolution 2359 (2017); and the reports of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/454) and the African Union
Commission Chairperson. Those are a few concrete
illustrations of support for autonomous African Union
peace operations, which are crucial to addressing the
challenges of peace and security.
(spoke in French)
There is an urgent need for more synergy, for a
harmonious African Union-United Nations partnership
in the prevention, mediation and management of violent
conflicts and for an increase in joint efforts to mobilize
more resources. In that regard, greater flexibility in
the interpretation of Chapter VIII of the Charter would
significantly reduce missteps in the area of peace and
international security.
In conclusion, on the occasion of the Nelson
Mandela International Day yesterday, SecretaryGeneral António Guterres, called for honouring the
legacy of the former South African President — not
by making statements or holding ceremonies, but by
making our world better.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Botswana.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Given the lateness of
the hour, I will be very brief. I would like to take this

17-2224121/27

S/PV.8006 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

opportunity, on behalf of my delegation, to congratulate
the People’s Republic of China on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July and to commend you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s important open debate on the topic “Peace
and security in Africa: enhancing African capacities
in the areas of peace and security”. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for the very valuable
contribution he made this morning at the start of the
debate. We would also like to express our appreciation
for the briefing by the Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union.
Botswana aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
Botswana welcomes this open debate focused
on peace and security challenges in Africa, the most
conflict-prone continent in the world. It is our ardent
hope that today’s discussion will enable us to find
solutions to the existing, new and emerging challenges
to peace and security in Africa. In that regard, we
urge the international community to assist African
Member States, the African Union and Africa’s
regional economic communities in dealing with those
challenges, particularly the rise of terrorism and the
proliferation of illicit small arms and light weapons.
Africa needs financial and technical assistance
and capacity-building if it is to enhance its capacities
in the areas of peace and security. This is crucial
to developing human capital and national legal
frameworks, policies and action plans for promoting
peace and security, particularly with regard to the
acquisition and management of weapons and small
arms. African capacities can also be strengthened
through institutional cooperation between the African
Union and the United Nations, as well as strategic
partnerships with other actors actively involved in this
area, such as your own country, Mr. President.
Botswana welcomes the commitment by African
leaders to silencing the guns by 2020, in accordance
with the African Union’s Agenda 2063 and the 2016
Lusaka road map. Until Africa addresses its peace
and security challenges, its sustainable development
will continue to be elusive. As the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development rightly notes, “There can
be no sustainable development without peace and no
peace without sustainable development.” Conflict
22/27

19/07/2017

prevention and resolution are therefore critical to
sustainable development and durable peace. Poverty
is identified as one of the root causes of conflict and
instability, reinforcing the importance of the nexus of
development and security. Promoting economic and
social development enhances national, regional and
global peace and security.
Botswana commends China for the capacitybuilding and technical-training programmes that
it has provided to African countries over the years
through the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation. We
also acknowledge with appreciation the contribution
that China makes to enhancing African capacities in
diplomacy, peacekeeping, civilian protection, logistical
support, joint military exercises and training, counterterrorism and counter-piracy. Lastly, China also
contributes troops, police, experts and funding in
support of peacekeeping missions in Africa, for which
we are deeply grateful.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uganda.
Mr. Ayebare (Uganda): At the outset, my delegation
would like to express its gratitude and appreciation to the
People’s Republic of China for organizing today’s open
debate, which is very important to Africa. We greatly
appreciate the briefings this morning by the SecretaryGeneral and Mr. Smail Chergui, Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union.
While the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security belongs
to the Security Council, Africa has been playing an
increasingly central role in those efforts on the African
continent, based on Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. That requires an effective partnership
between the African Union (AU) and the United
Nations, and in particular between the AU Peace and
Security Council and the Security Council. The annual
joint meetings between the two Councils are clear
testimony to the importance that the United Nations
attaches to peace and security in Africa.
My country has actively supported and participated
in African Union-led peace support operations and other
peace initiatives in the region. Uganda was the first
and largest troop-contributing country in the African
Union Mission in Somalia, where through our joint
work with our sister countries of Burundi, Ethiopia,
Kenya and Djibouti we have contributed to liberating
Somalia from the terrorists of Al-Shabaab and helped to
17-22241

19/07/2017

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV. 8006 (Resumption 1)

establish a security situation that has enabled Somalia
to hold successful successive national elections.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mali.

It is important to note that regional mechanisms and
subregional organizations in Africa have also played a
critical role in maintaining peace and security there, and
that they are indeed the building blocks of the African
peace and security architecture. For example, through
the East African Community, Uganda continues to
play a leading role in encouraging all Burundian
stakeholders to engage in an all-inclusive political
dialogue in support of President Mkapa as facilitator.
Under the auspices of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, Uganda continues to work with other
Member States to address the current conflict in South
Sudan, particularly on reconciling the various factions
of the ruling Sudan People’s Liberation Movement,
which we believe will ultimately lead to the restoration
of peace and security in that country.

Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on the People’s Republic of China’s accession to the
presidency of the Security Council for the month
of July. I would like to say how much we in Africa,
especially we in Mali, appreciate your cooperation
with our respective countries. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General and the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security for their very
thought-provoking and considerate briefings on this
issue this morning.

We cannot talk about building capacities for peace
and security in Africa without addressing issues that
directly threaten some of our member States. In that
regard, I should single out the situation in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of Congo, where the
United Nations has one of the largest peacekeeping
missions in Africa and where negative forces continue
to threaten Member States. I should specifically
mention the Allied Democratic Forces, which are
directly threatening our country. If Africa and the
United Nations do not address this urgent situation, it
will undermine the entire peacekeeping enterprise in
Africa generally, and thus our capacity to maintain
peace and security there.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/454) on
options for authorization and support for African Union
peace support operations, submitted to the Council on
26 May, is a welcome development, and we look forward
to hearing about the Council’s specific commitments
to addressing Africa’s concerns with regard to the
provision of adequate, predictable and sustainable
sources of funding for AU-led peace operations.
As you correctly indicated in your concept note
(S/2017/574, annex), Mr. President, respecting African
countries’ ownership in solving African security
problems is a precondition and foundation for support
to African-led peace operations. My delegation joins
other Member States in stressing how vital it is to
ensure that the Security Council listens to Africa in
addressing the security challenges facing the continent.

The delegation of Mali aligns itself fully with
the statement previously delivered by the delegation
of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
The African continent still harbours an array of
challenges — first and foremost among them the quest
for peace and security. In the context of our debate this
afternoon, I would like to share with members of the
Council some suggested courses of action in the area
of enhancing African capacity in the field of peace
and security.
First, the old adage that prevention is better than
cure still holds true. That is why the first point I wish
to make is a plea for the strengthening and enhancing
of African capacity in terms of conflict prevention.
On that point, as I am sure those present will recall,
the African Union and subregional organizations, such
as Economic Community of West African States and
many more such groupings on the African continent,
have set up early-warning mechanisms that serve the
purposes of handmaiden of preventive diplomacy.
Crisis prevention also necessitates staying the
course for the long haul to mitigate and eventually
eradicate the factors and root causes of tension and
conflict, namely, poverty, poor governance, injustice,
human rights violations and marginalization. It would
be remiss of me not to mention at this juncture the shared
action we must pursue to counter the illicit economy
that fuels conflict in Africa, in particular trafficking
of all types, including trafficking in weapons, drugs,
currency, black market goods and human beings.
Secondly, it is important to note that regional and
subregional cooperation wards off common threats,
such as terrorism, violent extremism and transnational

17-2224123/27

S/PV.8006 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

organized crime. African countries have also made
great progress in that regard. The most recent example
of such progress is the establishment of the Joint Force
Force of the Group of Five States for the Sahel (G-5),
which grew out of the shared determination of the
Heads of State of Burkina Faso, Mali, Mauritania, the
Niger and Chad to pool their efforts and their resources
so as to effectively and efficiently counter terrorism
and other forms of organized crime.
I should also like to draw attention to the fact that,
alongside its focus on security, the G-5 Sahel, first
and foremost, is a forum for addressing development,
governance and the resilience of its people. The setting
up of the Joint Force embodies the determination of the
Heads of State of the region, supported by the African
Union, to foster the requisite conditions for sustainable
development and peace in the region; for we are firmly
convinced that lasting peace cannot be achieved in the
absence of development and investment. In that regard,
I should like to express my gratitude for the strategic
partnerships and alliances that have been gradually
established by well-disposed friendly countries and
international partner organizations to backstop the G-5
Sahel initiative and to support the broader region.
Moreover, we are all very well aware that there
is no purely military solution to extremist ideologies.
That is why I think it is crucial that Africa equip itself
with a peaceful counter-radicalization strategy that is
fit-for-purpose, and that it do so in and through Africa’s
own mechanisms, in particular by heeding the advice
of the Panel of the Wise, traditional or religious leaders
and civil society, including women and the youth. Wwe
also know that education has a core role to play in terms
of providing a spirit of civic belonging and fostering
peaceful coexistence in our respective countries.
Thirdly, it is necessary to underscore the importance
of cooperation between the United Nations and African
regional organizations, especially the African Union,
with a view to further developing African conflict
resolution management and prevention capacities, as
well as boosting African ownership of post-conflict
peacebuilding. I commend the initiatives and measures
currently under way between the Secretary-General and
the African Union Commission. That brings forth the
need to highlight the pressing need to work to fine-tune
consistency and coordination that are a sine qua non
for the various joint actions inked with our bilateral
and multilateral partners who participate in conflict
management and resolution in Africa.
24/27

19/07/2017

I would like to conclude with an appeal for concrete
and meaningful action to help Africa to eradicate,
completely and sustainably, the wellsprings of tension
and enable it to turn its attention to development.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Ms. Meitzad (Israel): On behalf of my delegation,
I thank you for your leadership, Sir, as President of the
Security Council, and I commend you for convening
this important debate.
In recent years, innocent persons across Africa have
endured unrelenting conflict due to the proliferation of
terrorist groups in their countries. From Boko Haram
in Nigeria to Al-Qaida affiliates in the Sahel region,
to Al-Shabaab in Somalia and Da’esh throughout the
continent, terrorists continue to pose an urgent and
increasing threat to peace and security in Africa. The
consequences are devastating. Children are recruited
into radical organizations, teenaged girls are forced
to marry men often four times their age and countless
innocent lives are stolen every day. While the dangers
of terrorism pose immediate and obvious threats to
security, the long-term effects can prevent crucial
economic and social development in Africa.
Africa is a continent on the rise. Israel and Africa
share many similarities in our experiences, especially
as they relate to security challenges. It is in the strategic
interests of Israel to build robust and lasting partnerships
with Africa. As a young country in a region plagued by
conflict, Israel was compelled to develop comprehensive
counter-terrorism solutions. With Hamas and Hizbullah
right on our doorstep, Israel is well-versed in the threats
that terrorist groups, like Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab,
can pose to peace. With unique know-how, technology,
research and development, Israel seeks to contribute, as
much as possible, to the global fight against terrorism,
especially in Africa.
Israel supports the partnerships between the
African Union, regional groups, partner nations and
the United Nations to advance security collectively.
Regional, local groups and initiatives can play a crucial
role in countering terrorism and overcoming security
threats by helping improve police and border control,
confronting the financing of terrorism, halting the
proliferation of weapons and more.
As many have stated in the past, there can be no
security without development and no development
17-22241

19/07/2017

Peace and security in Africa

without security. My country shares that understanding
and will continue to share lessons learned with our
friends and allies throughout Africa. Last year, Prime
Minister Netanyahu visited East Africa to discuss
counter-terrorism and development initiatives with
regional leaders. This year, the Prime Minister had
the honour to participate in last month’s Economic
Community of West African States Heads of State
meeting in Liberia. In his address, the Prime
Minister stated,
“Our goal here is not merely to join forces to fight
the bad, but to work together to advance the good.”
Collaboration in Africa should not focus solely
on combating terrorism, but must also work to bolster
development. African-Israeli partnerships have already
internalized that lesson. Whether through official
channels or non-governmental organizations, Israel
is fully present and active in the effort to encourage
innovative technologies, inspire entrepreneurship and
empower communities.
Israel believes that, while talent can be found
anywhere, opportunities must be created. Therefore,
Israel’s international development agency, Mashav,
emphasizes the power of human capital — an abundant
resource on the African continent. Mashav programmes
in Africa seek to empower communities, especially
youth, strengthen high-tech know-how and capacitybuilding and provide specialized training.
It is the long-standing belief of Israel that the
inclusion of women is key to sustaining peace, in Africa
and around the world. In that regard, we commend
the Secretary-General’s initiative for prioritizing
women’s roles in peacekeeping in the United Nations.
One of Mashav’s critical projects, in partnership with
UN-Women, reflects that view. Through its annual
workshop, Mashav provides a platform for African
women to engage actively in politics, peacebuilding,
mediation and conflict resolution.
Along with Government efforts, civil society
activities are a major driver for fostering development.
Various Israeli non-governmental organizations
have been working on the ground together with local
communities to advance water, energy and health
solutions. It is through such initiatives that youth and
women become leaders, start-up founders and agents
for change for sustainable peace and development in
Africa. Support from the international community,
regional organizations and partner States is vital to

S/PV. 8006 (Resumption 1)

the development and stability of Africa. However, we
believe it is equally important that African challenges
be met with African-led solutions.
Israel is committed to working together with our
friends in Africa to shape a safer and more secure and
prosperous future.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Grant (Canada) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to thank China for organizing this
open debate on enhancing African capacities in the
area of peace and security.
Despite much progress, armed conflict and
insecurity continue to undermine progress toward
sustainable development in many parts of Africa. We
have committed to partnering with Africans with a
view to supporting African-led efforts to address peace
and security challenges on the continent and, in this
regard, there is much work to be done.
Canada’s new feminist international assistance
policy emphasizes the importance of working with
African Governments to ensure that women are active
participants in shaping political solutions to violent
conflict; promoting the increased and meaningful
participation of women in peace operations;
protecting and promoting the rights of women and
girls; and to preventing and responding to sexual
violence — including sexual exploitation and abuse
perpetrated by peacekeeping personnel. When women
and girls play integral and meaningful roles in society,
States are more peaceful and resilient. We should
support our African partners, who are endeavouring
to advance holistic approaches to address drivers of
conflict, with a particular focus on empowering women
and girls.
(spoke in English)
It is also critical that we do more to strengthen
partnerships between the United Nations system,
individual Member States, and African regional
organizations and their member States. For example,
supporting new or expanded innovative training
initiatives for African countries, which provide
significant numbers of troops and police to peacekeeping
missions, would serve to enhance the effectiveness of
both African-led and United Nations efforts to promote
peace and security on the continent, as could greater
sharing of analysis and lessons learned. Recognizing

17-2224125/27

S/PV.8006 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

this, as host of the 2017 United Nations Peacekeeping
Defence Ministerial, which will take place in November
in Vancouver, Canada will be convening countries to
discuss ways to strengthen partnerships to enhance the
effectiveness of United Nations peace operations. We
also commend the new Joint United Nations-African
Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in
Peace and Security to further our coordination efforts.
Finally, we must focus more on enhancing the
financial viability of African Union (AU) peace
operations as a cornerstone of African leadership.
In that regard, Canada calls on all States to support
the efforts of the AU to increase African resource
mobilization to fund the operations and programmes
of the AU Commission, including in the area of peace
and security. For our part, Canada will keep an open
mind and looks forward to dialogue on the modalities
available to ensure successful AU peace operations.
By collaborating on advancing the women and
peace and security agenda, more robust partnerships,
and enhancing the financial viability of AU operations,
we can help our African partners realize their vision of a
more peaceful and prosperous Africa. We look forward
to continue working with our African and international
partners in this endeavour.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow me
first of all to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
relevant choice of topic under discussion today, and to
thank you for organizing this open debate. Your choice
underlines the importance that your country attaches to
our continent and the pride of place it has.

19/07/2017

better understanding of these challenges, as well as
considerable human, technical and financial resources
that Africa alone cannot provide. The support of the
international community remains crucial. That support
is often provided through regional and subregional
organizations, which continue to demonstrate their
added value and comparative advantages.
Morocco welcomed the signing of the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security on 19 April. We hope
that it can be implemented effectively and efficiently,
and we are prepared to offer our support in that regard.
This new agreement will be the culmination of the
efforts of the two organizations and their member
States, which all recognize the need to strengthen the
partnership between the two organizations.
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union in the area of peace and security is
not new. This cooperation takes place on the ground
in various forms, such as the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, and the provision
of logistical support mechanisms financed by
contributions intended for African Union-led missions,
such as the African Union Mission in Somalia. The
transition from African Union missions to United
Nations missions in Mali and the Central African
Republic has highlighted some of the shortcomings of
African Union peace operations, which we consider to
be more related to the lack of resources.

I would also like to thank the People’s Republic
of China for its strong and generous commitment to
Africa, particularly in terms of capacity-building and
logistical support in the area of peace and security.

However, current circumstances have demonstrated
the limitations of these types of partnerships and the
urgency of adapting this strategic partnership in order
to refocus discussions on the need to find ways to
ensure predictable, flexible and sustainable financing
for African Union peace operations authorized by the
Security Council. In particular, that funding would
make it possible to accelerate African capacity-building
in the area of peace and security.

Our continent, Africa, is undeniably on the road
of development and progress. However, the complexity
of contemporary conflicts and sources of instability
takes on a variety of forms: terrorism, transnational
organized crime, separatism and the struggle to
control natural resources, just to name a few. It is in
that context that we must pay particular attention to the
root causes of conflicts and also strengthen African
capacities in terms of conflict prevention. Effectively
addressing threats to peace and security requires a

The reports of the two organizations on this
subject stressed the importance of adequate funding for
African peace operations, offering different options.
African countries have demonstrated their willingness
to commit more to this path by guaranteeing 25 per
cent of the financing of their peacekeeping operations
by 2020. Resolution 2359 (2017), recently adopted,
on the Group of Five for the Sahel force could have
provided an alternative to existing forms of support,
but, unfortunately, the African positions could not be

26/27

17-22241

19/07/2017

Peace and security in Africa

sustained. Africa is still waiting for a strong signal
from its partners.
In that regard, I would like to congratulate the
African representatives on the Security Council:
Senegal, Egypt and Ethiopia. These countries have
spared no effort to advance the priorities of the
continent, including the issue of financing. They have
been fully invested in the elaboration of the presidential
statement and of resolution 2320 (2016).
Bilateral partners also play an important role in
strengthening African capacities. You, Sir, and the
other members who spoke during this debate, spoke
about the various actions taken to strengthen African
capacities in the area of peace and security.

S/PV. 8006 (Resumption 1)

I visited the country last week, which allowed me to
further underscore my belief that capacity-building and
the support of partners is essential in our peacebuilding
and peacekeeping efforts.
Morocco’s cooperation extends to more than 30
African countries and comprises the following areas:
the training of military and security personnel of all
grades and various fields; donations of materiel and
equipment; predeployment training for contingents
destined for peacekeeping operations; support for,
and provision of, military infrastructure; the training
of magistrates and judges; and the strengthening and
support for the implementation of national human
rights institutions.

For its part, the Kingdom of Morocco, a founding
member of the Organization of African Unity,
rediscovered its institutional family in January during
the twenty-eighth African Union Summit, held in Addis
Ababa. In that capacity, my country will play fully its
role in peace and security among its African peers.
Nevertheless, Morocco did not wait to rejoin the African
Union to take steps to proactively support its fraternal
African countries in the area of peace and security.
My country can be justly proud of its experience and
recognized expertise, which it has not hesitated to share
in the framework of South-South cooperation, one that
is fair and active.

I have just referred to the training of magistrates and
to our support for strengthening national human rights
institutions. We believe that those are key because,
in our view, the fight against impunity, human rights
violations and the promotion of the rule of law are some
of the key elements of tackling the deep-rooted causes
of conflicts and instability, and that is particularly true
in Africa.

During its time on the Security Council, Morocco
played a leading role in drafting the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, but also in the
drafting of the United Nations response to the crisis
in Guinea-Bissau, Libya and the Central African
Republic. Concerning the Central African Republic,
Morocco has had the honour to chair the Central
African Republic country-specific configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission since 2014. In that capacity,

Morocco remains steadfast in its determination to
pursue and enhance its cooperation with all African
countries, both bilaterally and multilaterally. My
country will spare no effort to continue to make a
positive contribution to the efforts of the international
community aimed at tackling instability and conflict
in Africa.

To conclude, I would like once again to commend
China’s commitment alongside Africa and its support
for the implementation and the operationalization of
the recommendations adopted in the various Security
Council resolutions.

The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

17-2224127/27
