General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

80

State Party receiving such a request shall enter into such consultations without delay. Any other State Party which requests
to do so shall be entitled to take part in the consultations. Each
State Party participating in such consultations shall seek a
mutually acceptable resolution of any controversy and shall
bear in mind the rights and interests of all States Parties. The
Secretary-General of the United Nations shall be informed of
the results of the consultations and shall transmit the information received to all States Parties concerned.
3. If the consultations do not lead to a mutually acceptable
settlement which has due regard for the rights and interests of
all States Parties, the parties concerned shall take all measures
to settle the dispute by other peaceful means of their choice
appropriate to the circumstances and the nature of the dispute.
If difficulties arise in connexion with the opening of consultations or if consultations do not lead to a mutually acceptable
settlement, any State Party may seek the assistance of the
Secretary-General, without seeking the consent of any other
State Party concerned, in order to resolve the controversy. A
State Party which does not maintain diplomatic relations with
another State Party concerned shall participate in such consultations, at its choice, either itself or through another State
Party or the Secretary-General as intermediary.

Article 16
With the exception of articles 17 to 21, references in this
Agreement to States shall be deemed to apply to any international intergovernmental organization which conducts space activities if the organization declares its acceptance of the rights
and obligations provided for in this Agreement and if a majority
of the States members of the organization are States Parties to
this Agreement and to the Treaty on Principles Governing the
Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space,
including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies. 26 States members of any such organization which are States Parties to this
Agreement shall take all appropriate steps to ensure that the
organization makes a declaration in accordance with the provisions of this article.
Article 17
Any State Party to this Agreement may propose amendments
to the Agreement. Amendments shall enter into force for each
State Party to the Agreement accepting the amendments upon
their acceptance by a majority of the States Parties to the Agreement and thereafter for each remaining State Party to the
Agreement on the date of acceptance by it.
Article 18
Ten years after the entry into force of this Agreement, the
question of the review of the Agreement shall be included in the
provisional agenda of the General Assembly of the United Nations in order to consider, in the light of past application of the
Agreement, whether it requires revision. However, at any time
after the Agreement has been in force for five years, the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, as depository, shall,
at the request of one third of the States Parties to the Agreement
and with the concurrence of the majority of the States Parties,
convene a conference of the States Parties to review this Agreement. A review conference shall also consider the question of
the implementation of the provisions of article 11, paragraph S,
on the basis of the principle referred to in paragraph 1 of that
article and taking into account in particular any relevant technological developments.
Article 19
This Agreement shall be open for signature by all States
at United Nations Headquarters in New York.
2. This Agreement shall be subject to ratification by signatory States. Any State which does not sign this Agreement before its entry into force in accordance with paragraph 3 of this
article may accede to it at any time. Instruments of ratification
or accession shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of
the United Nations.
3. This Agreement shall enter into force on the thirtieth
day following the date of deposit of the fifth instrument of
ratification.
1.

4. For each State depositing its instrument of ratification or
accession after the entry into force of this Agreement, it shall
enter into force on the thirtieth day following the date of
deposit of any such instrument.
5. The Secretary-General shall promptly inform all signatory and acceding States of the date of each signature, the date
of deposit of each instrument of ratification or accession to this
Agreement, the date of its entry into force and other notices.
Article 20
Any State Party to this Agreement may give notice of its
withdrawal from the Agreement one year after its entry into
force by written notification to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations. Such withdrawal shall take effect one year
from the date of receipt of this notification.
Article 21
The original of this Agreement, of which the Arabic, Chinese,
English, French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, who shall send certified copies thereof to all signatory
and acceding States.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized
thereto by their respective Governments, have signed this Agreement, opened for signature at New York on .... 31

34/90.

Report of the Special Committee to Invesdgate
Israeli Practices Affecdng the Human Rights
of the Population of the Occupied Territories

A

The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations as well as the principles and provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 32
Bearing in mind the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949, 33 as well as of other
relevant conventions and regulations,
Recalling all its resolutions on the subject, in particular resolutions 32/91 B and C of 13 December 1977
and 33/113 C of 18 December 1978, as well as those
adopted by the Security Council, the Commission on
Human Rights and other United Nations organs concerned and by the specialized agencies,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the
Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territories, 84 which contains, inter alia, public statements
made by leaders of the Government of Israel,
1. Commends the Special Committee to Investigate
Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Population of the Occupied Territories for its efforts in
performing the tasks assigned to it by the General Assembly and for its thoroughness and impartiality;
2. Deplores the continued refusal by Israel to allow
the Special Committee access to the occupied territories;
3. Calls again upon Israel to allow the Special Committee access to the occupied territories;
4. Deplores the continued and persistent violation by
Israel of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August
1949, and other applicable international instruments,
81 The Agreement was opened for signature on 18 December 1979.
32 Resolution 217 A (III).
88 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973, p. 287.
34 A/34/631.

IV.

81

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political Committee

and condemns in particular those violations which that
Convention designates as "grave breaches" thereof;
5. Condemns the following Israeli policies and
practices:
(a) Annexation of parts of the occupied territories;
(b) Establishment of new Israeli settlements and expansion of the existing settlements on private and public
Arab lands, and transfer of an alien population thereto;
(c) Evacuation, deportation, expulsion, displacement and transfer of Arab inhabitants of the occupied
territories and denial of their right to return;
(d) Confiscation and expropriation of private and
public Arab property in the occupied territories and all
other transactions for the acquisition of land involving
the Israeli authorities, institutions or nationals on the one
hand, and the inhabitants or institutions of the occupied
territories on the other;
(e) Destruction and demolition of Arab houses;
(f) Mass arrests, administrative detention and illtreatment of the Arab population;
(g) Ill-treatment and torture of persons under
detention;
(h) Pillaging of archaeological and cultural property;
(i) Interference with religious freedoms and practices as well as family rights and customs;
(j) Illegal exploitation of the natural wealth, resources and population of the occupied territories;
6. Reaffirms that all measures taken by Israel to
change the physical character, demographic composition,
institutional structure or status of the occupied territories, or any part thereof, including Jerusalem, are null
and void, and that Israel's policy of settling parts of its
population and new immigrants in the occupied territories constitutes a flagrant violation of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War and of the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations;
7. Demands that Israel desist forthwith from the
policies and practices referred to in paragraphs 5 and
6 above;
8. Reiterates its call upon all States, in particular
those States parties to the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War,
in accordance with article 1 of that Convention, and
upon international organizations and the specialized
agencies not to recognize any changes carried out by
Israel in the occupied territories and to avoid actions,
including those in the field of aid, which might be used
by Israel in its pursuit of the policies of annexation and
colonization or any of the other policies and practices
referred to in the present resolution;
9. Requests the Special Committee, pending the
early termination of the Israeli occupation, to continue
to investigate Israeli policies and practices in the Arab
territories occupied by Israel since 1967, to consult, as
appropriate, with the International Committee of the
Red Cross in order to ensure the safeguarding of the
welfare and human rights of the population of the occupied territories and to report to the Secretary-General
as soon as possible and whenever the need arises
thereafter;
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
investigate the treatment of civilians in detention in the
Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967;
11. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To provide all necessary facilities to the Special
Committee, including those required for its visits to the

occupied territories, with a view to investigating the
Israeli policies and practices referred to in the present
resolution;
(b) To continue to make available additional staff as
may be necessary to assist the Special Committee in the
performance of its tasks;
(c) To ensure the widest circulation of the reports
of the Special Committee, and of information regarding
its activities and findings, by all means available through
the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat
and, where necessary, to reprint those reports of the
Special Committee which are no longer available;
(d) To report to the General Assembly at its thirtyfifth session on the tasks entrusted to him in the present
paragraph;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session the item entitled "Report of the
Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied
Territories".

99th plenary meeting
12 December 1979
B

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3092 A (XXVIII) of 7 December 1973, 3240 B (XXIX) of 29 November 1974,
3525 B (XXX) of 15 December 1975, 31/106 B of
16 December 1976, 32/91 A of 13 December 1977 and
33/113 A of 18 December 1978,
Considering that the promotion of respect for the
obligations arising from the Charter of the United Nations and other instruments and rules of international
law is among the basic purposes and principles of the
United Nations,
Bearing in mind the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949, 35
Noting that Israel and those Arab States whose territories have been occupied by Israel since June 1967 are
parties to that Convention,
Taking into account that States parties to that Convention undertake, in accordance with article 1 thereof,
not only to respect but also to ensure respect for the
Convention in all circumstances,
1. Reaffirms that the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949, is applicable to Palestinian and other
Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967, including
Jerusalem;
2. Strongly deplores the failure of Israel to acknowledge the applicability of that Convention to the territories it has occupied since 1967;
3. Calls again upon Israel to acknowledge and to
comply with the provisions of that Convention in Palestinian and other Arab territories it has occupied since
1967, including Jerusalem;
4. Urges once more all States parties to that Convention to exert all efforts in order to ensure respect for
and compliance with its provisions in Palestiman and
other Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967,
including Jerusalem.

99th plenary meeting
12 December 1979
M United Nations,

Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973, p. 287.

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

82

C

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/ 5 of 28 October 1977
and 33/113 B of 18 December 1978,
Expressing grave anxiety and concern at the present
serious situation in the occupied Arab territories as a
result of the continued Israeli occupation and the measures and actions taken by the Government of Israel, as
the occupying Power, and designed to chan~e the leg~l
status, geographical nature and demographic composition of those territories,
Considering that the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949, 36 is applicable fo all the Arab territories
occupied since 5 June 1967,
1. Determines that all such measures and actions
taken by Israel in the Palestinian and other A~a~ territories occupied since 1967 have no legal vah?1ty and
constitute a serious obstruction of efforts aimed at
achieving a just and lasting peace in the Middle East;
2. Strongly deplores the persistence of Israel in
carrying out such measures, in particular the establishment of settlements in the Palestinian and other occupied
Arab territories;
3. Calls again upon Israel to comply strictly with its
international obligations in accordance with the principles of international law and the provisions of the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949;
4. Calls once more upon the Government of Israel,
as the occupying Power, to desist forthwith from taking
any action which would result in changing the legal
status, geographical nature or demographic composition
of the Arab territories occupied since 1967, including
Jerusalem;
5. Urges all States parties to the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War to respect and to exert all efforts in order to ensure
respect for and compliance with its provisions in aII the
Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967, including Jerusalem.
99th plenary meeting
I 2 December 1979

34/91.

Question of the islands of Glorieuses, Juan de
Nova, Europa and Bassas da India

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the islands of
Glorieuses, Juan de Nova, Europa and Bassas da India,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling further the Declaration on Principles of
International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Co-operation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, contained in its resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970,
Considering its resolution 34/21 of 9 November 1979,
as well as previous resolutions on co-operation between
the United Nations and the Organization of African
Unity,
Bearing in mind the decisions on the islands of Glorieuses, Juan de Nova, Europa and Bassas da India
86

Ibid.

adopted by the Assembly of Heads o~ State an? Gover!lment of the Organization of African . Umty at its
fifteenth 37 and sixteenth" 8 regular sessions, held at
Khartoum from 18 to 22 July 1978 and at Monrovia
from 17 to 20 July 1979,
Taking note of the part of the Political Declaration
adopted by the Sixth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Havana
from 3 to 9 September 1979,39 relating to the Malagasy
islands in the Indian Ocean,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the Charte~ of the
United Nations on the peaceful settlement of disputes,
Noting the request of Madagascar for the reintegration of the islands of Glorieuses, Juan de Nova, Europa
and Bassas da India, •0
Considering that the Government of Madagascar has
repeatedly signified its willingness to ei:iter in_to negotiations with the Government of France with a view to finding a solution to the question in conformity with . the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the Umted
Nations,
1. Reaffirms the necessity of scrupulously respecting
the national unity and territorial integrity of a colonial
territory at the time of its accession to independence;
2. Takes note of the resolution on the islands of
Glorieuses, Juan de Nova, Europa and Bassas da India
adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its thirty-third ordinary session,
held at Monrovia from 6 to 20 July 1979;41
3. Invites the Government of France to initiate
negotiations without further delay with the Government
of Madagascar for the reintegration of the abovementioned islands, which were arbitrarily separated from
Madagascar;
4. Calls upon the Government of France to repeal
the measures which infringe the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Madagascar and to refrain from taking
other measures that would have the same effect and
could hinder the search for a just solution to the present
dispute;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to follow the
implementation of the present resolution and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth
session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-fifth session an item entitled "Question of the
Malagasy islands of Glorieuses, Juan de Nova, Europa
and Bassas da India".

99th plenary meeting
12 December 1979

34/181.

Co-operation and assistance in the application and improvement of national information
and mass communication systems for social
progress and development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1778 (XVII) of 7 December 1962, 3148 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973,
31/139 of 16 December 1976 and 33/115 A of
18 December 1978,
37 See A/33/235 and Corr.I.
ss See A/34/552.
s9 See A/34/542, annex, sect. I, para. 100.
4o See A/34/245, annex.
41 A/34/552, annex I, resolution CM/Res.732 (XXXIII).
