S/2021/657

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 July 2021
Original: English

Adaptation and authorized strength of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
In its resolution 2584 (2021), the Security Council requested the SecretaryGeneral, in the light of the growing level of insecurity and physical violence agai nst
the civilian populations in central Mali, to provide, no later than 15 July 2021, a report
on the progress of the force adaptation plan implementation and recommendations on
the force levels and ceiling of United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) uniformed personnel, including planning
assumptions and estimated costs, suggesting deployment phases and providing a
detailed description and a timeline for the necessary new infrastructure works,
information on how that would extend the field capability of MINUSMA and how it
would accompany a Government-led strategy for the centre, and expressed its intent
to discuss the Mission’s force level on the basis of that proposal.

II. Mission adaptation
2.
The MINUSMA force adaptation plan is aimed at enabling the Mission to
deliver on its mandated strategic priorities, in particular the second priority,
concerning the central region of Mali. In keeping with Security Council resolution
2518 (2020), in which the Council underscored the importance of adequate medical
and other critical capabilities for peacekeeping operations to remain agile and
effective in implementing their mandates and to enhance the sa fety and security of
peacekeepers and mission protection, great strides have been made by the Mission to
adapt to the evolving and highly complex threat environment and to become more
agile, more mobile and more flexible, with more tailored units and enhan ced
capabilities. Efforts continue under the adaptation plan to strengthen mobility and
flexibility so as to address urgent and expanding needs with regard to protection of
civilians. The mobile task force is now operational and is increasing its operation al
tempo. Despite some challenges linked to coronavirus disease (COVID -19) pandemic
restrictions and the political crisis in Mali, significant infrastructure acquisition and
construction for Mission adaptation will be completed by early 2022, further
strengthening the Mission’s dynamic posture and reach in central Mali.

21-09870 (E)

210721

*2109870*

S/2021/657

3.
Significant gaps remain, however, in requirements for enabling capabilities,
primarily aviation and medical assets, which are critical to ensure greater ability with
regard to troop projections and enhancing peacekeepers’ safety and security. More
broadly, these capability shortfalls, which substantially constrain the effectiveness of
MINUSMA in delivering on its priorities, include military medium utility helicopter
units, attack and armed helicopter units, forward surgical teams, a quick reaction force
company and fixed-wing intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance and unmanned
aerial system capabilities. Some medical, helicopter and aerial intelligence,
surveillance and reconnaissance capabilities are anticipated to be deployed by the
beginning of 2022. The ongoing deployment to Mopti of a level II hospital, as well
as the forthcoming deployment of an armed helicopter unit and a medium utility
helicopter unit with an integrated aeromedical evacuation team in early 2022, will
significantly increase the Mission’s capacity to anticipate and respond to threats
against civilians, as well as its ability to provide reliable medical support to
peacekeepers. The fact that the personnel for all three of the above-mentioned
incoming units will hail from the same troop-contributing country is expected to
result in further interoperability and efficiency gains, including with respect to
casualty evacuation timelines. However, the Secretariat is still seeking pledges for
attack and armed helicopter units meeting the Mission’s requirements for northern
Mali. In an increasingly challenging security environment, additional air assets are
urgently needed to enable the Mission to deliver on its mandate. I reiterate my call on
Member States to support the adaptation plan when considering contributions and the
Mission’s budget, in keeping with their commitments under the Action for
Peacekeeping framework, as well as in the spirit of the provisions of resolut ion 2518
(2020) on the safety and security of peacekeepers.

III. Extension of field capabilities and support to a
Government-led strategy for central Mali
4.
Considering the increasingly complex challenges MINUSMA is facing, the
growing level of insecurity and physical violence against the civilian population in
central Mali and, more broadly, the expanding terrorist threat, scaling up the
Mission’s uniformed personnel capacity would enhance its ab ility to protect civilians
in central Mali and create further space for the peace process in the north. It would
also enable the Mission to consolidate its positions in remote locations in northern
Mali, such as Aguelhok and Ber, which are under regular threat of attack. Such
consolidation is a key requirement for continued and effective support for the
implementation of the Mission’s mandate. The deployment of additional capabilities
would also further enhance the Mission’s ongoing efforts to strengthen ba se defence,
counter the threat posed by improvised explosive devices and continue to strengthen
its casualty evacuation capacity given recent complex attacks against its bases and
continued attacks against patrols and convoys.
5.
In order to generate the desired impact on the ground, in particular in terms of
improved security conditions, an increase in the authorized strength of MINUSMA
should be accompanied by: (a) a concomitant and clear commitment from the Malian
authorities to step up their efforts to stabilize central Mali; and (b) renewed
determination of the parties to the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali to
deliver on their obligations, in particular the completion of the accelerated disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process. Equally important is the need for political
stability in Bamako, to ensure the successful completion of the political transition,
which is expected to culminate in the holding of free, fair and transparent elections
by February 2022. Efforts to combat impunity also remain essential to stemming the

2/7

21-09870

S/2021/657

violence in the centre, and more needs to be done by the authorities to follow up on
their commitments in that regard.
6.
The prevailing environment of insecurity and instability in northern and central
Mali, resulting from deep-rooted political and governance issues and further
compounded by increasing violent extremism and transnational organized crime,
requires more than the deployment of additional uniformed personnel. There is a need
to enhance other aspects of the multidimensional response mandated by the Security
Council. As outlined in my most recent report on the situation in Mali (S/2021/519),
absent a strong and coherent vision of the Government and a rei nforced presence of
the State, the Mission will not be in a position to make a sustained difference on the
ground. Increased national ownership and the necessary political will remain essential
for the Mission to make progress. It is encouraging that the transitional authorities
have expressed their determination to expedite both the implementation of the peace
and reconciliation agreement and the stabilization of the centre and that they have
taken some practical steps in that respect.
7.
An increased focus by the Government on both the situation in central Mali and
on the peace and political processes more broadly would enhance the overall
effectiveness of the Mission. For the centre, this would require a Malian -led and
clearly articulated stabilization vision and strategy to protect civilians and reduce
intercommunal violence, anchored by concrete steps to re-establish a State presence,
legitimate authority and the delivery of basic services. A designated and effective
government mechanism for the centre, with high-level political support, would also
be essential to ensure implementation. Additional uniformed personnel and
capabilities would expand the Mission’s reach and mobility and enhance its ability to
support the authorities in implementing such a strategy. It should be coupled with
additional concrete efforts to increase the capacity, deployment and operationalization
of the Malian Defence and Security Forces in such a way as to provide support for,
but avoid the substitution of, Malian efforts, in close cooperation with international
and regional partners.
8.
The proposed increase in uniformed personnel would compleme nt the Mission
adaptation plan and further strengthen a proactive, robust, flexible and agile posture,
while reinforcing ongoing efforts to enhance peacekeepers’ safety and security. In the
centre, the additional uniformed capacities would be used to expan d the reach and
mobility of the Mission in an integrated manner, through a forward operating base
concept. That concept involves an integrated, reinforced and provisioned temporary
operating base, currently being used by the Mission, that can be projected from main
bases to areas of interest for up to three months, to protect civilians and support a
Malian-led stabilization strategy, while providing a higher level of protection to
Mission personnel than temporary operating bases.
9.
The effective and expanded reach of capabilities and integrated activities will
be complemented by increased community engagement and a focus on the prevention
of conflict with local populations in areas of developing tensions. The forward
operating bases will therefore be able to host mobile teams for relevant civilian
substantive components, enabling an integrated MINUSMA presence in priority
areas, in order to deliver on the mandate in a comprehensive manner. Additional duty
stations would need to be established, with further civilian capacities, to enable
community outreach and engagement, including through interpreters, community
liaison assistants, coordination officers and communication specialists.
10. The deployment of additional MINUSMA peacekeepers would be an important
sign of the steadfast support of the international community to the Malian people and
the stabilization of the subregion. To ensure that such deployment achieves a decisive
and sustainable impact on the ground, it should be accompanied by a new round of
21-09870

3/7

S/2021/657

dedicated consultations on central Mali with transition authorities and local
communities on the development of the comprehensive and politically led strategy
requested by the Security Council. Those consultations would, inter alia, be aimed at
ensuring that the comparative advantages of MINUSMA, the United Nations country
team and all other partners are fully leveraged as part of the broader efforts being made
to prevent the continued deterioration of the security situation. A strong and proactive
communications campaign would be required, to help to build a shared vision for the
restoration of State authority and the rule of law in central Mali, mobilize sustained
Malian leadership and manage expectations about deployment timelines.

IV. Recommendations on the force levels and ceiling of Mission
uniformed personnel
11. The recommended increase in MINUSMA troop and police levels and ceiling
would require the deployment of an additional 2,069 uniformed personnel, consisting
of 1,730 military personnel, 300 formed police unit personnel and 39 individual police
officers. The proposal is aimed at expanding, in an integrated manner, the reach and
mobility of MINUSMA operations, taking into consideration, notably, the safety and
security of personnel, the absorption capacities of the Mission and the requirement to
couple additional troop and police strength with a Malian-led stabilization strategy in
the centre, in order to foster synergy and ensure impact durability.
12. To ensure a continued integrated approach and to enable the effective deployment
of additional troops and police, existing civilian staff would be temporarily deployed
in support of forward-leaning military and police operations, notably from Mopti and
Bamako offices. Additional substantive personnel deployed as interpreters,
community liaison assistants, coordination officers and communication specialists
would also be required. A commensurate increase in security personnel would be
necessary to ensure that relevant safety and security protocols a re maintained.
Similarly, additional civilian support personnel would be needed to facilitate the
planning and implementation of camp expansions, further deployments and other
work, to ensure adequate and timely absorption capacities in support of the incr eased
uniformed personnel. An assessment of the additional resources required would need
to be conducted to ensure that supporting and security capacities are commensurate
to the tasks envisaged.

A.

Military personnel
13. Noting that additional troops must have the requisite mindset, training and
equipment to successfully operate in the Malian context, the following additional
capacities, totalling 1,730 military personnel, are proposed:
(a) To enhance force capability to conduct flexible protection of civilians
responses in the centre, three quick reaction force companies (750 personnel in total),
equipped with the required mine-protected vehicles and supported by a combat
engineer company (107 personnel), could be used both as respon se forces and as key
components in the implementation of the forward operating base concept, which is an
alternative to setting up new camps and permanent presences in areas of concern ;
(b) Owing to the often-impassable terrain and large distances involved,
helicopters are essential for troop projections, both in response to emerging situations
and to perform casualty and medical evacuations. Two military utility helicopter
units, with up to 10 helicopters in total (260 personnel in all) for Mopti and Doue ntza,
supported by an aviation support unit (30 personnel) in Douentza, are proposed, to

4/7

21-09870

S/2021/657

provide the flexibility needed to respond to threats against civilians, while permitting
routine access and presence operations to continue;
(c) To strengthen the Mission’s capability to support the operationalization of
reconstituted Malian armed forces units and the monitoring of the peace and
reconciliation agreement under Operation Farrier, while at the same time reinforcing
the Mission’s positions in Sector North, a quick reaction force company (200
personnel) is proposed, to be based in Kidal and Aguelhok, as feasible;
(d) In Sector West, the existing base defence mechanized infantry company
could be reinforced (60 personnel) to meet current statement of unit req uirements,
which would enhance the safety and security of peacekeepers in exposed locations,
such as Ber and Goundam, and allow infantry units to dedicate more time to
protection of civilians and other tasks;
(e) To enhance the safety and security of personnel and ensure efficient
resupply capacities, capabilities aimed at countering the threat posed by improvised
explosive devices should also be considered. To that end, MINUSMA would use five
explosive ordnance disposal teams (80 personnel in total) to su pport the freedom of
movement of mobile task force troops and an additional combat convoy company
(243 personnel) to enhance the Mission’s capacity to conduct convoy escort duties,
in order to facilitate the supply and functioning of all MINUSMA key instal lations.

B.

Police personnel
14. Given that additional police personnel are also needed to create greater freedom
of movement for MINUSMA personnel and national security forces in support of the
protection of civilians, the restoration of State author ity and the fight against
impunity, additional capacities totalling 339 police personnel are proposed.
15. The above-mentioned additional capacities of United Nations police personnel
would be deployed in alignment with the deployment plans for Malian secu rity forces,
including for community policing and expected territorial police support requirements,
as follows:
(a) To strengthen protection of civilians and complement military operations,
60 additional formed police unit personnel with special intervent ion team capacity in
both Douentza and Mopti (total of 120);
(b) With a view to capitalizing on the stabilization of the south -eastern Gao
region, including the general area of Ansongo, and support the extension of the rule of
law, an additional 80 formed police unit personnel in Gao and 20 in Ménaka (total of 100);
(c) To strengthen mobility and the operational tempo in support of the
restoration and extension of the rule of law, 20 additional formed police unit personnel
in Timbuktu, 40 Goundam and 20 in Mopti (total of 80);
(d) To directly support community policing initiatives and the establishment
of the territorial police envisioned under the peace agreement, 13 individual police
officers each in Timbuktu, Mopti and Gao (total of 39).

C.

Support implications
16. Considering the complex security situation and the challenges involved in
expanding existing or constructing additional infrastructure, the deployment of
additional personnel and enablers would require time and significant Missio n support
resources. It would entail both reprioritizing ongoing projects and mobilizing

21-09870

5/7

S/2021/657

resources for infrastructure projects, staffing, air assets, information and technology
equipment, vehicles and other equipment.
17. Possible challenges in land acquisition, transportation constraints (in particular
in northern Mali) and the need for adequate engineering capacities are of particular
concern. Additional infrastructure, such as new accommodation, hangars, helipads,
warehouses, workshops and Field Technology Section installations, would be
required to absorb, support and enable the increase in uniformed personnel, as would
measures to reduce the Mission’s impact on the environment. That will require both
logistic movements and projects relating to horizontal and transitional works, namely,
upgrades to existing infrastructure and new construction with regard to field defence,
water and wastewater systems, the power network, bunkers and boreholes, ammunition
stores and internal roads. The surge in operational load and requirements for 24/7 air
operations in Mopti and Douentza will require the establishment of a new aviation
subunit in Douentza in the form of a sub-air region and the strengthening of the
existing air region in Mopti through the establishment of a regional air operations
centre that will exercise operational control over air assets in Sector Centre.
18. Transportation to Sector North is increasingly complicated and time -consuming
owing to security risks and road conditions. Warehouse capacities would need to be
increased in Kidal and Timbuktu, respectively, and quantity and time -related
limitations for food and non-food items would arise, depending on the end
destination. The proposed additional combat convoy company will support deliv ery
to meet the increased need for supplies.

V. Timelines for construction and force and police
troop generation
19. The deployment timelines will depend on force generation and absorption
capacities to accommodate the arriving units. Most units being deployed will be expected
to deploy with tentage to accommodate their troops for at least six months while
accommodation construction is finalized. Although it is expected that land acquisition
for the Douentza camp expansion should not pose significant challenges, the further
expansion of the Mopti camp may require political support. The following
assumptions are being considered to estimate the critical expansion and construction
timeline for the Mopti camp:
(a)

Land acquisition in Mopti: three months;

(b)

Solicitation for horizontal and transitional works: three months;

(c)

Mobilization time for contractors: one month or more;

(d)

Horizontal and transitional works: three months;

(e) MINUSMA would be prepared to receive some additional personnel in
Mopti starting in December 2021, in accordance with the military and police
component plans and given the current work being done in support of the Mission
adaptation plan.
20. Bearing in mind the urgent needs with regard to the protection of civilians in
central Mali and on the basis of the estimated time it would take for the Mission to
be ready to receive the new capabilities set out herein, it is anticipated that those new
capabilities could be deployed between December 2021 (the formed police unit
personnel, the explosive ordnance disposal teams and the base defence mechanized
infantry company) and January 2023 (the airfield support and medium utility
helicopter units). Those estimates are best-case scenarios, assuming that land is
allocated in Mopti within the three-month period stated above and that troop6/7

21-09870

S/2021/657

contributing countries swiftly make pledges that meet MINUSMA statement of unit
requirements. Force generation for MINUSMA is all the more complex than for other
peacekeeping missions because, in order to mitigate security risks against
peacekeepers, the Mission’s statement of unit requirements are the most demanding
in terms of counter-improvised explosive device systems and other protective
equipment. Units currently registered in the Peacekeeping Cap ability Readiness
System do not meet MINUSMA-specific requirements. Should the Security Council
decide to increase the Mission’s authorized strength, the Secretariat would enhance
its force-generation efforts through targeted engagement so as to encourage troopcontributing countries to procure the equipment required or to consider joint
deployments. The United Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial Conference to be held in
December 2021 in Seoul would also provide an opportunity to mobilize Member
States on MINUSMA-specific requirements and to encourage pledges aimed at filling
capability gaps.

VI. Observations
21. In 2019, the Security Council added a second strategic priority to the mandate
of MINUSMA without considering additional resources to the Mission . The
adaptation plan has significantly strengthened the proactivity, robustness, flexibility
and agility of the Mission’s posture. However, in the absence of substantial progress
in the implementation of the peace agreement and a national strategy to stab ilize the
centre, insecurity has further worsened, with extremist groups now expanding their
operations into southern regions.
22. Against that background, I welcome the intention of the Security Council to
re-examine the authorized strength of MINUSMA. An increase in uniformed
personnel would strengthen the Mission’s ability to protect civilians in central Mali,
enhance the safety and security of peacekeepers and help to improve overall
performance. It should be accompanied by a Malian-led and clearly articulated
stabilization vision and strategy to protect civilians. In keeping with the shared
commitments under the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, I count on the Council’s
steadfast political support and the commitment of Member States to ensure that the
Mission is adequately configured and resourced in order to help to address the
growing level of insecurity and increasing physical violence against the civilian
populations in central Mali.

21-09870

7/7
