UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1995/33
20 July 1995
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3556th meeting of the Security Council, held on 20 July 1995, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina", the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council, recalling its previous resolutions, is deeply
concerned by the situation in and around the safe area of Zepa. It
condemns in the strongest possible terms the offensive by the Bosnian Serb
forces against the safe area. The Security Council is also concerned in
particular at the plight of the civilian population there.
"The Security Council attaches the utmost importance to the safety and
well-being of the civilian population in Zepa. It demands that the Bosnian
Serb forces refrain from any further action that threatens the safety of
that population, and that they respect fully the rights of the civilian
population and other persons protected under international humanitarian
law. The Council reaffirms its condemnation of all violations of
international humanitarian law, and reiterates to all concerned that those
who have committed or ordered the commission of such acts will be held
individually responsible in respect of such acts. It reminds the military
and political leaders of the Bosnian Serb party that this responsibility
extends to any such acts committed by forces under their command.
"The Security Council underlines the importance it attaches to the
fullest cooperation with UNHCR and other international humanitarian
organizations, and demands that they be given unhindered freedom of
movement and access to that area. It further demands that the Bosnian Serb
authorities cooperate with all efforts, including those of UNPROFOR, to
ensure the safety of the civilian population, and in particular its most
vulnerable members including evacuation as requested by the Foreign
Minister of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina in his letter of
17 July 1995 (S/1995/582, annex).
"The Security Council strongly condemns the recent acts of violence
and intimidation which have occurred against the personnel of UNPROFOR. It
demands that both parties ensure the safety and freedom of movement of
UNPROFOR personnel at all times."
----95-21765 (E)

200795
