A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/100
2 February 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 95 (c)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/50/617/Add.3)]
50/100.

United Nations Conference on Human Settlements
(Habitat II)

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 47/180 of 22 December 1992, in which it decided
to convene the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II)
from 3 to 14 June 1996, and to establish both a preparatory committee and an
ad hoc secretariat for the Conference,
Reiterating its gratitude to the Government of Turkey for offering to
act as host to the Conference, which is to be held at Istanbul,
Noting with satisfaction the progress that has been made so far in the
preparations for the Conference, as outlined in the report of the Preparatory
Committee for the Conference on its second substantive session 1/ and the
report of the Secretary-General on preparations for the Conference, 2/
Reaffirming the importance of the principles and concepts set out in the

1/
Official Records
Supplement No. 37 (A/50/37).
2/

96-76417

of

the

General

Assembly,

Fiftieth

Session,

A/50/519.

/...

A/RES/50/100
Page 2

Rio Declaration on Environment and Development 3/ and Agenda 21 4/ for the
purpose of guiding the implementation of the decisions and recommendations of
the Conference,
Recalling also its resolution 49/109 of 19 December 1994, in which,
inter alia, it decided that a third substantive session of the Preparatory
Committee would be held at United Nations Headquarters early in 1996 to
complete the preparatory work for the Conference,
1.
Endorses the report of the Preparatory Committee for the United
Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) on its second substantive
session (Nairobi, 24 April-5 May 1995), 1/ which contains, inter alia,
decision II/1 on the financing of the Conference and its preparatory
activities, decision II/3 on the recommendations of the Preparatory Committee
on the organization of work of the Conference, including the holding of preconference consultations on 1 and 2 June 1996, the establishment of committees
and other procedural matters and decision II/4 on the rules of procedure for
the Conference; 5/
2.
Decides that the third session of the Preparatory Committee will
be held at United Nations Headquarters from 5 to 16 February 1996;
3.
Requests the Secretary-General to make the necessary provisions,
within existing resources, so that the Preparatory Committee may, if it so
decides, establish two working groups to meet in addition to plenary meetings
for the duration of the third session;
4.
Notes with interest the call by the Secretary-General of the
United Nations to give the Conference the dimensions of a "city summit", and
reaffirms that the Conference should be held at the highest possible level of
participation;
5.
Expresses its sincere appreciation to those States and
organizations that have made or pledged financial or other contributions in
support of the preparatory activities for the Conference, and requests the
Secretary-General of the Conference to continue to make every effort to raise
the extrabudgetary resources required for Conference activities and
preparations;
6.
Renews its appeal to all Governments, especially the Governments
of developed countries and other Governments in a position to do so, as well
as to international and regional financial institutions, to make substantial
contributions to the voluntary fund established by the General Assembly in its
resolution 47/180 for the purpose of financing preparatory activities for the
Conference and supporting developing countries, in particular the least

3/
See Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992 (A/CONF,151/26/Rev.1 (Vol. I and Vol.
I/Corr.1, Vol. II, Vol. III and Vol. III/Corr.1)) (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions Adopted by the
Conference, resolution 1, annex I.
4/

Ibid., annex II.

5/

As amended in A/C.2/50/9 and Corr.1.
/...

A/RES/50/100
Page 3

developed among them, in participating fully and effectively in the Conference
and its preparatory process;
7.
Encourages all relevant non-governmental organizations that are
interested, especially organizations from developing countries, to participate
in and contribute to the Conference and its preparatory process on the basis
of the procedures adopted at recent United Nations conferences;
8.
Invites the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at
its fifty-first session on the implementation of and follow-up to the outcome
of the Conference undertaken by the organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system, including the role played by the United Nations Centre for
Human Settlements in that process;
9.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-first
session under the item "Sustainable development and international economic
cooperation" a sub-item entitled "United Nations Conference on Human
Settlements (Habitat II)".
96th plenary meeting
20 December 1995
