S/PV.7059

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7059th meeting

Thursday, 14 November 2013, 10.05 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(China)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Ms. King
Mr. Musayev
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Maes
Mr. Laassel
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Zagaynov
Mrs. Uwizera
Mr. Menan
Mr. McKell
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in Libya

13-56435 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1356435*

S/PV.7059

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Libya to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Prosecutor Bensouda.
Ms. Bensouda: This is the sixth time that my Office
reports to the Security Council since the adoption of
resolution 1970 (2011), by which the Council, acting
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
referred the situation in Libya to the International
Criminal Court (ICC). My Office appreciates the
opportunity to once again engage with and update the
Council on developments in the Libya situation and the
related proceedings before the Court.
Libya has come a long way since the 2011 uprising
that paved the way for the Libyan people to rebuild their
country towards a more promising future. The new
Libya has had notable successes, including the holding
of the first democratic elections in half a century,
but the country still faces formidable challenges.
The security situation in Libya remains volatile and
precarious, marked by car bombings, abductions and
assassinations of public and security officials. That
unfortunate fact has understandably hampered my
Office’s ability to operate in Libya in furtherance of its
investigative activities. We hope the security situation
in Libya will improve, in order to enable my Office to
effectively follow up and intensify its investigations.
My Office welcomes initiatives aimed at helping to
rebuild Libya’s military and law-enforcement agencies
to reinforce security for Libya and all Libyans. We call
on all States to assist Libya in its efforts to become a
fully fledged, secure, democratic society that adheres
to the highest standards of justice. The Libyan people
deserve no less.

2/18

14/11/2013

In this new country, Libya desires to become and
be recognized as a stable, democratic society that fully
observes the rule of law and punishes perpetrators of
crimes that shock the conscience of humankind. Those
aspirations, while genuine and praiseworthy, have yet to
be fully realized. There have certainly been promising
gains. For instance, the draft law that would make rape
during armed conflict a war crime in Libya is a most
welcome step in the right direction. Conversely, it is
a matter of great concern that thousands of detainees
remain in uncertain conditions in the country, with
multiple and apparently well-founded allegations of
torture and even killings in detention reported. My
Office fully shares the concerns of the United Nations
that unless this problem is effectively addressed now,
it will only escalate with time. It is incumbent upon
the Ministers of Justice, the Interior and Defence of
the State of Libya to speedily ensure that detainees
are transferred to proper Government-controlled
detention facilities, where they can be either charged,
with their due-process rights fully respected, or, where
appropriate, released. Torture and inhumane treatment
of prisoners should have no place in the new Libya.
Equally disturbing are the simmering tensions
around the Tawergha minority issue. Those tensions and
the possibility of reprisals have the potential to reignite
violence in the country. It bears stressing that those who
seek to defend the revolution and see to it that it succeeds
are at real risk of burying it if they do not take concrete
and immediate steps on this issue. The fact-finding and
reconciliation commission to be established following
the adoption of the new transitional justice law must
bring all parties together with a view to resolving
the issue sooner rather than later. I should recall that
ordering the displacement of the civilian population for
reasons related to the conflict other than for security or
military imperatives is a crime over which my Office
can still exercise jurisdiction.
As I remarked during my previous briefing to
the Council (see S/PV.6962), Libya has embraced the
Rome Statute process and chosen to engage with the
Court. The admissibility challenges that are before the
Court are testing the application of the Rome Statute
provisions in an unprecedented manner. Through its
active involvement in related proceedings before the
Court, Libya is setting an example of how States can
invoke complementarity to protect their sovereign right
to investigate and prosecute their nationals. My Office
and the Libyan Government have robustly advanced

13-56435

14/11/2013

The situation in Libya

our respective positions in court on the question of who
should prosecute two accused Libyan nationals who we
both believe are most responsible for serious crimes
under the Court’s jurisdiction committed within the
territory of Libya. On 11 October, the Court’s Pre-Trial
Chamber issued its decision on the admissibility of
the Abdullah Al-Senussi case, finding it inadmissible
before the ICC.
In essence, the Chamber was satisfied that, in
this specific case, Libya met the statutory criteria for
stopping my Office from continuing its investigations
and prosecution of Abdullah Al-Senussi. After fully
studying the decision, my Office has concluded that
there is no legal basis for appeal. Should new facts arise
in the future that negate the basis on which the case
was found inadmissible, my Office will not hesitate to
request a review of the decision. The challenge now is
for Libya to demonstrate to the world that Al-Senussi
will receive a genuinely fair, impartial and speedy trial
that respects all his rights and fundamental guarantees,
including the right to counsel of his choice. It also falls
on the Council and the international community to
assist Libya in that process and to ensure that justice is
not only done, but is seen to be effectively done.
By contrast, in the case of Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi, the Pre-Trial Chamber has ruled the case
admissible before the ICC, on the grounds that Libya
has failed to meet the legal criteria for making the
case inadmissible. In its subsequent admissions to the
Chamber, the Government of Libya has sought further
time to provide additional information, and the matter
is currently under consideration by the Chamber. In the
meantime, the Court has reiterated the obligation of
the Government of Libya to surrender Mr. Al-Qadhafi
to its custody. It is fundamentally important that the
Council both remind and urge the Libyan Government
to comply with the decisions of the Chamber, even when
they do not suit the Government’s position. I stress
how critically important it is that all States respect
and implement the decisions of the Court’s judges.
The obligation to surrender persons against whom
arrest warrants have been issued to the Court must
be respected. Political considerations have no place
in law that is impartially and independently applied.
I strongly urge the Government of Libya to surrender
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the Court without further
delay.
There are many others who are alleged to have
committed crimes or who have continued to commit

S/PV.7059

crimes in Libya since February 2011. Some are still
in the country, while others are abroad, where they
continue to use their influence to destabilize the
country and pose a security threat to civilians. It is
impossible for the ICC to investigate and prosecute
all perpetrators alone. Neither can Libya undertake
that demanding task by itself. The investigation and
prosecution of a few by both the International Criminal
Court and the Government of Libya should not result in
impunity for the many. Joint, complementary efforts by
both the Government of Libya and the Court, strongly
and actively supported by the international community,
are thus crucial to ending impunity in the country.
To that end, my Office and the Government of
Libya have recently concluded a burden-sharing
memorandum of understanding, whose purpose is
to facilitate our collaborative efforts to ensure that
individuals allegedly responsible for committing crimes
in Libya as of 15 February 2011 are brought to justice
either at the ICC or in Libya itself. While my Office will
prioritize its investigations and prosecutions of those
who are outside the territory of Libya and thus largely
inaccessible to the Libyan authorities, the Government
of Libya will prioritize investigations of those suspects
who are within Libyan territory.
I am also pleased to report that my Office and the
Government of Libya have committed to supporting
each other’s investigations and prosecutions through
the exchange of information, subject to confidentiality
and protection obligations. To be absolutely clear,
this agreement neither relieves the International
Criminal Court or the Libyan courts of their respective
jurisdictions, nor does it apply and/or affect the
ongoing judicial proceedings in either the Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi or the Al-Senussi cases.
The support of the Council and of the international
community will be crucial for the colossal task of
collecting evidence to untangle the modus operandi of
the networks responsible for committing crimes. Among
other things, we will require telephone intercepts and
sustained follow-up on transfers of funds to establish
the whereabouts and movements of persons under
investigation. This is all information that we can access
only with the assistance of States. Above all, we hope
we can count on the cooperation of States in facilitating
the smooth arrest and surrender of those against whom
warrants will be issued. This is key to sending a clear
message to would-be Libyan and all other wouldbe perpetrators that the international community is

13-564353/18

S/PV.7059

The situation in Libya

watching and will no longer allow impunity to reign
unchecked.
I view the memorandum of understanding as an
important confidence-building measure in the working
relationship between my Office and the Government of
Libya, and my hope is that it will pave the way to closing
the impunity gap in Libya. I welcome the memorandum
as a positive commitment of the Government of Libya
to accountability and providing justice to Libya’s
victims, and indeed to cooperating with the ICC in
the investigation and prosecution of additional cases
against those most responsible for the most serious
crimes under the Court’s jurisdiction committed in
Libya.
I will conclude by reiterating that Libya’s challenges
are our own, and we will all share in the successes or
failures of these efforts to bring justice to the victims
in Libya and peace and security to its people. Towards
that end, I again encourage the Government of Libya
to make public a comprehensive strategy to address
serious crimes committed in the country, regardless
of who is the perpetrator and who is the victim, and I
encourage Libya’s partners to step up to the challenge
ahead of us and to make effective not only the ICC
mandate in Libya, but that of the Council.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Prosecutor Bensouda for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the Security
Council.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would like
at the outset to thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) for her briefing on the situation of
Libya with respect to the Court, pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), in which she provided in particular
information concerning the issues of cooperation, the
admissibility of the cases of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and Abdullah Al-Senussi, torture and other crimes. Our
observations will be limited to these issues.
Togo welcomes the healthy development of
cooperation of States and non-State institutions with
the ICC. Togo thanks the Prosecutor for sounding the
alarm concerning the ongoing climate of insecurity
in the country, to the detriment of investigations. It
fervently urges the adoption of innovative solutions
with the Libyan authorities, other States and concerned
non-State institutions to ensure the safety and security
of the population.

4/18

14/11/2013

My country welcomes in that regard the signing
this month of a memorandum of understanding
between the Prosecutor’s Office and Libya on the
sharing of responsibilities in future investigations.
We hope that the memorandum does not endorse the
amnesty laws adopted to ensure impunity for certain
acts, on the grounds that they were committed to
protect the revolution. With that condition, we seek
a quick agreement between the Libyan authorities
and the Prosecutor’s Office on how to implement this
memorandum.
Concerning the admissibility of the cases of Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi, Togo
urges all parties concerned to respect the decision of
the competent Chamber, which has ruled, on the one
hand, that the Saif Al -Islam Al-Qadhafi is admissible
before the ICC, but that, on the other, that of Abdullah
Al-Senussi is inadmissible before the Court and may
be tried in Libya. Togo hopes that the process will be
respected and that the competent Chamber shall decide
without delay on the appeal of Al-Senussi against the
decision to dismiss before the ICC so as to allow a
quick resolution of the case. My country calls on the
players to carry out those decisions and those that will
follow in the spirit of effective cooperation and in the
utmost respect of the principle of complementarity and
the relevant provisions of the Rome Statute governing
the work and mandate of the ICC.
Regarding torture and other crimes, we express our
deep concern about the difficulties facing the Libyan
national authorities in taking control of all detention
centres and in preventing the mistreatment of prisoners
in the hands of armed groups and people with no
respect for human rights in judicial proceedings and
the administration of justice. We express the hope that,
for the sake of sustainable national reconciliation, the
new law on transitional justice will be promptly and
properly implemented in order to ensure a fair trial for
those involved. We hardly need recall that the role of
justice must be not to keep victims and perpetrators
at odds indefinitely, but rather to serve as an interface
between them so as to bring them together and allow
them to follow the psychosocial treatment necessary for
lasting reconciliation.
While stressing that the Libyan national authorities
bear the primary responsibility for protecting the
Libyan people, Togo urges them to take the measures
necessary to halt the deterioration of the security

13-56435

14/11/2013

The situation in Libya

situation in Libya, and calls on the international
community to provide the assistance, as required.
In conclusion, Togo insists that any assistance to
the Libyan authorities to protect the population should
be undertaken in strict compliance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We, too, wish to thank Ms. Bensouda for her
briefing on the investigation into the situation in Libya
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011). We support the
efforts of the Court to bring to justice the perpetrators
of the most serious crimes committed during the events
in Libya. They must not go unpunished.
We would be grateful to the International Criminal
Court (ICC) for providing a more detailed explanation
of the adoption of diametrically opposed decisions
regarding the admissibility before the Court of the
cases of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah
Al-Senussi. The Court declared the Al-Qadhafi case
admissible, noting that the Libyan cases were unable
to guarantee due judicial process, yet only four months
later it came to the completely opposite conclusion in
the Al-Senussi case, stating that Libya wished to and
was able to conduct that judicial investigation.
We continue to harbour serious doubts about
the ability of the Libyan authorities to conduct a
national investigation at this stage, as reflected by the
information contained in section 4 of the report on
cases of death in detention centres and the ongoing
practice of torture in that country. In that context, we
note the absence of any progress in investigations by
the ICC of crimes committed by the rebels during the
Libyan conflict. The report fails to note any positive
developments in that regard. It is well-known that the
rebels committed atrocities both during and after the
armed conflict.
Unfortunately, according to various sources, armed
violence, clashes and lawlessness in Libya continue
to this day. The central authorities are clearly unable
to exert control over the whole country. Under such
circumstances, it is unclear how effective the work of
the national fact-finding and national reconciliation
commission can be and what its potential role could be
when it comes to bringing to justice rebels accused of
committing crimes. We believe that the ICC should take
up investigations into crimes committed by the rebels.
We reiterate our call to the Court not to confine
the investigation to just the inner-circle of the former

S/PV.7059

Libyan leader, and to deliver instead an objective
legal assessment of the actions of all parties to the
conflict and to post-conflict violence. Again, we urge
the Court to investigate cases of the disproportionate
and indiscriminate use of force during the NATO-led
operation, which led to casualties among the civilian
population.
Finally, we continue to be troubled by the absence
of information on developments and steps taken
regarding the detention in Zintan, in June 2012, of
a group of ICC officials. Such incidents have a very
negative impact on the cooperation of the Court with
States and undermines efforts to combat impunity.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Ms. Bensouda, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), for her
comprehensive briefing and the sixth report on the
activities of her Office persuant to the relevant Security
Council resolutions on the situation in Libya.
Since the referral of this situation to the ICC,
the Libyan authorities have always declared thir
readiness to cooperate with the Court in accordance
with mechanisms established by the Security Council,
including the sanctions regime, and to try those who
committed violations against the Libyan people in
accordance with just laws that guarantee justice and
promote national reconciliation and transitional justice.
The Libyan authorities have always supported the ICC
and declared their readiness to cooperate with it to
guarantee justice for victims, as reflected in the report
by the Prosecutor on the implementation of resolution
1970 (2011).
Earlier this month, a memorandum of understanding
was signed between the Office of the Libyan Prosecutor
and the ICC Prosecutor, a step we welcome. The Libyan
Government has also pledged that trials at the national
level will focus on high-level officials who committed
crimes against humanity, while other investigations
will take place in the context of national reconciliation
and transitional justice.
All claims filed against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and Abdullah Al-Senussi should be dealt with through
a clear commitment by the Government to cooperatae
with the ICC. That was demonstrated when the Court
decided not to accept the case against Al-Senussi,
believing that the Libyan authorities would be able to
conduct a trial in accordanec with international law. It
is in that context that we understand the focus by the

13-564355/18

S/PV.7059

The situation in Libya

Libyan authorities on giving priority to the national
judiciary in dealing with all cases affecting its people,
with due respect for Libya’s sovereignty and with
Libyan laws that respect international fair-trial norms,
so as to try senior officials for grave human rights
violations, ensure justice for victims and promote
transitional justice and national reconciliation. That
would help Libya overcome the legacy of the past and
build an open, democratic society that is inclusive of all
Libyans and meets all their basic needs.
In view of the transitional period in Libya, the
international community should cooperate with and
support the Libyan Government in all its efforts to
ensure justice for all Libyans, fight impunity, promote
the rule of law and address both internal and external
security threats. We should all do our utmost to
demonstrate to the Libyan people that we and the whole
world are committed to helping them to establish peace
and stability in the country.
The Kingdom of Morocco would like to reiterate
its full support for the Libyan Government in carrying
out its important responsibilities. We call upon the
Security Council and all the friends of Libya to provide
the necessary assistance to enable the Government
to deal with the great challenges still facing that
brotherly country, in particular problems having to
do with security concerns, the smuggling of weapons,
controlling the border, immigration and so on, in
a manner that respects human rights and promotes
national reconciliation. We have also expressed our
willingness to cooperate with our brothers in Libya in
the areas of institution-building and transitional justice.
We underscore the fact that a free, democratic and
independent Libya is necessary for all of us to achieve
the necessaqry unity among countries of the region and
to face the challenges of terrorism and violence in the
Sahel and in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Prosecutor for her report and presentation. I would
like to reiterate our support for hear as well as for the
International Criminal Court (ICC).
Following 42 years of dictatorship, Libya is
now in transition. Violent acts are continuing,
including against diplomatic missions. But the Libyan
authorities, including Prime Minister Ali Zeidan, have
reiterated their commitment to pursuing the country’s
democratization. While the Libyan revolution
exposed the shortcomings of State structures and the
disastrous legacy of Qadhafism, Libyans have shown
6/18

14/11/2013

an unwavering determination in a post-revolutionary
context, which is, by definition, difficult. The Council
has mobilized to help them, and must continue to do so.
Despite its difficulties, Libya has asked to try Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi itself.
That courageous decision, which is in line with the
Rome Statute and resolution 1970 (2011), points to the
willingness of the Libyan authorities to shoulder their
responsibilities. The judges of the ICC have authorized
the Libyans to try Al-Senussi themselves, believing
that Libya had the willingness and due competence to
conduct that trial. On the other hand, the judges rejected
the request of the Libyan authorities to hear the case
of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi. The Libyan Government
has stated its intention to provide additional evidence
to the Court on that matter. We have no doubt that
Libya, pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), will comply
with the decision of the ICC judges. Libya’s respect
for its international obligations is a key indicator of its
commitment to the rule of law.
The Prosecutor also indicated that she was
continuing her investigation into allegations of crimes
committed in Libya by those close to Al-Qadhafi who
today might be situated outside Libyan territory, posing
a threat to the new authorities. The Prosecutor can rest
assured of our support.
As for other allegations, we welcome the work
carried out to establish a comprehensive strategy to
put an end to crimes and impunity in Libya. As stated
by Ms. Bensouda, the adoption of a new Libyan law
on transitional justice and the establishment of a
United Nations fact-finding and national reconciliation
commission could help respond to allegations of crimes
such as those committed in Misrata and Tawergha
during the armed conflict of 2011 or those that were
allegedly committed in Bani Walid in 2012.
Like the Prosecutor, we also welcome reports of a
new Libyan draft law making rape in armed conflict a
war crime. Finally, we express our grave concern at the
practice of torture and cases of deaths in detention in
centres under the control of armed brigades. As he stated
before the Council (see S/PV.7031), Mr. Tarek Mitri, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya,
the Libyan authorities are well aware of this problem.
Those practices must come to an end.
Resolution 1970 (2011) is an example of the capacity
of the Security Council and, more generally, of the

13-56435

14/11/2013

The situation in Libya

international community for unity and quick action.
Given the atrocities committed by the Libyan leadership,
the United Nations and regional organizations together
condemned such acts. Resolution 1970 (2011),
referring the situation in Libya to the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court, was at the heart of a
process marking the isolation of criminals, regardless
of their rank. It is now a matter of ensuring follow-up
to that approach.
The process initiated by resolution 1970 (2011) must
take its course, as the Council reaffirmed in resolutions
1973 (2011), 2009 (2011), 2040 (2012) and 2095 (2013).
The ongoing process will require the full cooperation
of Libya with the Office of the Prosecutor and the full
support of the Council.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting, and we
welcome the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, to the Council. We thank
her for introducing her the sixth report to the Council
on the topic under consideration.
Guatemala believes that all the authorities in Libya
have an obligation to respect the work of the Court and
the Office of the Prosecutor. To that end, we need to
guarantee that they can work without impediment or
restriction. We hope that the Government will provide
all the necessary support to the staff of the Court and
the Office of the Prosecutor so that they can conduct
their investigations in an appropriate manner. In that
regard, we welcome the memorandum of understanding
that was recently signed between the International
Criminal Court and the Government of Libya. We
are convinced that the document will help to promote
close cooperation between the two parties and lay the
foundation for achieving a more direct relationship
between the Court and the Government of Libya.
Moreover, it is vital that both the Court and
the Office of the Prosecutor enjoy the support and
necessary assistance of States parties and those that
are not yet party to the Rome Statute. We value the
work of the Office of the Prosecutor of the Court to
date, but we also see the involvement and interest of
the Libyan authorities in the process as a positive sign.
We welcome the progress achieved by the Office of the
Prosecutor in the cases of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and Abdullah Al-Senussi.
We trust that, as the transition process continues,
greater institutional consolidation will take place,

S/PV.7059

which will enable Libya to create a State that can
guarantee human rights, the rule of law and an end to
impunity. Nevertheless, we must not forget the climate
of insecurity that prevails in Libya today. Mr. Tarek
Mitri, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in Libya, pertinently has stressed in this Chamber that
security remains the principal concern in Libya (see
S/PV.7031). Attacks on diplomatic missions and their
staff, armed conflict between military forces, bomb
attacks on public offices and even the abduction of
high-level Libyan Government officials are only some
of the acts that reflect the gravity of the situation that
the people must face on a daily basis. It cannot be
denied that, in such a landscape, the judiciary and the
institutions responsible for preventing crime are at high
risk.
Guatemala therefore appreciates the efforts of the
international community to resolve or at least alleviate
the pressure created by that situation. We believe that
the Council can play a fundamental role in expanding
such aid and support. However, we also think that those
problems cannot be resolved in the short run. Change
will take time. Much will depend on the impartiality,
independence and capacity that the Libyan judiciary is
able to develop. Only through the strengthening of the
judicial system can one speak of the true rule of law in
Libya.
As to the investigations conducted by the Office
of the Prosecutor on other crimes committed in Libya,
we believe that they are of the utmost importance. We
urge the Office of the Prosecutor to pursue its very
important efforts in that regard. We reaffirm our call
for the investigation of all possible violations of human
rights and of crimes against humanity committed
in Libya, regardless of their perpetrators. We are
extremely concerned about gender-based crimes that
took place during the conflict, and we hope that the
investigation into those grave crimes will result in
justice for their victims. Investigations into all crimes
committed against detainees and minority groups must
also continue.
Finally, we reiterate our support and commitment
to the Court and the Office of the Prosecutor. We
hope that their good work in Libya will continue and
that cooperation and understanding achieved in that
instance will serve as a model for other cases.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for her briefing and

13-564357/18

S/PV.7059

The situation in Libya

for presenting her sixth report to the Security Council,
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011). The contribution of
the International Criminal Court to fighting impunity
is evident, and the Court’s activity to that end should be
further supported.
Azerbaijan welcomes the commitment of the
Government of Libya to restoring the rule of law
in the country and ensuring accountability for the
crimes committed in the course of the conflict. We
also acknowledge the existence of serious challenges
and threats facing the country and undermining the
progress made so far.
We commend the Libyan Government for its
cooperation with and assistance to the Court and the
Office of the Prosecutor. We welcome the signing of a
memorandum of understanding between the Government
of Libya and the Office of the Prosecutor on burdensharing in further investigations and prosecutions. As
the report notes, the signing of the memorandum of
understanding is a positive commitment on the part of
the Government of Libya to providing justice to victims
and to cooperating with the ICC in the investigation
and prosecution of additional cases against those
responsible for the most serious crimes in Libya.
The Libyan authorities continue to demonstrate
their commitment to ensuring an effective and genuine
investigation and fair trials, consistent with the required
international standards. Thus, by employing available
legal proofs and acting in compliance with the process
set out in the Rome Statute, the Government challenged
the admissibility of the Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and
Abdullah Al-Senussi cases. In its decision issued on
11 October, the Pre-Trial Chamber found the latter case
inadmissible before the ICC, stressing that Libya is
willing and genuinely able to carry out its proceedings
in relation to that case. We also note the Government’s
further submission, filed on 23 September, regarding
the case against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and its
readiness to share the supporting evidence with the ICC
in accordance with Libya’s national legislation.

14/11/2013

treatment of detainees and its commitment to securing
the handover of detainees to effective State control
and to ensuring the proper functioning of the criminal
justice system.
In conclusion, we encourage the international
community to continue providing the necessary support
to the efforts of the Libyan Government towards ending
impunity for the most serious crimes committed during
the conflict and advancing its development and security
agenda.
Ms. King (Australia): I would like to thank the
Prosecutor, Ms. Bensouda, for her briefing on the work
of her Office in relation to Libya.
More than two years into its transition process,
Libya has made real and substantial progress, but
serious political and security challenges remain.
Central to Libya’s completing a successful transition
to democracy is the establishment of the rule of law.
We recognize that the challenging security situation
in Libya makes the work of all accountability actors
more difficult. It is vital that nascent legal institutions
be strengthened and that accountability for serious
crimes be pursued. The International Criminal Court
(ICC) is playing an important role in that endeavour.
The Council’s referral of the situation in Libya to the
ICC has not only demonstrated a determination that
those responsible for the most serious crimes will be
held accountable; it has been an important catalyst for
the reform of Libya’s judicial system.

We commend the recent efforts towards setting up
mechanisms to address allegations of other crimes that
reportedly took place during the armed conflict. The
adoption of Libya’s new transitional justice law and
the establishment of the fact-finding and reconciliation
commission are essential steps in that regard.

We commend the Libyan Government for the
constructive manner in which it has continued to engage
with the ICC. In particular, we acknowledge the manner
in which Libya has invoked its rights by challenging the
ICC’s jurisdiction regarding the cases against Mr. Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Mr. Abdullah Al-Senussi, in
compliance with the Rome Statute. We also welcome
the close consultation that is taking place between
Libya and the Office of the Prosecutor on those matters.
Those actions reflect the principle of complementarity,
a central element of the Rome Statute, working in
practice. Indeed, as Ms. Bensouda has said, Libya,
through its active involvement in related proceedings
before the Court, is setting an example of how States
can invoke the principle of complementarity to protect
their sovereign rights to investigate and prosecute their
nationals.

We also take positive note of the Libyan
Government’s efforts to improve the conditions and

We note the Pre-Trial Chamber decision that the
ICC case against Mr. Al-Senussi is inadmissible on the

8/18

13-56435

14/11/2013

The situation in Libya

basis that Libya itself is willing and able to exercise
jurisdiction over him. While that decision is the subject
of an appeal, it is important to recognize that the
Pre-Trial Chamber’s decision reflects the significant
steps taken by Libya to re-establish the rule of law.
We note Ms. Bensouda’s advice that her Office has
concluded that there is no legal basis for appeal of the
Pre-Trial Chamber decision.
Libya’s adoption of the transitional justice law and
the establishment of the fact-finding and reconciliation
commission are important and welcome steps in
re-establishing the rule of law. We urge Libya to use
those and other mechanisms to ensure that those most
responsible for the commission of serious international
crimes are brought to justice, regardless of whether
they fought in defence of the Al-Qadhafi regime or
were among those who raised arms to establish a new
Libya. In that context, we welcome the conclusion of
the memorandum of understanding between the Office
of the Prosecutor and the Government of Libya on
burden-sharing in relation to future investigations and
prosecutions.
While we recognize significant progress in some
areas, we remain concerned at the distinct lack of
progress in addressing the situation of conflict-related
detainees. Reports that many such detainees continue
to be held by armed brigades without due process and
have been subject to torture and other ill treatment
are of grave concern. We urge Libya to ensure that
detainees are transferred to effective State control in
accordance with the recommendations of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
We also urge Libya to ensure that those responsible for
such mistreatment, or other crimes, such as enforced
disappearances, are held to account.
While we commend the Libyan Government’s
record of cooperation with the Court, it is essential that
the Libyan Government also cooperate with the Court in
all matters, pursuant to its obligations under resolutions
1970 (2011) and 2095 (2013). In particular, we note
that Libya remains under an obligation to surrender
Mr. Al-Qadhafi to the ICC, and we urge Libya to do
so as soon as possible. We note with particular concern
the advice from Mr. Al-Qadhafi’s legal counsel that his
client is being detained in isolation, denied visits from
family and friends and denied access to legal advisers.
That cannot continue.

S/PV.7059

We note the Prosecutor’s advice that the focus of her
ongoing investigations is on persons outside of Libya.
In that context, Australia calls on States, particularly
Libya’s neighbours, to cooperate with the Court to
ensure that those most responsible for the most serious
international crimes committed in Libya are brought to
justice.
It is also essential that the Council continues to
offer its support not only for the efforts of Libya, but
also the ongoing investigations of the Prosecutor. The
active and ongoing support of the Council is essential
to ensure that the objectives of the Council’s referrals to
the ICC, namely, that justice is delivered and peace and
security are maintained, are met.
Mr. McKell (United Kingdom): Let me also
thank the Prosecutor for her report and briefing on the
situation in Libya.
The United Kingdom has been concerned about the
ongoing difficulty in Libya’s internal political situation
since the Prosecutor delivered her previous briefing
(see S/PV.6962). Those challenges are, to some extent,
to be expected after four decades of misrule. Security
and justice sector reform are, however, more crucial
now than ever before if Libya is to rebuild its State
institutions and return to stability in the aftermath
of the revolution. We, along with our international
partners, remain committed to working with Libya to
provide it with the support it needs to meet the serious
challenges it faces.
We welcome the ongoing efforts to investigate and
bring to justice all those who are guilty of war crimes
and crimes against humanity since 15 February 2011. We
particularly welcome the signing of the memorandum
of understanding between the Office of the Prosecutor
and the Government of Libya on burden-sharing on
further investigations and prosecutions, and we hope
that swift progress can be made on its implementation.
The United Kingdom welcomes Libya’s positive
response to the recommendations made in the United
Nations report on torture and death in detention in Libya.
We echo the Office of the Prosecutor’s call upon the
Libyan Government to fully implement its April 2013
law criminalizing torture, enforced disappearances and
discrimination.
We also share their concerns about Libya’s slow
progress on processing detainees. We echo calls for
Libya to work closely with the United Nations and

13-564359/18

S/PV.7059

The situation in Libya

the International Committee of the Red Cross to help
independently confirm the screening and processing of
detainees, releasing those against whom there is little
or no evidence and submitting the remainder to trial.
In doing so, we believe that it will help to establish
confidence in the Libyan justice system.
We fully support the ongoing investigations in
relation to gender crimes and in relation to the situation
of internally displaced persons, including Tuaregs.
Those efforts continue to play an important part in
challenging impunity and ensuring accountability for
those who bear the greatest responsibility for the most
serious crimes. We urge the Libyan Government to
resolve that situation as quickly as possible.
The United Kingdom is grateful for the update from
the Prosecutor on the cases of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and Abdullah Al-Senussi. We note in particular the
recent decision of the Pre-Trial Chamber that the
Al-Senussi case is to proceed in Libya. The United
Kingdom supports the right of Libya to hold national
trials for crimes committed within its jurisdiction. Any
action must be taken in line with the decisions of the
International Criminal Court. Detention must be in
accordance with international law, including access
to legal advisors, and trials must be consistent with
Libya’s international human rights obligations. We
encourage Libya’s full cooperation with the Court on
the Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi case and the Abdullah
Al-Senussi case.
The United Kingdom continues to be a friend of
Libya and a supporter of the International Criminal
Court. We look forward to future cooperation between
Libya and the Court as Libya returns to stability in the
aftermath of the revolution.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina thanks the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for
introducing the sixth report of the Office of the
Prosecutor pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
The constructive dialogue between the Libyan
authorities and the Office of the Prosecutor is a work
in progress. In May, we recognized that the constraints
in contact with the Government of Libya had been
overcome, and that the Office of the Prosecutor had
re-established contact with the new Administration
following the 2012 elections. At that time, we
commended the fact that Office of the Prosecutor and
the Prosecutor-General of Libya had recently signed

10/18

14/11/2013

a memorandum of understanding concerning the
distribution of work in future investigations and trials.
With regard to the cases of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and Abdullah Al-Senussi, which had been suspended
by the Office of the Prosecutor when Libya questioned
their admissibility, Argentina has always stressed
that, in accordance with sub-paragraphs (a) and (c) of
article 17 (1) of the Rome Statute, this was a judicial
matter under the exclusive purview of the Chambers of
the Court. The Court also ruled on the admissibility
challenge in the case against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi.
The Appeals Chamber rejected the Libyan request to
suspend the decision of the Pre-Trial Chamber, which
had found that the case was admissible before the ICC.
Argentina notes that the Pre-Trial Chamber decided on
11 October that the case against Abdullah Al-Senussi
was inadmissible before the ICC, a decision that
Mr. Al-Senussi has appealed. Argentina reminds Libya,
as the Prosecutor does in her report, that it is obligated
to hand over Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafito the Court.
Argentina commends the Prosecutor for pursuing
her investigations into other possible suspects,
including those outside Libyan territory. My country
also recognizes the Prosecutor’s concern regarding
the report “Torture and deaths in detention in
Libya,” released in October by the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya and the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, covering detention
centres held by armed brigades, in which torture is
routinely employed. It is imperative for such detention
centres to be placed under State control. In that regard,
we urge Libya to make every effort to comply with
the timeline established by the new law of transitional
justice, which establishes that the cases of detainees
associated with the previous regime and accused of
crimes should be transferred prior to 21 December 2013
to the competent prosecutor to be handled according to
due process. We join the Prosecutors call for Libya to
effectively apply the law it adopted in April, penalizing
torture, discrimination and forced disappearance.
The members of the Council once again have before
them a report that emphasizes Libya’s willingness
to cooperate with the Court. Argentina, like the
Prosecutor, fully understands the multiple challenges
facing the Libyan authorities and commends the Office
of the Prosecutor for its willingness to continue to
support the Government in its efforts to address the
greatest possible number of cases under its jurisdiction.

13-56435

14/11/2013

The situation in Libya

Above and beyond the matter of the competency
of the Court, whose focus is naturally on the worst
offenders, it is important and auspicious that the Libyan
Government should continue to solidify its fight against
impunity and render justice for the heinous crimes that
have been committed, because only accountability
before justice will consolidate peace and bring relief to
the victims.
As is the case each time the Prosecutor presents
a report to the Council, there are several additional
points that my delegation would like to highlight.
First of all, referrals by the Council — including the
situation in Libya — entail an obligation for followup. In Argentina’s view, the Council must do more
than take note of these reports. We are pleased that
in its presidential statement S/PRST/2013/2, on the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts, the Council
expressed its commitment to providing follow-up to
its decisions with respect to ad hoc tribunals and the
ICC. Given that a follow-up mechanism for ad hoc
tribunals already exists, it is now urgent to implement
that commitment by establishing a specific mechanism
for the International Criminal Court.
Secondly, Argentina is concerned by the provision,
contained in the two referrals made so far, exempting
nationals of non-party States to the Rome Statute
from the Court’s jurisdiction for acts or omissions
derived from operations established or authorized by
the Council or related to such operations. Argentina
believes that the Court’s jurisdiction is universal and
should remain so.
Another matter that could seriously affect the Court
is that, in both referrals, the Council has determined
that the expenses involved should be borne not by the
United Nations but rather by the States parties to the
Rome Statute. That deviates from the provisions of
article 115 (b) of the Roma Statue and article 13 of
the Relationship Agreement between the International
Criminal Court and the United Nations. The legitimate
concerns of many members with respect to seeing a
more efficient Court and one able to deliver justice with
greater speed — concerns such as those raised by the
representative of the Russian Federation— cannot be
satisfied if the Court faces serious financial problems
in the execution of justice.
To conclude, my delegation would like to stress
that the International Criminal Court is one of the most
notable contributions to the struggle against impunity
and the prevention of atrocities. Just this morning in my

S/PV.7059

country, the Senate approved a law for full reparations
to political prisoners, union members and students
detained under the last military dictatorship. This
morning in my country, the Federal Appeals Chamber
finally returned a verdict in the case of two priests,
Carlos de Dios Murias and Gabriel Longueville, who
were illegally deprived of liberty and murdered under
the military dictatorship. Today in my country, at
8 a.m., we heard the testimony of Eduardo Pinchersky,
a victim of the civil-military dictatorship. Speaking not
only as a political activist but also as a Jew, he said,
“The gods decided who would die and who would live.
They thought they were gods.”
We need the International Criminal Court.
Ms. Uwizera (Rwanda): I would like to thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, for her sixth report on the
implementation of resolution 1970 (2011) and for the
additional information she has provided today.
Let me begin by acknowledging the efforts
undertaken by the Government of Libya and its people
in rebuilding their State institutions, particularly the
judicial system, at a moment when the country continues
to face challenges on the security and political fronts.
Rebuilding State institutions is not an easy task; it
requires the time and concerted efforts of all actors.
In that regard, we call upon all key partners of Libya
to continue providing the necessary support and to
enhance collaboration with the Government of Libya.
In the cases of Abdullah Al-Senussi and Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, it has always been our belief
that the primary responsibility to investigate and
prosecute the crimes against humanity of which those
individuals are accused lies with the Libyan national
jurisdiction. We therefore welcome the recent decision
by the Pre-Trial Chamber to uphold its principles of
complementarity by recognizing the steps already
taken by the Libyan courts in prosecuting Al-Senussi.
As far as Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi is concerned,
the Government has begun legal proceedings at home,
thus showing the ability and the willingness of the
national judicial institutions to uphold their duty. We
hope that démarche of the Libyan Government will be
considered a demonstration of goodwill and on the same
path of ensuring accountability, hence upholding the
same principle of complementarity. It should be noted
that the Libyan Government has taken steps recently in
its legislative development. We believe that this is an

13-5643511/18

S/PV.7059

The situation in Libya

indication that Libya is willing to prosecute those who
committed crimes and to put an end to impunity.
However, let us encourage the Government of Libya
to show its goodwill by putting into practice the laws
promulgated, including the transitional justice law. We
particularly stress the need for the Libyan Government
to ensure that article 28 of that law, related to ending
the detention of those associated with the former
regime without due process, is fully implemented. In
that regard, we are concerned about the reported crimes
committed against the Tawerghan civilians who, to
this day, have been unable to return to their homes in
Tawergha. We hope that the Libyan Government will
ensure the equal protection of its citizens.
From our experience of the gacaca jurisdictions,
we believe that national initiatives like the fact-finding
and reconciliation commission in Libya can implement
strategies that could address allegations of crimes
committed at the local level, such as those committed
in Misrata and Tawergha in 2011. The international
community shall provide the necessary assistance in
supporting and strengthening that mechanism. We
stress that, fundamentally in order for the Libyan
people to reconcile, justice has to be rendered by the
Libyans themselves.
As for the other perpetrators of crimes against
humanity committed during the uprising who may
reside outside Libya, we encourage the Government of
Libya, in collaboration with the concerned countries
and other partners, to ensure that those who committed
crimes and who may continue to pose a threat to the
Libyans are brought to justice.
To conclude, let me reiterate that the International
Criminal Court should be used as a court of last resort. It
is therefore important for the international community
to support and provide assistance to enhance national
capacities — in this case, Libyan capacities — to deal
with past crimes, promote the rule of law, establish a
sound judicial system and investigate and prosecute
serious crimes. Only by strengthening national capacity
are we really fighting impunity.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for her briefing on the recent developments
regarding Libya. We agree with her that Libya has
come a long way, despite all the challenges it faces,
by working closely with the international community,
including the International Criminal Court.

12/18

14/11/2013

Regarding the recent developments between
the ICC and Libya, I would like to make a couple of
observations based on what the Prosecutor has just
explained. First, I believe that close cooperation
between the ICC and Libya is absolutely vital if the ICC
is to fulfil its mandate, as given by the Security Council.
We commend the Libyan Government’s cooperation
so far, but also expect it to continue to implement its
obligations under resolution 1970 (2011) and to further
enhance its cooperation with the ICC. In that context,
we welcome the conclusion of the memorandum of
understanding on burden-sharing between the ICC
Prosecutor and the Prosecutor-General of the Libyan
Government. We hope that this new instrument will
help enhance their cooperation for the common goal of
fighting impunity.
With respect to the progress made in the cases
against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah
Al-Senussi, we think that the Court’s decision set the
criteria for the questions regarding admissibility. We
hope that those decisions will also make a positive
contribution to the interpretation of the principle of
complementarity.
We support the Prosecutor’s efforts to investigate
the allegations of crimes committed by pro-Al-Qadhafi
officials outside Libya, as well as those committed by
rebel forces. We look forward to a thorough investigation
of all those allegations with the full cooperation with
the Libyan authorities. It will be desirable for the ICC
Prosecutor to keep assisting and encouraging the Libyan
authorities in prosecuting criminal cases domestically,
whenever possible, in accordance with the policy of
positive complementarity.
Ms. Bensouda mentioned concerns about challenges
in the investigations and corrections process at the
national level. My delegation shares her concerns. In
that regard, we would like to stress the importance of
capacity-building in Libya and the continued support of
the international community to that end.
With all of those developments, we understand
that many tasks remain in Libya. However, with
the continued efforts and cooperation of the Libyan
authorities, the ICC and the Security Council, we
believe that Libya will successfully achieve sustainable
peace and democracy based upon the rule of law. As
we have done, my delegation will continue to work
with other Council members to that end with a firm
commitment to the Charter and the vision of the ICC.

13-56435

14/11/2013

The situation in Libya

Like the Permanent Representative of Argentina, we
also believe that we need the ICC.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her briefing and welcome her
back to the Security Council Chamber. We have taken
note of the sixth report of the ICC Prosecutor to the
Security Council. We commend Ms. Fatou Bensouda
for her hard work and commitment to the international
criminal justice system.
Libya continues to face serious challenges in the
consolidation of its democratic system. The best way
for the international community to assist Libya in
overcoming those challenges is to help it strengthen
the capacity of Libyan institutions. Justice and security
institutions alike need to be supported in enhancing
their capacity and effectiveness. We call on armed
groups in Libya to lay down their arms and engage in
the democratic process and dialogue to resolve their
differences and grievances.
We welcome the memorandum of understanding
on burden-sharing in regard to further investigations
and prosecutions signed by the Government of Libya
and the Office of the Prosecutor this month. Libya is
cooperating with the ICC, in accordance with resolution
1970 (2011). The memorandum of understanding, as
recognized by the ICC, is a sign of the commitment
of the Libyan Government to ending impunity and to
providing justice to victims. We call upon the Libyan
Government to maintain its constructive engagement
with the Court.
We welcome the Pre-Trial Chamber’s decision on
the inadmissibility of the Abdullah Al-Senussi case,
in accordance with the principle of complementarity
enshrined in the Rome Statute. On the basis of that
principle, a case in The Hague is a matter of last resort.
We appreciate the determination of the International
Criminal Court that Libya is willing and able to carry
out its proceedings against Abdullah Al-Senussi.
The Court’s evaluation that the general security
situation in Libya has not affected the capacity of Libyan
institutions to obtain evidence and testimony and to
conduct proceedings in the specific case of Al-Senussi is
heartening. It is important that the Libyan Government
maintain the quality of evidence, testimony, witness
protection and fairness in the proceedings against Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and provide convincing additional
information to the Appeals Chamber in that regard.

S/PV.7059

The Prosecutor’s Office is in the process of
collecting evidence against other individuals of the
previous regime outside Libya who might be responsible
for serious crimes. The Council would appreciate
receiving additional information on such investigations.
As regards the investigation of other alleged crimes
committed in Libya, we underline the need to conduct
thorough and impartial investigations regardless
of which side has perpetrated the crime. We also
encourage NATO to fully cooperate with the Court and
with Libya’s national efforts to investigate the civilian
casualties during the conflict.
The formation of a democratically elected
Government is leading to positive results in Libya.
We welcome the adoption of Libya’s new transitional
justice law. We hope that that law will be used to
ensure due process for all detainees. The country has
now entered the important phase of implementation
of the transitional laws. That is critical to a stable and
prosperous Libya.
The international criminal justice system has
demonstrated that national judicial mechanisms can
ultimately be more efficient and cost-effective in
dealing with such serious crimes. The International
Criminal Court and other international tribunals have
succeed in dealing with only a handful of cases. For the
bulk of the cases, greater reliance on national judicial
systems will continue to produce more salutary results.
The strengthening of the Libyan judicial system is
therefore essential to address the crimes that occurred
in that country. The Libyan Government must continue
to formulate and to implement a comprehensive strategy
to address those crimes.
The international community should extend its
full support to Libya to achieve that objective. In the
long run, the promotion of reconciliation is essential
to fostering national unity and to bridging the fissures
caused by conflicts. The success of the Fact-finding and
Reconciliation Commission is important for promoting
unity in the country. Achieving a balance between the
imperatives of justice and peace is always a difficult
challenge. That can best be achieved through national
mechanisms and institutions.
Finally, we underscore Pakistan’s fullest support
for the well-being and prosperity of the people of Libya.
We wish them success in their quest for reconciliation,
stability and institution-building.

13-5643513/18

S/PV.7059

The situation in Libya

Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): We are
pleased to welcome Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), and would
like to thank her for her briefing on her sixth report
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
The United States welcomes the commitment
and efforts of the Government and people of Libya
during their country’s transition following 40 years
of dictatorship. We recognize that the process of
building a democratic and secure nation is a long-term
endeavour with many challenges. An important part
of that process is in the field of the rule of law, where
Libya will need to continue to build on ongoing efforts
to bolster accountability mechanisms that help support
and develop a more robust, fair and effective system of
justice.
In that regard, we welcome Libya’s continued
commitment to fulfulling its international obligations,
including those related to the International Criminal
Court under resolution 1970 (2011), We also welcome
Libya’s continuing cooperation in the ongoing
proceedings before the International Criminal Court.
We note with interest the recent memorandum of
understanding on burden-sharing between the Libyan
authorities and the International Criminal Court
regarding investigations and prosecutions.
Under the Rome Statute, the International Criminal
Court is complementary to national jurisdictions, The
Pre-Trial Chamber’s October decision granting Libya’s
admissibility challenge in the case against Abdullah
Al-Senussi, the first such decision by the International
Criminal Court, is a significant development in that
regard. We note that the Court found that the Libyan
authorities are taking concrete and progressive steps in
the domestic proceedings against Mr. Al-Senussi and
that Libya has demonstrated that it is willing and able
to genuinely investigate and prosecute the case.
In those proceedings, we see the principle of
complementarity applied in the context of a country
transitioning out of conflict. The Prosecutor’s report
notes a number of efforts that Libya has undertaken to
develop its justice institutions and mechanisms. Those
include Libya’s new transitional justice law, the Factfinding and Reconciliation Commission and a new
draft law on rape as a war crime. We welcome those and
other initiatives, including those that help build much
needed capacity in the justice system so that justice can
be delivered more effectively.

14/18

14/11/2013

Finally, we would like to emphasize that the Libyan
Government must work to ensure that those in detention
centres are not held without due process and that they
are treated humanely, including in accordance with
Libya’s law criminalizing torture, adopted in April.
In the end, much of the responsibility for ensuring
accountability for crimes in Libya will fall to the
domestic authorities. Even where it has jurisdiction,
the International Criminal Court cannot pursue every
case, nor is it charged with the general monitoring or
oversight of Libya’s overall progress in implementing
justice and rule of law initiatives.
In the light of that mandate, we appreciate the
Prosecutor’s briefing and how she intends to focus her
Office’s work as the Court carries out its responsibility
to investigate and prosecute those who bear the greatest
responsibility for crimes. The United States stands
ready to assist Libya as it works to reform its justice
sector, strengthen the rule of law and advance human
rights. We strongly believe that those and other areas of
Libya’s transition need to be fully addressed.
We look forward to working with the international
community, including the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, and other international partners in
a targeted and coordinated way to ensure adequate
support to Libya as it undertakes such critical efforts.
The United States also looks forward to continuing our
active engagement with the Office of the Prosecutor
and the International Criminal Court, consistent with
our law and our policy to advance accountability for
atrocities.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Ms. Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), for her sixth
report pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) and for her
briefing today. Let me reiterate our full support and
appreciation for her work. I would also like to welcome
the Permanent Representative of Libya, Mr. Dabbashi,
to the Council.
Luxembourg is a firm advocate of the International
Criminal Court. We think that justice and peace are
complementary and that the fight for the rule of law
and against impunity is of fundamental importance. In
that regard, we believe that the ICC Prosecutor and her
Office have a real role to play in Libya at a time when
the country is laying the foundations for its new State.
For that reason, like previous speakers we welcome the
fact that the Libyan authorities have reiterated their
willingness to cooperate with the Court by signing
13-56435

14/11/2013

The situation in Libya

a cooperation and burden-sharing memorandum of
understanding on new investigations and prosecutions
with the Office of the Prosecutor at the beginning of
the month. That is a promising develoment and an
example to be followed by other countries, some of
which are calling into question the very principle of
their cooperation with the Court. We are confident that
the Libyan Government will do its utmost to ensure the
effective implementation of that important agreement.
We understand and respect the fact that the Libyan
authorities wish, in some cases, to try individuals
accused of committing crimes that fall under the
Statute of Rome on their territory. In that regard, we
must welcome the fact that Libya has always complied
with the procedures of the Rome Statute when it has
raised objections of inadmissibility in the Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi cases. With regard
to the latter case, the Court’s Pre-Trial Chamber handed
down a judgement on 11 October, while a decision has
yet to be issued in connection with the Al-Qadhafi case.
We trust that the Libyan authorities will respect the
final decision of the Court on the case of Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi case. We are confident that they will
appropriately follow up on the rejection of the request
for suspensive effect of the requirement to surrender
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the ICC and will deliver
the accused to the ICC pending a definitive decision of
the Court on the admissibility challenge.
The Libyan authorities have the ultimate
responsibility to ensure respect for the rule of law in
their country. However, the current situation of major
insecurity is a serious obstacle to achieving that goal.
We therefore call on the Libyan authorities to do more
to create a favourable security environment, for there
cannot be real justice or genuine freedom without
security and stability also being guaranteed. For the
memorandum of understanding on the division of
labour between the Court and the Libyan authorities
to be properly implemented, it is important that the
Office of the Prosecutor be able to move unhindered
throughout Libya.
The international community must stand with
Libyans to help them meet the twin challenges of
security and national reconciliation. However, that
does not excuse us from remaining vigilant in ensuring
respect for fundamental freedoms. We therefore note
with concern the report published on 1 October by
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for

S/PV.7059

Human Rights on torture and mistreatment in detention
centres. The Libyan authorities have recognized the
seriousness of the problem, and we have no doubt
they will implement the recommendations contained
in the report, in particular concerning the transfer of
prisoners to detention centres controlled by the State, in
order to make a definitive break with the dark practices
inherited from the Al-Qadhafi regime. We also support,
along with Prosecutor Bensouda, the idea of ​​a periodic
review of the implementation of the law criminalizing
torture that was adopted in April.
Let me conclude by acknowledging the very
positive development represented by the adoption, on
22 September by the Libyan General National Congress,
of the law on transitional justice. That text was long
overdue. It contains, among others, provisions relating
to the rights of and compensation for victims and the
identification of responsibilities for the crimes of the
past. It is our hope that the implementation of the law
will be swift and will facilitate the process of national
reconciliation.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
China.
I thank Ms. Bensouda for her briefing.
With the efforts by the Government of Libya, the
political transition process in Libya has continued to
make progress. We support Libya in continuing to
advance the political transition, and we hope that all
parties in Libya will attach importance to the interests
of the country and the people, maintain national
unity, commit themselves to resolving differences
through dialogue and properly meet all the challenges
in the political transition so as to achieve national
reconciliation and accelerate national reconstruction
and development. China welcomes the efforts made
by the Government of Libya to achieve justice through
the judiciary. China’s position on international judicial
bodies remains unchanged.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Lybia.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would also like to express my gratitude to Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal

13-5643515/18

S/PV.7059

The situation in Libya

Court (ICC), for her briefing on the ICC and the crimes
committed in Libya.
The Libyan authorities believe that the restoration
of justice and the fight against impunity are the
cornerstones of efforts to bring about national
reconciliation and stability. That objective cannot
be met through national efforts alone, especially in
the light of the precarious situation of the country’s
institutions and the complex demands imposed due to
the transitional phase.
We welcome the support that has been received by
the Libyan authorities from the United Nations and from
friendly nations, as well as the understanding between
the Libyan judicial authorities and the ICC. Moreover,
we are even more optimistic now that we have read the
report of the Prosecutor on the cooperation between
her Court and various countries aimed at reaching
creative solutions, given the security gaps faced by the
investigations in Libya and the difficulties encountered
in trying to restore the rule of law in the country.
As I have said before in the Council, the International
Criminal Court is a significant and necessary partner
for Libya at this stage, in particular in restoring justice
and fighting impunity, particularly with respect to the
serious crimes committed in Libya since 15 February
2011. The memorandum of understanding signed
between the two parties at the beginning of this month
crystallizes their partnership and provides for burdensharing in investigations and trials.
The judicial authorities in Libya have come a long
way in terms of investigations and trials in the cases of
perpetrators of the most heinous crimes committed in
Libya who are currently detained in Libya. However,
those authorities are encountering some difficulties
with respect to investigating cases against people
who are outside of Libya due to non-cooperation by
the States where those people are residing. Some of
the high-level authorities of the former system who
fled to neighbouring countries continue to engage in
activities aimed at destabilizing Libya. They do so
by promoting discord and massacres, and they use, to
that end, property pillaged from the Libyan people.
Unfortunately, the countries in which they are residing
have not made enough efforts to follow the money
trail and freeze their funds, in violation of the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council in that respect.
With regard to paragraph 21 of the Office of
the Prosecutor’s report, we are pleased about the

16/18

14/11/2013

collection of testimony concerning suspects residing
outside the country and concerning trials. However,
we reitereate the responsibility of pro-Al-Qadhafi
forces living outside Libya. We are very committed to
judicial complementarity between the Libyan judicial
system and close cooperation between Libya’s General
Prosecutor and the Prosecutor of the ICC, with a view to
restoring justice and combating impunity in the context
of stabilizing Libya’s institutions and promoting peace
in society.
In addition to Libya’s respect for the decisions
handed down by the International Criminal Court,
our intention is to cooperate with the Court as much
as possible. Nevertheless, above and beyond the
judicial context, the televised images of Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi threatening people on 20 February 2011 are
still very fresh in the minds of our people, especially
the families of the victims. Those families tend to place
responsibility for murder and destruction throughout
the country squarely on the shoulders of Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi. And they want to
see justice done to them.
No Government, regardless of its popularity, can
accept a trial taking place outside Libya, as that would
destabilize the peace of our society, which is quite
precarious. Indeed, it might even pose a threat to the
lives of the perpetrators of the crimes. The Libyan
judiciary has begun trials against against Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Al-Senussi, and it is clear that the
international criteria for justice will be respected,
either in the Al-Qadhafi case or in cases concering
some of his accomplices, including Al-Senussi. We
hope that the International Criminal Court will very
soon recognize Libya’s responsibility in terms of
trying those perpetrators and rendering justice and
accountability for those two men.
Libya is deeply committed to the rule of law, in
spite of the exceptional circumstances prevailing in
the country. The Libyan people are clear about the fact
that the path to prosperity includes bearing witness to
the truth, restoring justice and compensating victims.
Without justice, it is impossible to bring about national
reconciliation; without national reconciliation, it
is impossible to restore stability. Without stability,
it is impossible to achieve development; without
development, our people will not enjoy prosperity.
Our authorities are working as hard as they can to
restore security using the various elements in place,
including the army, security forces and the judiciary.
13-56435

14/11/2013

The situation in Libya

That is taking place in spite the difficulties faced by
the Government in connection to being able to establish
a national army and reforming the police and security
services. Nevertheless, it has gone a long way towards
bringing about a reform of the judiciary through the
separation of power, especially between the executive
and legislative branches of Government, and by issuing
indictments for serious crimes in accordance with the
law, including the transitional law. The latter is geared
towards bringing about national reconciliation and
helping the country emerge from the current phase and
move to a new stage of prosperity and development — all
the while holding accountable the perpetrators of the
most serious crimes, including crimes against humanity
and genocide.
In addition, we have criminalized torture, while
the Minister of Justice is also addressing the issue
of compensating victims. We hope that the relevant
legislation will be adopted very soon. The national
transitional Government is taking the necessary steps
to put in place an entire transitional justice system. We
hope that, very soon, we will be able to restore overall
security, as well as administrative security, in order to
restore the rule of law as soon as possible.
The Libyan Government fully understands the
concerns of human rights organizations, as well as
the concerns of some countries with regard to certain
excesses that have taken place in detention centres
over the past couple of years. The competent Libyan
authorities have affirmed that they will not neglect
any violations of human rights: all of them will be
addressed, in spite of the fact that those are individual,
isolated events. The international community, civil
society organizations and others have noted that cases
of human rights violations are constantly decreasing,
which is due to the law just adopted on torture and
other crimes.
The Libyan Government stresses punishing the
perpetrators of all crimes and ending impunity. We
are working energetically to bring all perpetrators
of crimes to justice. However, we face a number
of security problems — of which all members are
aware — resulting from the murder of judges and army
and security officers. That is a great challenge for our
authorities, as is the use of weapons by some elements
intent on impeding the export of gas and oil from Libya.
Those elements are attempting to use to their own ends
the flexibility of the Libyan authorities over the past
two years, aimed at avoiding further bloodshed.

S/PV.7059

We would like to thank the Prosecutor and the ICC
for their efforts to cooperate with my country. We very
much aspire to the same goals. We hope for more support
from the Security Council, especially with regard to
encouraging countries that have not yet done so to send
all suspected criminals back to Libya in order that their
cases may be prosecuted in our country — people who
are responsible for very grave crimes. We also await
further support in terms of freezing assets and helping
us to restore security and the rule of law and protect
judges.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to Prosecutor Bensouda to respond to comments
made and questions raised.
Ms. Bensouda: I take this opportunity to thank
all speakers for their statements of support regarding
my Office’s work and the work of the International
Criminal Court.
On the question relating to the difference between
the cases of Al-Senussi and Al-Qadhafi before the
Court, which I believe was raised initially by the
representative of the Russian Federation, let me state
that the assessment of admissibility is on a case-bycase basis. It is not enough for a State to assert that it
can undertake a trial, and the Court does not judge the
system as a whole.
In the case of Al-Senussi, the volume of information
submitted was sufficient to show that the Libyan
courts are trying the same case, that is, of the same
individuals for the same crimes. Furthermore, the
case is factually different from that of Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi. Al-Senussi is in detention and benefitting
from the due process guarantees that are offered by
confident State control. That is not entirely the case
with respect to Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi. The judges
found that the information that was submitted in the
case of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi lacked the degree
of specificity that is necessary to meet the test. The
Libyans have offered to submit more information, and
the Court is considering that request. I think that the
different positions of the Court’s judges and my Office
highlight respectively in these two cases the impartial
legal proceedings before the Court, which are always in
strict conformity with the legal framework of the Rome
Statute.
On the question of the detentions in Zintan, the
Court takes the matter very seriously and is intent
on decyphering precisely what transpired during the

13-5643517/18

S/PV.7059

The situation in Libya

course of that mission. We are taking appropriate
measures. The matter is in the hands of President Song
and the Registry, and they are doing the assessment. I
understand that both the Presidency and the Registry
have been in contact with the legal authorities in that
regard. I respect the President’s and the Registrar’s
respective mandates in this regard.
On NATO’s conduct during its operation in Libya,
I noted in my last report that the Office had found
no information to conclude that NATO’s air strikes,
which may have resulted in civilian deaths or injury,
or damaged civilian objects, were the result of the
intentional directing of attacks against the civilian
population, as such, or against civilian objects, which
would be clearly excessive to the anticipated military
objective and advantage. My Office has encouraged
NATO to cooperate fully in Libya’s national efforts to

18/18

14/11/2013

investigate civilian casualties. In the current report, my
Office welcomes the agreement between NATO and the
Government of Libya to work more closely together in
the future.
Allow me to conclude by stating firmly that the
Office will always conduct its mandate impartially and
in strict conformity with the Court’s legal framework,
devoid of extraneous considerations, and that we will
pursue perpetrators where we have jurisdiction. The
establishment of international rule of law, impartially
applied, requires this of us.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The
Security Council has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

13-56435
