116

37/141.

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

Expression of appreciation to the Executive
Director of the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research

The General Assembly,
Noting that the incumbent Executive Director of the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research will shortly be
relinquishing his duties,
Recognizing the contribution made by the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research under his guidance,
through training and research, towards the achievement of
the major objectives of the United Nations, in particular the
maintenance of peace and security and the promotion of
economic and social development,
l. Expresses its sincere appreciation and thanks to Mr.
Davidson Nicol for the effective and dedicated manner in
which he has performed his functions as Executive Director
of the United Nations Institute for Training and Research;
2. Extends its good wishes to him for success in his
future undertakings.
109th plenary meeting
17 December 1982

37/142.

United Nations Institute for Training and
Research

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 36/75 of 4 December 1981 on the
United Nations Institute for Training and Research,
Acknowledging the value and usefulness of the research
on the effectiveness of the activities of the United Nations
and of_ the studies on the future concerning development
strategies, undertaken by the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research,
Recognizing the role of the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research in assisting, through training and
ot~e~ services with_in its m_andate, members of permanent
m1ss10ns to the United Nat10ns and other national officials
concerned with the work of the United Nations,
Aware of the continuing precarious financial situation of
the United Nations Institute for Training and Research and
drawing attention to the recommendations of the Joint Inspection Unit on the financing of the Institute, 25
l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Executive Director of the United Nations Institute for Training and Research 26 and of his introductory statement on
5 October 1982;21
2. Welcomes the continuing emphasis that the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research is placing at
present on economic and social training and research and
the inclusion of specific projects on the problems that exist
in the areas identified by the General Assembly at its sixth
and seventh special sessions, in the relevant decisions adopted
by ~e Assembly at its twenty-ninth and subsequent sessions,
an~ m the I_ntemational Development Strategy for the Third
Um!ed Nations Development Decade, 28 taking into consideration the statements on the programme of work of the
Institute made at the current session;

3. Welcomes also the efforts of the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research to strengthen the coordination of its activities and its co-operation with relevant organs and organizations within the United Nations system, in particular the United Nations University, and the
continuation of those efforts;
4. Welcomes further the steps being taken by the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research in accordance
with General Assembly resolutions 35/53 B of 5 December
1980 and 36/75 of 4 December 1981 and calls upon the
Institute to continue to organize its programme of work and
activities and to adjust its administrative costs so as to ensure
that estimated expenditure does not exceed estimated revenue;
5. Urges all States that have not yet contributed to the
United Nations Institute for Training and Research to do
so, and calls upon all donor countries, especially those that
are not contributing at a level commensurate with their capacity, to increase their voluntary contributions in order to
meet the needs of the Institute;
6. Requests Member States to announce their annual
voluntary contributions early, if possible at the United
Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to examine all possibilities for funding the United Nations Institute for Training and Research in order to place its financing on a more
predictable, assured and continuous basis, and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session,
keeping in mind article VIII of the statute of the Institute 29
and the views expressed during the current session of the
Assembly.

109th plenary meeting
17 December 1982

37/143.

United Nations University

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2951 (XXVII) of 11 December
1972, 3081 (XXVIII) of 6 December 1973, 3313 (XXIX)
of 14 December 1974, 3439 (XXX) of 9 December 1975,
31/117 and 31/118 of 16 December 1976, 32/54 of 8 December 1977, 33/108 of 18 December 1978, 34/112 of
14 December 1979, 35/54 of 5 December 1980 and 36/45
of 19 November 1981,
Having considered the report of the Council of the United
Nations University on the work of the University 30 and the
report on the University prepared by the Joint Inspection
Unit,3 1
Noting with appreciation that a site has been dedicated
for the permanent headquarters of the United Nations Univer~ity, thanks to the generous offer of the Tokyo Metropolitan Government, and that active steps are being taken
by the Government of Japan towards the construction of a
building that will house the permanent headquarters of the
University as provided in the Agreement of 14 May 1976
between the United Nations and Japan regarding the Headquarters of the University,
N oti'!g decision 5. 2. 3 adopted on 7 October 1982 by the
Executive Board of the United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization at its one hundred and
fifteenth session,

25

A/35/181, annex, paras. 62, !09 and 110.
Official Records of the Gen~ral Assembh. Thirtv sevmth S<•.1sim1.
Supplement No. 14 (A/37/14).
·
27
Ibid., Thirty-seventh Session, Second Committee, 6th meeting paras.
13-19.
.
28
Resolution 35/56, annex.
26

29
See Official RtcorJs of the General Assembly, Twenn·-second Session,
Annexes. agrnd.i item 45, document A/6875, annex III."
0
'
Ibid . I.- .rtv-seventh Session, Supplement No. 31 (A/37/31 ).
"A/17/111.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report prepared
by the Joint Inspection Unit, 31 and of the comments of the
Secretary-General thereon, 32 which_, inter a_lia, ~upport t~e
new directions of the United Nations Umversity and its
broader intellectual concerns as reflected in its medium-term
perspective ( 1982-1987) under the following five themes:
(a) Peace, security, conflict resolution and global
transformation;
(b) Global economy;
(c) Hunger, poverty, resources and the environment;
(d) Human and social development and coexistence of
peoples, cultures and social systems;
(e) Science and technology and their social and ethical
implications;
2. Notes with satisfaction that, with the adoption of the
medium-term perspective, a renewed emphasis has been
placed on the multidisciplinary and integrative appro~ch to
the search for solutions to urgent global problems, m accordance with the Charter of the United Nations University;
3. Also notes with satisfaction that, in keeping with its
philosophy of continuity with change, the (!nited N~ti?ns
University has maintained its momentum m the ongmal
programmes and enlarged on the foundations built in the
early years;
4. Welcomes the fact that research, post-graduate training and the dissemination of knowledge will be covered
under the medium-term perspective as a single programme
of the United Nations University with subprogrammes responding to the five themes;
5. Notes with satisfaction the increasing co-operative
activities of the United Nations University with the United
Nations, its organs and agencies, particularly United
Nations research and training institutions, and urges the
University to continue to strengthen its co-_ope_rati_on, and
the co-ordination of its activities, with those mstttuttons and
the appropriate organiz~tional units <;>f the. Un~ted Na~ions
Secretariat, as well as its collaborat10n with mtemat1onal
academic and scientific organizations;
6. Encourages the United Nations University to explore
and expand innovative, fruitful and varied institu~io~al relationships in accordance with its Ch_arter, to assist m ~he
effective implementation of the medmm-term pers_pec_tive
and achieve wider outreach and increased decentrahzat10n,
ensuring the continuing growth of vigorous .academi_c and
scientific communities everywhere and particularly m the
developing countries;
1. Welcomes the increased attention being given by the
United Nations University to the activities related to the
dissemination of knowledge, including its own research
findings, referred to in its Charter and, as a consequence,
the promotion of a more informed awareness of global problems among all sectors and levels <_)f the world co~mu!lity
through the use of the new information and commumcat10ns
technology now available;
8. Recognizes that, over the medium term, the United
Nations University needs to build up its Endowment Fund
and other contributions in order to increase its core income;
9. Earnestly appeals to all Member States to take cognizance of the important developments at the United Natio~s
University and to contribute urgently and gei:ierously to its
Endowment Fund and, additionally or alternatively, to make
operating contributions to the University to enable it to fulfil
effectively its global mandate.
109th plenary meeting
17 December /982

37/144.

Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief
Co-ordinator

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 36/225 of 17 December 1981 : by
which it reaffirmed the mandate of the Office of the Umted
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator and called for the
strengthening and improvement of the capacity and effectiveness of the Office,
Recalling also its resolution 35! l 07 of 5 ~ecember !980,
by which it reaffirmed the necessity of ensunng_ a contu~ued
sound financial basis for the Office of the Umted Nations
Disaster Relief Co-ordinator and extended until 31 December 1983 the term of the Trust Fund established pursuant to
its resolution 3243 (XXIX) of 29 November 1974 and modified under its resolutions 3440 (XXX) of 9 December 1975
and 3532 (XXX) of 17 December 1975 and by its decision
33/429 of 19 December 1978,
Recalling further its resolution ~4/55 of ~9 November
1979, by which it requested an m~r~ase m emergency
disaster assistance, with a normal ceiling of $30,000 per
country in the case of any one disaster,
Deeply concerned about the ad~itional e~onomi~ burden
placed upon the developing countn~s by th~ mci:easmg number of natural disasters and other disaster situations, as well
as the disruption caused to their development process,
Recognizing the contribution made by th~ _lJnited Natio~s
system to the relief of suffering and prov1s10n of h~mamtarian assistance in natural disasters and other disaster
situations,
Recognizing also that the primary responsibilities of a~ministration, relief operations and disaster p~eparedness he
with the affected countries and that the maJor part of the
material assistance and human effort in disaster relief comes
from the Governments of those countries,
Recognizing further the importance of the contribution of
the International Committee of the Red Cross, the League
of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies and appropriate
voluntary organizations,
Recognizing that, in order to attai~ an effe~tive ~oordination system of humanitarian and_ disaster rehef ass1~tance, it is essential to strengthen and improve the capacity
and effectiveness of the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator and the United Nations system
as a whole in order to enable the Office to respond to natural
disasters and other disaster situations speedily, efficiently
and effectively, thereby ensuring prompt delivery of concerted relief,
Recognizing that a major constraint o~ an effective response of the United Nations to natural disasters and other
disaster situations has been the shortage of resources,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the work of the Office of the United
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator33 and of the statement
made by the Co-ordinator before the Second Committee on
2 November I 982; 34
2. Takes note of the progress made by the SecretaryGeneral and the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination
in initiating improvements in the management operati<_)ns of
the Office of the United Nations Disaster ReliefCo-ordmator
and in establishing modalities for the implementation of the
procedures, outlined in General Ass~~bly _resolution. 36/
225 and decision 1982/ I of the Admmistrat1ve Committee
on Co-ordination, for dealing with requests for disaster relief
A/37/235 and Corr. I.
Official Records of the Gn1era/ Assemhh· Thirr, ,. •
Second Commillee. 27th mcctrn,~. i' ,,,,, : ·
n
'

,2 A/37/111/Add. I.

117

4
