United Nations

S/PV.6453 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6453rd meeting
Friday, 17 December 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. DiCarlo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .

Mr. Heissel
Ms. Kuljanin
Mr. Figueirôa
Ms. Teng Chen
Mr. Gonnet
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Teruuchi
Ms. Ziade
Ms. Montemayor de Teresa
Mr. Edokpa
Mr. Tolkach
Ms. Dinç
Mrs. Kafeero
Mrs. Stevens

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolutions 1820
(2008) and 1888 (2009) (S/2010/604)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-69905 (E)

*1069905*

S/PV.6453 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 10.10 a.m. on 17 December.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes in
order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. I shall now invite Mr. Peter Schwaiger,
Deputy Head of the delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations.
Mr. Schwaiger: The candidate countries Turkey,
Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
the countries of the Stabilization and Association
Process and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia, as well as Ukraine,
the Republic of Moldova, Armenia, Azerbaijan and
Georgia align themselves with this statement.
The European Union would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his presence yesterday at the
open debate. We are also grateful for the presentation
of his Special Representative, Madame Wallström, and
would like to express our gratitude to Under-SecretaryGeneral Le Roy and Military Adviser Lieutenant
General Gaye for all the efforts undertaken by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to combat
sexual violence in armed conflict and post-conflict
countries.
Continuing evidence of daily sexual violence in
armed conflict and fragile countries underscores the
need to intensify our efforts to prevent and combat
such violence. Although attention has been focused on
the Democratic Republic of Congo, alarming reports
have also been coming from other countries, including
countries that are not on the Council’s current agenda.
Impunity continues to prevail for most acts of sexual
violence committed in the course of recent conflicts.
The European Union (EU) therefore warmly welcomes
the present report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 1820
(2008) and 1888 (2009) (S/2010/604).
The EU calls on the Security Council and all
States Members of the United Nations to redouble their
efforts, notably in the fight against impunity. Often,
amnesty is given in the name of peace to combatants
who have used sexual torture or sexual violence as a
tactic of war. But there can be no sustainable peace
without prosecution of perpetrators and justice for
victims. Targeted and appropriately tailored measures
should be imposed on all parties to a conflict
responsible for grave instances of sexual violence.
Perpetrators should be held accountable. Data

2

collection and follow-up on the prosecution of sexual
offenders requires urgent strengthening.
At the Security Council’s open debate on the
subject held on 26 October, the European Union
reiterated its firm call for the reinforcement of global
monitoring of situations pertaining to sexual violence
in armed conflict. The recommendations of the
Secretary-General in the current report provide
concrete suggestions in that regard, and the European
Union fully endorses those recommendations. The call
to establish monitoring and reporting arrangements is
particularly
noteworthy.
Robust
monitoring
arrangements will enable the Council to track, deter
and combat the use of systematic sexual violence in
conflict situations.
The European Union warmly welcomes the
adoption yesterday of resolution 1960 (2010) on sexual
violence in situations in armed conflict. We urge the
Security Council to build on its strong commitment to
that issue and to ensure the full implementation of that
and all other relevant resolutions.
The Security Council should adopt a zerotolerance approach by including issues of sexual
violence as a priority element in resolutions
establishing the mandates for its sanctions committees,
and the mandates should explicitly include sexual
violence as a criterion for the designation of political
and military leaders for targeted measures.
The Security Council should also reaffirm its
commitment to integrating the gender equality
dimension and the protection of civilians from sexual
and gender-based violence into the mandates of
peacekeeping operations. The connections between
violence against women and the ability of women to
participate in conflict prevention and management, as
well as in peacebuilding and development, must be
better understood. Local populations need a focal point
for reporting instances of sexual violence.
Furthermore, sexual exploitation or abuse by United
Nations troops or United Nations staff is totally
unacceptable.
The European Union supports the United Nations
in its efforts to combat violence against women,
including the work of the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Margot
Wallström. The European Union also closely
collaborates with the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,

10-69905

S/PV.6453 (Resumption 1)

Radhika Coomaraswamy, and has recently reiterated its
support for the implementation of the monitoring
mechanism set up by resolutions 1612 (2005) and 1882
(2009) by revising the EU implementation strategy on
children and armed conflict.
I would now like to briefly elaborate on some
recent European Union activities undertaken in
response to resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009),
and complementing individual actions by EU member
States.
Fighting all forms of sexual and gender-based
violence against women and girls, including in armed
conflict but not excluding other situations of concern,
is among the key objectives of the EU’s human rights
policy in external relations. In July 2010, the European
Union adopted 17 monitoring indicators for its
comprehensive approach on the implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008). In addition
to over the €300 million set aside for programmes
addressing the needs and rights of women and girls in
conflict-affected and post-conflict situations in over 67
countries, significant new funds will be made available
for civil society projects.
In October of this year, the European Union and
the African Union organized a joint civil society
seminar on women, peace and security in Addis Ababa.
In 2012, we plan to organize a workshop on the
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions on our two continents, and we are currently
looking for ways to support the training of African
peacekeepers and the African Standby Force in human
rights and gender issues and to increase the number of
women in such contingents.
The European Union has recently conducted the
first-ever lessons-learned exercise on mainstreaming
human rights and gender within its Common Security
and Defence Policy missions and operations. It has just
adopted standard training modules on human rights,
child protection and gender to be used as a baseline
reference by all 27 EU member States.
EU crisis management missions, 13 of which are
currently ongoing, all have advisers or focal points on
gender, and many carry out specific actions in the fight
against sexual and gender-based violence.
In closing, the European Union reiterates its
strong support for the work of the United Nations in
combating sexual violence in armed conflict and

10-69905

warmly welcomes the Secretary-General’s report and
most particularly the resolution adopted yesterday.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I would like to
thank you, Madame President, and the United States of
America, for your initiative to convene this important
open debate. I would also like to thank Margot
Wallström, the Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, for presenting the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/604). I commend all
Council members for the adoption of resolution 1960
(2010), which Portugal had the honour to co-sponsor.
That action-oriented resolution is already a landmark,
and I am convinced that it will indeed make a
difference, especially for women and girls, in so many
parts of the world.
Portugal obviously shares the views that were
expressed by the European Union regarding the
implementation of the resolution, but let me underline
some aspects of particular significance to my country.
The excellent report before us today provides us with a
clear analytical framework for understanding sexual
violence in conflict as a threat to security and an
impediment to peacebuilding in situations on the
Council’s agenda. It also examines the causes and
consequences of sexual violence in local communities,
as well as its consequences for the conflict and the
peace process itself. Moreover, the report provides us
with very useful information on the significant
progress made in implementing resolutions 1820
(2008) and 1888 (2009) with the appointment of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, as well as with the
establishment of a Team of Experts on the Rule of Law,
in order to assist national authorities in reinforcing
judicial systems weakened by conflict.
We must recognize that much has been done. The
legal framework exists. Under international law, the
definition of sexual violence is clear and, depending on
the circumstances, can constitute a war crime, a crime
against humanity, an act of torture or a constituent act
of genocide. These crimes may entail individual
criminal responsibility, including that of commanders.
With the appointment of Special Representative
Wallström and, subsequently, of the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law, with the presence of United
Nations agencies and peacekeeping missions in the
field, the Council should have the tools necessary to
obtain reliable and accurate information on sexual

3

S/PV.6453 (Resumption 1)

violence. This is an issue of particular importance to
helping the Council discharge its responsibilities.
Concerning the Council’s action on this issue, we
believe that the Council has been quite successful but
that it still needs to reinforce its effectiveness. The
mass rapes in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo in July and August emphasize the need for
further action by the international community. We can
certainly consolidate and make full use of existing
tools by ensuring adequate funding for the Office of
the Special Representative and for the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law, and by assessing the need for
women’s protection advisers in relevant peacekeeping
operations.
I would underline two aspects where the Council
could become more effective.
The first aspect is the need to improve the
Council’s access to timely, objective, accurate and
reliable information on sexual violence in situations on
its agenda. In this regard, Portugal strongly supports
the recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General and the decision taken yesterday by
the Council to establish a monitoring and reporting
system on sexual violence in conflict in order to ensure
a coherent and coordinated approach at the field level
and at Headquarters. The good practices of the
mechanisms created by the Council to monitor the
situation of children in armed conflicts should guide
our action, and we hope that these mechanisms will
enjoy the same level of success to combat sexual
violence in armed conflicts.
The second aspect is the Council’s action. Indeed,
a Council that is better informed is also in a better
position to take action. With sufficient information, the
Council will be able to take, in a timely manner,
further steps to influence parties to conflict to comply
with international law and to make specific
commitments regarding the prevention of sexual
violence or the investigation of alleged abuses.
However, if these measures do not restrain the
perpetration of sexual violence, the Council needs to
follow-up on resolution 1888 (2009). In this regard,
Portugal welcomes the decision of the Council to use
information available in the reports of the SecretaryGeneral as a basis for a more focused United Nations
engagement with those responsible for such acts. This
should be understood as sending a clear message to
perpetrators of sexual violence that the Council is

4

ready to apply sanctions to perpetrators who have been
identified or who are credibly suspected of committing
sexual violence in situations of armed conflict on its
agenda.
Finally, let me assure the Council of our constant
support to the Special Representative in her difficult
but very important tasks.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): We
are here today to concretize the strategic lines of action
developed in resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009)
to fight conflict-related sexual violence against women
and girls. We therefore thank you, Madame, for
organizing today’s open debate. We welcome the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2010/604), which provides
an excellent basis for today’s discussion, and wish to
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Margot
Wallström, for her excellent work. Her mandate is
important and challenging. We assure her of our full
support and encourage her to build strong synergies
with the United Nations operational system.
The Secretary-General’s report explicitly states,
and we probably all agree, that this year was further
proof of our inability to prevent sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict. We need to do better in the
future. The recommendations contained in the report of
the Secretary-General indicate the way to advance, and
we fully support them all. In particular, we should like
to highlight the following points and call on the
Security Council to take action accordingly.
First, Switzerland supports the establishment of a
monitoring, analysis and reporting mechanism, as
provided for in resolution 1960 (2010), adopted
yesterday. The mechanism will collect timely,
objective, accurate and reliable information about
conflict-related sexual violence, for example on
incidents, trends and patterns. Such information should
be provided by competent and well-coordinated
sources on the field and serve as a basis for concerted
action by the Security Council. The mechanism should
take into consideration the experience of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism on the six grave
violations against children in armed conflict identified
in resolutions 1612 (2005) and 1882 (2009). With a
separate mechanism for women and girls, the Council
would assure consistency in countering the use of

10-69905

S/PV.6453 (Resumption 1)

systematic sexual violence in conflict situations on its
agenda.
Secondly, it is important to increase pressure on
conflict parties and individuals to comply with
international humanitarian and human rights law, and
to enhance efforts to end impunity for conflict-related
sexual violence. To that end, the Security Council has a
range of tools including, but not limited to, the use of
the sanction system or the competence to refer matters
to the International Criminal Court. We encourage the
Security Council to make full use of the available tools
in order to give teeth to measures concerning women,
peace and security.
Thirdly, we support the idea that all parties to
conflict should prepare specific plans of action for
ending acts of sexual violence in conflict situations on
the Council’s agenda. This would enable the
international community to provide specific support to
the actors concerned in fulfilling their obligations.
Further, it would contribute to a transparent and
objective follow-up by the Security Council. The
deployment of rapid response teams on the rule of law,
as provided for in resolution 1888 (2009), is an
example of such support. In this context, we would like
to mention the Justice Rapid Response initiative,
initiated by Canada and supported by my country. The
initiative provides, for example, rapidly deployable
criminal justice professionals who collect information
in cases of sexual violence in a timely fashion.
Fourthly, we encourage United Nations agencies
to continue efforts to increase the capacity of their
personnel in matters of conflict-related sexual
violence. This is particularly important with a view to
the establishment of a monitoring and reporting
arrangement. Resolution 1888 (2009) introduced the
mandate for women’s protection advisors who, once
operational, will provide additional, important points
of reference for the women-protection efforts.
Finally, we invite the Council to systematically
link thematic and geographical issues. When
considering a conflict situation, it is crucial to include
a thematic perspective, because the thematic issues on
the Council’s agenda are cross-cutting issues. To link
that to today’s subject — as deplorable as it is, sexual
violence has become characteristic of many conflicts.
It therefore calls for a consistent approach by the
Council.

10-69905

Lastly, I should like to reiterate that we fully
associate ourselves with the statement to be delivered
later by the representative of Costa Rica on behalf of
the Human Security Network.
The issue discussed in this open debate is high
among our priorities. We remain committed to
contributing to achieving the goals of resolutions 1820
(2008) and 1888 (2009).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Ms. Štiglic (Slovenia): Allow me first to thank
the United States for organizing this important open
debate. I should also like to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict Margot
Wallström and the Council’s other invitees for their
briefings.
I would also like to align Slovenia with the
statement delivered by the representative of the
European Union and the statement to be delivered by
the representative of Costa Rica on behalf of the
Human Security Network.
In contemporary conflicts, sexual violence is not
a side effect but, rather, a front line consideration.
Civilians, mostly women and girls, are often the
deliberate targets of such violence. Sexual violence in
conflict situations is frequently invisible but rarely
non-existent. The international community was
shocked by the reported mass rapes in the Democratic
Republic of Congo in July and August this year.
However, alarming news on sexual violence is also
coming from other conflict and post-conflict situations.
Sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations takes many forms, not just rape. Under
international law, sexual violence constitutes different
forms of crimes and acts. Although the victims of
sexual violence are predominantly women and girls,
we should not forget that sexual violence is also
committed against boys and men. The current report
(S/2010/604) of the Secretary-General gives a very
good overview of the issue of conflict-related sexual
violence in general, and specifically about the
situations in countries on the Security Council’s
agenda. Slovenia welcomes the progress made in
carrying out the five-point priority agenda of the
Special Representative. We also welcome the
recommendations in Secretary-General’s report.

5

S/PV.6453 (Resumption 1)

It is of the utmost importance to prevent the
continuing sexual violence by fighting impunity. In
that regard, the role of international criminal justice
should be recognized, in particular that of the
International Criminal Court. Slovenia supports the
recommendation to increase pressure on the
perpetrators of sexual violence, as well as those in the
chain of command responsible for such acts, through
the adoption of sanctions and other targeted measures
against individuals and entities by the relevant
sanctions committees.
As timely, objective, accurate and reliable
information is fundamental in addressing conflictrelated sexual violence, Slovenia supports the
recommendation to establish a monitoring and
reporting mechanism that would build on the
experience and practice of the mechanism established
under resolutions 1612 (2005) and 1882 (2009), on
children and armed conflict.
There is yet much to be done in the area of victim
assistance.
Disabled
women
face
heightened
vulnerability to sexual violence and exploitation. It is
commendable that, in recognition of the risk faced by
women maimed or wounded by antipersonnel
landmines, sexual violence has been specifically
included in the 2010 gender guidelines for mine action
programmes that have been developed by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
We look forward to the strategic framework on
civilian protection and the series of scenario-based
training modules, which will also address sexual
violence, that are being finalized by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support. We support the recent United Nations
activities on this issue aimed at finalizing training
materials for United Nations and national police,
including the development of gender guidelines for
military personnel in peacekeeping operations that also
address the protection of women and girls from sexual
violence.
I would like to take this opportunity to inform the
Council that, a month ago, Slovenia adopted its 20102015 national action plan for the implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008). One of the
three main objectives of the plan is to prevent sexual
violence against women and girls and to protect them
during and after armed conflict. Furthermore, the
action plan includes measures to strengthen the role of

6

women in conflict resolution and conflict prevention,
as well as in peacebuilding and peacekeeping.
In conclusion, I would like emphasize that sexual
violence poses an obstacle to peace and security. It
impedes women from participating in peace and
democratic processes and in post-conflict reconstruction
and reconciliation. As a tool of war it can become a way
of life: once entrenched in the fabric of society, it
lingers long after the guns have fallen silent. Many
women lose their health, livelihoods, husbands, families
and support networks as a result of rape. This, in turn,
can shatter the structures that anchor community values,
and with that disrupt their transmission to future
generations. Children accustomed to acts of rape can
grow into adults who accept such acts as the norm. This
vicious cycle must stop, as we cannot accept a selective
zero-tolerance policy. Today’s adoption of resolution
1960 (2010), on sexual violence, is an important step in
that direction. It is for that reason that Slovenia joined
in co-sponsoring it.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia would like to associate itself with the
expressions of gratitude for the holding of this debate,
which will certainly contribute to increasing
understanding and awareness of this tragic aspect of
armed conflict. We would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2010/604), and
Special Representative of the Secretary General
Margot Wallström for her excellent presentation
yesterday.
Allow me first to emphasize the importance of
the role of the United Nations in promoting the
participation of women in achieving peace, security
and development, as well as in the initiatives
undertaken in response to the problem of sexual
violence in conflicts.
Colombia endorses the repeated statements issued
by the Security Council in connection with all acts of
sexual violence and other violence against civilians in
armed conflict, in particular against women and
children. We regret the fact that, despite those
statements, various armed groups continue to commit
such acts.
International efforts by the Organization, in
particular the establishment of UN Women, contribute

10-69905

S/PV.6453 (Resumption 1)

to strengthening coordination and cooperation in the
implementation of mandates on women peace and
security. Broad and inclusive intergovernmental
consultations to assess the gender architecture and the
advancement of women, as well as agreement among
States as to the models and practices to be adopted on
this topic, are fundamental to making progress in
enhancing national capacities to eliminate sexual
violence in conflict.
Strengthening the rule of law as an essential
element in the search for lasting solutions to sexual
violence in conflict is one aspect addressed in the
report of the Secretary General. My delegation would
like to highlight that approach and to encourage the
United Nations to continue to broaden it.
The work done in this area by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
United Nations Development Programme has our full
support.
Resolution 1888 (2009) includes provisions for
increasing the participation of women in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts. We agree that their
participation in that regard contributes to creating an
atmosphere of trust in which women and children can
expose the abuses to which they are subjected. We also
believe that their inclusion can generate greater
participation by women in law enforcement, militaries
and police agencies in countries in which they are
deployed.
For several months, therefore, Colombia has been
a contributor to the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti, providing two female police officers
with a strong background in human rights and the
protection of children and adolescents. Colombia
would like to reiterate its willingness to step up its
contribution in that regard. We hope that, in
implementing resolution 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009),
mechanisms for cooperation, constructive dialogue and
effective support to countries will be promoted. We
also highlight the role that the General Assembly can
play in strengthening cooperation with States in the
complex tasks that have been set out.
Strengthening the role and capacity of women, as
well as justice and the enforcement of their rights, is of
utmost importance for the Government of Colombia. In
that effort, the contribution of the United Nations
system and the international community is essential.

10-69905

Colombia, in its capacity as one of the Friends of
1325, will continue to closely monitor developments in
the area of women and peace and security and
reiterates its commitment to the implementation of
policies, plans and programmes that expand and
strengthen the role of women in peacebuilding.
Ms. Wallström’s dedication, dynamic work and
commitment to this cause deserve our recognition and
all our support.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Puri (India): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for organizing this debate.
There is a saying that all that is necessary for evil
to continue is for good men to do nothing. My
delegation believes that the community of nations must
ensure that the human rights of all are respected.
Universal respect for human rights is, in our view, the
basis of the common and better future that we seek to
build.
The weakest are the biggest victims of conflict
and, as the Secretary-General points out in his report
(S/2010/604), women continue to suffer appallingly in
conflicts. Sexual violence is, according to the report,
not merely a consequence of conflict but a driver. It
perpetuates conflict and locks its victims into a vicious
cycle of violence and oppression. The international
community has not just the responsibility, but also the
obligation to do its utmost to ensure the security of
women and children.
Two important strands of international concern
converge in this debate. These are the struggle to
empower women and the constant endeavour of the
United Nations to preserve peace and international
security.
The struggle to empower women has moved
forward from declaratory resolutions. The Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action, the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women and the Commission on the Status of
Women have been milestones in that journey.
I was myself proactively involved in the creation
of UN Women. We have very high expectations from
that entity.
No country can be absolved from the
responsibility of acting against sexual violence, one of

7

S/PV.6453 (Resumption 1)

the more abhorrent forms of violence against women.
My delegation is committed to international regimes
that further those objectives.
The proceedings of the Council today will add to
the edifice created by resolutions 1325 (2000), 1612
(2005), 1820 (2008), 1882 (2009) and 1888 (2009).
Those and other decisions of the Security Council on,
inter alia, sexual violence, children and the protection
of civilians have led to a significant addition to the
corpus of international law.
We welcome the appointment of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Margot Wallström.
Thanks to the resolve of the international
community the operational and peacekeeping activities
of the United Nations has been oriented towards
recognizing the plight of women and children in
conflict areas and being proactive in working towards
preventing violence against them. India supports those
developments.
The resolution that was adopted yesterday
(resolution 1960 (2010)) and which we sponsored, will
add a number of new dimensions to the ongoing work.
While the objectives of that framework are laudable, its
implementation remains a work in progress. We will,
during our term on the Council, remain seriously
engaged with both the evolution of the normative side
and its implementation.
The monitoring and reporting mechanism, which
is to provide the data on the basis of which the system
is to operate, needs close supervision by Member States
to ensure its veracity and credibility. Data collection
and analysis, as well as listing and de-listing, should be
carried out in a transparent and judicious manner under
the close supervision of Member States.
The Security Council must ensure that the
resources needed to implement its mandates are
available. United Nations missions are being asked to
do more with less. For example, the resolution that was
just adopted will expand the mandate without
expanding already inadequate resources.
Being the largest troop-contributing country in
United Nations history, with more than 100,000
peacekeepers in 40 United Nations missions, India has
perhaps more experience than most in implementing
Security Council mandates. It is indeed Indian troops,
along with the peacekeepers of fellow troop-

8

contributing countries, who convert the intent of this
Council into deed.
We take great pride in the stellar record of our
peacekeepers, both men and women, in the protection
of women, children and the weak. Indian troops have
apprehended some of the principal culprits behind the
recent sexual violence in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We can do much more if more
resources are made available.
Martin Luther King once said that injustice
anywhere diminishes justice everywhere. We believe
that the perpetrators of those crimes must be brought to
justice. Relevant national capacities must be
strengthened.
The Secretariat and the funds and programmes can
do more. We believe that greater participation by women
in the areas of conflict prevention, peace negotiations,
peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction is an
essential prerequisite for lasting peace and security.
We believe that women’s protection advisers have
a key role to play in implementation, and we would be
happy to contribute such personnel. We value the
contributions of civil society in that arena.
I am a member of the Sikh faith. Four centuries
ago, Guru Gobind Singh, at a time when conditions in
India were unstable and conflict-ridden, ordered us to
treat women captured in battle with the greatest
respect. That is the Indian ethos in respect of women,
particularly during situations of conflict. That is what
we are committed to and what we will uphold.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica): It is an honour for
Costa Rica to speak in its capacity as Chair of the
Human Security Network. The Network is a crossregional group of countries that includes Austria,
Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan,
Mali, Norway, Slovenia, Switzerland and Thailand,
with South Africa as an observer.
On behalf of the members, I would like to express
our appreciation for the convening of an open debate
on this important topic and thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Margot Wallström, for the
presentation of the report (S/2010/604).

10-69905

S/PV.6453 (Resumption 1)

The Human Security Network stresses the need to
provide coherent and strategic leadership in the United
Nations on the issue of sexual violence in conflict,
including through the allocation of appropriate
resources in implementing the mandate conferred on
Ms. Wallström by the Security Council in its resolution
1888 (2009). We would like to express our support to
Ms. Wallström and encourage her to build strong
synergies with the United Nations operational system.
Less than two months ago, we celebrated the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000).
Unfortunately,
progress
towards
the
implementation of cross-cutting gender commitments,
especially those aimed at curbing, punishing
perpetrators of and protecting against sexual violence
in situations of armed conflict, has not been
satisfactory. In that respect, we welcome the progress
made on Ms. Wallström’s five-point priority agenda as
a step forward in the process.
The report highlights, inter alia, the challenges
posed by inaccurate information about sexual violence,
inadequate preventive measures and the failure to end
impunity. In the light of such challenges, we strongly
support the efforts of the United Nations system to
establish
monitoring,
reporting
and
analysis
arrangements with regard to conflict-related sexual
violence.
Timely, objective, accurate and reliable
information, verified by the United Nations system, on
conflict-related sexual violence is crucial to addressing
this issue in a comprehensive and systematic manner. It
must be the basis for further action by the Security
Council, including the adoption of sanctions and other
targeted measures, and for including in the SecretaryGeneral’s annual reports to the Council detailed
information on parties to armed conflict who are
credibly suspected of committing or being responsible
for acts of rape or other forms of sexual violence.
As suggested in the report, the arrangements
should take into account experiences gained and
practices developed through the monitoring and
reporting mechanism established pursuant to Security
Council resolutions 1612 (2005) and 1882 (2009) on
children and armed conflict.
Sexual violence, including by parties to armed
conflicts, is unacceptable at any time. We call on all of
them to cease such acts and to make concrete

10-69905

commitments in this regard, as called for in resolution
1960 (2010), adopted yesterday.
All necessary steps, including targeted measures,
must be taken to protect individuals, hold perpetrators
accountable and provide remedy to victims. Ending
impunity for perpetrators and those responsible in
chains of command, including United Nations
personnel, is imperative. The Rome Statute’s
qualification of sexual-related crimes as potential war
crimes and crimes against humanity constituted a
major achievement in the fight against impunity. In this
connection, we urge the Security Council to refer
relevant cases to the International Criminal Court.
The Human Security Network also takes note of
the recommendation regarding the adoption by relevant
sanctions committees of sanctions and other targeted
measures against individuals and entities. In this regard,
the exchange of information among United Nations
peacekeeping missions, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict and the Security Council
sanctions committees will be of great importance.
Women’s full enjoyment of all human rights has
been a priority of the Human Security Network since
its inception. While it is crucial to this agenda that we
maintain momentum in the fight against sexual
violence, we also underline the importance of women’s
empowerment as part of the solution. Sustainable peace
is not possible without the participation of women; and
without the participation of women in laying the
foundations for sustainable peace, sustainable
development may also be hindered in the future.
We particularly welcome the adoption of a new
resolution on sexual violence in conflict. We express
our hope that efforts to combat sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict and its aftermath will be
strengthened in a manner that will support a coherent
and comprehensive United Nations response consistent
with the conceptualization of the newly-created UN
Women.
Neither silence, nor tolerance, nor impunity is an
option when facing the perpetrators. This is a message
that should clearly emanate from the Security Council,
and one that must resonate with us all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya.

9

S/PV.6453 (Resumption 1)

Ms. Ojiambo (Kenya): Kenya welcomes the
leadership shown by the United States in convening
this debate during its presidency of the Council. My
delegation also welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2010/604) on the implementation of
resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009), and supports
the progress described therein while taking note of the
remaining challenges. Kenya further welcomes the
adoption of resolution 1960 (2010) yesterday to
strengthen responses to sexual violence through the
establishment
of
monitoring
and
reporting
arrangements on conflict-related sexual violence.
I wish to also thank the Secretary-General,
Special Representative Wallström, Under-SecretaryGeneral Alain Le Roy and Lieutenant General Gaye for
their insightful briefings yesterday.
In his report, the Secretary-General brings to light
how conflict-related sexual violence has become a
threat to human security, especially for women and
girls. The report also highlights how such violence is
an impediment to socio-economic development and
peacebuilding efforts in countries emerging from
conflict situations. The continued use of sexual
violence as a tactic of war serves as a wake-up call to
all of us that more needs to be done to protect women
and girls from sexual violence.
My delegation would also wish to underscore the
fact that peace, justice and security are interdependent.
There can be no peace without the peace of mind that
enables women to undertake their daily tasks, no
justice without a national capacity to deliver justice,
and no security without women’s security. For this
reason, the issue that we are addressing today —
women and peace and security — is important and
deserves the absolute and unrelenting support of the
international community.
My delegation welcomes the appointment of
Margot Wallström as the first Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
to provide coherent and strategic leadership in the fight
against this vice. We wish her the very best in
executing her mandate. The international attention and
the priority that the diplomatic community ascribes to
her Office are already being demonstrated in the
countries where she has conducted field visits. Her
recent visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
following the mass rapes of over 300 women and girls
in Walikale contributed to the arrest of “Lieutenant

10

Colonel” Mayele, a suspect in the mass rapes. Kenya
believes that her leadership will further serve to bolster
efforts geared towards the fight against sexual violence
in armed conflict.
In armed conflicts, civilian casualties far
outnumber those of armed combatants. While women
and men alike suffer human rights violations in
conflicts, women and girls are more likely to be the
targets of sexual violence, especially rape. Women face
additional and sometimes insurmountable obstacles to
obtaining justice because of the stigma attached to
survivors of sexual violence, their disadvantaged
position in society and cultural challenges.
In this regard, Kenya welcomes the progress
made in establishing the Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law, whose mandate is to assist national authorities
in strengthening the rule of law and facilitating access
to justice for such victims. Kenya supports the
Secretary-General’s call on countries affected by
conflict to draw from this important resource. Member
States are also urged to ensure that the Team has
sustainable funding to facilitate its work.
My delegation appreciates the very important role
that women’s protection advisers will play in
protecting women and girls from sexual violence. Their
support for the monitoring, analysis and reporting
system on sexual violence and their facilitation of
dialogue with parties to conflict are welcome. The
development and implementation of strategies to
combat sexual violence and the mainstreaming of the
elimination of sexual violence into policies and
operations of peacekeeping and political missions are
also welcome.
While Kenya notes the proposal to determine the
need for the advisers on a case-by-case basis, caution
should be taken, however, to ensure that delays in
making such decisions do not lead to undue suffering
for women and girls in conflict situations.
The lifelong negative effects on victims and
perpetrators alike of the use of sexual violence as a
tactic of war, as highlighted in the Secretary-General’s
report, buttress the call for prevention of conflict and,
where conflict exists, for expedient action in ending
the conflict. While recognizing that the primary
responsibility for protecting civilians lies with each
State, the implementation of (2008) and 1888 (2009)
would be better realized through genuine partnerships
between nation States and other international efforts.

10-69905

S/PV.6453 (Resumption 1)

Kenya condemns all forms of violence against
women, including sexual violence, and has always urged
compliance with humanitarian and human rights law
during times of conflict. The appalling situation
regarding the atrocities of sexual violence meted out
against women and girls in conflict situations, especially
in the Great Lakes region and the Horn of Africa, have
to be looked at seriously. As a community of States, we
must rigorously implement the United Nations zerotolerance policy against sexual abuse and exploitation.
We must also provide protection for women and
ensure that putting a stop to war-related sexual violence
is prioritized at the international level. We laud the
crucial work being carried out by agencies such as UN
Women, the United Nations Population Fund and
UNICEF to deal with such issues. Similarly, we need to
galvanize support to put in place the necessary
infrastructure to ensure that victims of sexual violence
receive quality legal and medical assistance.
More women should be involved in peace
mediation and peacebuilding processes. Decisions
should not be made for women. Women must be part
and parcel of a process that affects them. In that regard,
Kenya’s new constitutional requirement that no more
than two-thirds of the members of elected or appointed
bodies shall be of the same gender is a principle that
can be emulated in order to mainstream women into
such processes.
I wish to conclude by reiterating my country’s
commitment to the full and timely implementation of
all Security Council resolutions against sexual
violence, including resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888
(2009) and 1960 (2010). Beyond that, we call on all
parties to conflicts to make specific and time-bound
commitments to ceasing all acts of sexual violence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate your delegation,
Madame President, on its presidency of the Council for
the month of December. We appreciate the initiative to
convene this open debate on such a sad and timely
issue. I would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, his Special Representative for Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Margot Wallström, as well as
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations
Alain Le Roy and Lieutenant General Babacar Gaye
for their briefings yesterday.

10-69905

The Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/604) on
the implementation of resolutions 1820 (2008) and
1888 (2009) lists a series of acts that can only be
described as atrocities committed against women in
various conflict situations currently on the Council’s
agenda. It is hard to believe that such acts can be
perpetrated as mere war tactics deliberately directed at
civilian populations in an environment of complete
insecurity, and therefore complete impunity.
The international community cannot remain
indifferent to such atrocities, nor accept the myth that
rape is an inevitable by-product of war. Doing so
would paralyse any attempt to eradicate such actions.
Sexual violence must be considered a violation of the
victims’ human rights; that being the case, the
perpetrators must be prosecuted, judged and punished.
At the same time, we must step-up awareness-raising
campaigns aimed at the civilian population vis-à-vis
preventing such crimes. And we must urge States to
strengthen protection for girls and women in conflicts.
Regrettably, sexual violence is a constant at all
stages of armed conflict. Often, it is not a matter of
isolated incidents, but instead includes related crimes
such as kidnapping, indiscriminate killing, torture,
looting and forced displacement. The international
community must continue to urge armed groups to end
such abhorrent practices and to work with States to end
the impunity surrounding them.
In Argentina, all selection and training procedures
carried out when deploying a peacekeeping operation
take into account the peacekeeper code of conduct,
including issues of gender, abuse, violence and sexual
exploitation, as outlined in the concepts and terms
established in resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008).
My country would like to congratulate the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative for Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Margot Wallström, on her
appointment and the work she is doing. We also
support the recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General’s report, in particular the following:
first, including in the Secretary-General’s annual
reports lists of those parties who have committed acts
of sexual violence in situations of armed conflict, as a
basis for more focused engagement with the parties
and, where necessary, for the application of targeted
measures; secondly, calling on all parties to a conflict
to make specific and time-bound commitments to cease
all acts of sexual violence; thirdly, establishing a

11

S/PV.6453 (Resumption 1)

monitoring, analysis and reporting system; and, lastly,
that the Security Council systematically consider the
issue of sexual violence when it authorizes or renews
the mandates of peacekeeping and special political
missions.

note of the important work of the network of 13
entities involved in the United Nations Action against
Sexual Violence in Conflict. We hope that it will
receive the support it needs to continue to improve
prevention and early warning mechanisms.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming my
country’s unshakable commitment to combating sexual
violence in situations of conflict. As a demonstration of
that commitment, we were proud to join the
co-sponsors of the resolution 1960 (2010), which the
Council adopted yesterday.

Chile takes a positive view of the following
recommendations in the report. The first is to invite the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
to exchange pertinent information with the Council and
its relevant sanctions committees.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to begin by saying that Chile associates
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Costa Rica on behalf of the Human Security Network.
Chile attaches great importance to the issue of
conflict-related sexual violence, which usually affects
highly vulnerable groups and which represents a threat
to security and a persistent obstacle to peacebuilding,
including in situations addressed by the Council. The
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
which my country has ratified, defines six types of
sexual violence as crimes against humanity.
Accordingly — and in the belief that such violence
should be a priority for those dealing with establishing,
maintaining and building peace, as well as for
humanitarian workers — Chile co-sponsored
resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010).
Those resolutions enable the international community
to focus on prevention and real-time responses, not
merely on the necessary corrective measures.
Believing as we do in the merit of the principles
underpinning those resolutions, we welcome the
Secretary-General’s
comprehensive
report
(S/2010/604) on this subject. We also wish to highlight
the role played by Ms. Margot Wallström’s in fulfilling
her mandate as the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative. We urge her to continue to work
actively and collaboratively while avoiding duplication
of efforts addressed in other mandates. We also thank
her for the field missions she has undertaken, which
have borne eloquent witness to the horrors of this
scourge. In that regard, we were outraged at the largescale violations committed in July and August. We
acknowledge the crucial need to address this scourge in
exemplary, timely and sustainable ways. We also take

12

The second is to assess the advisability of
adopting sanctions and other measures by the relevant
Security Council sanctions committees, as provided in
resolution 1888 (2009), taking into consideration their
short-, medium- and long-term impacts.
Third is to closely assess the usefulness of
including in the annexes to the annual reports lists of
parties responsible for sexual violence in situations of
armed conflict on the Security Council agenda as a
basis for more focused engagement on the parties. In
that connection, we believe that the Council’s work on
children and armed conflict could serve as a guide.
Fourth is to call on parties in situations of armed
conflict on the Council’s agenda to make specific and
time-bound commitments to put an end to all acts of
sexual violence, including clear orders through the
chain of command.
Fifth is to support the efforts of the United
Nations system to establish monitoring and reporting
arrangements with regard to conflict-related sexual
violence; to promote the participation of all concerned
in the analysis of information, including on trends,
patterns and early warning indicators; and to evaluate
and identify targeted actions against perpetrators and
programmatic responses for survivors.
I conclude by thanking the presidency of the
Council for this month, the United States, for having
convened this debate, and by calling on the Council to
engage decisively in the implementation of the
resolutions, which Chile supported together with the
mother resolution 1325 (2000), for which we already
have a national plan. In our opinion, such
implementation will be concrete only if we commit
ourselves to concerted action and accountability as
regards prevention, participation and protection, taking
into account all the stakeholders involved.

10-69905

S/PV.6453 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. De Laiglesia (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of the European Union. As this is the
first time that I address the Security Council as the new
Permanent Representative of Spain, I would like first
to express my gratitude for the opportunity to take part
in this debate.
Sexual violence in situations of conflict, like
gender-based violence in the home, has remained in the
private sphere for far too long. In his report
(S/2010/604) on the implementation of resolutions 1820
(2008) and 1888 (2009), the Secretary-General affirms
that sexual violence used as a weapon of war can
become a way of life that continues once the conflict
has ended. All too often, such violence is invisible and
thereby protected because it is considered a private
aspect of interpersonal relationships. However, we
cannot forget that it is a crime of war, a crime against
humanity and a flagrant breach of human rights.
The situation is exacerbated by the intolerable
impunity that many perpetrators of those crimes enjoy,
which allows the problem to be perpetuated over time
and prevents it from being fought effectively.
Combating that impunity should indeed be our main
priority and tried in the appropriate forums, including
the International Criminal Court.
The body of standards established by resolutions
1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009), as well as
1960 (2010), adopted yesterday by the Council, is the
main tool for combating sexual violence in conflict.
The institutional structure being set up, and led by
Special Representative Ms. Margot Wallström, is also
essential. However, as became obvious at the thematic
debate held by the Security Council (see S/PV.6411) on
the occasion of the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), a body of standards will not be
enough if measures are not applied and implemented.
The new resolution should lead the United Nations as a
whole to combat sexual violence in situations of
conflict even more decisively, ensuring the perfect
coordination of the activities of the various bodies and
relevant entities, including, of course, the new entity
UN Women.
My delegation supports the recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General, and
co-sponsored the resolution submitted to the Council.

10-69905

My Government also supports the Special
Representative’s agenda of priorities and considers it
very important to continue training peace contingents
to combat sexual violence and to consolidate the
institutional structure set out in the resolutions,
ensuring that they have the necessary financing.
My Government is completing the second review
of our national action plan on women and peace and
security, bringing it into line with the provisions of
recent Security Council resolutions and broadening its
provisions on sexual violence in conflict. In that
regard, I am pleased to report three actions that we
have recently undertaken.
First, in cooperation with the Government of the
Netherlands, we have launched a joint civilian-military
training exercise on gender-based violence and the
protection of civilians, as mentioned yesterday by the
Permanent Representative of the Netherlands in his
statement. Secondly, Spanish cooperation funds
activities promoted by civil society to combat sexual
violence in situations of conflict in Colombia, Peru,
Ecuador and Brazil. Finally, in June, the Spanish
criminal code was amended to include a specific
penalty for those violating the sexual freedom of a
protected person in the context of armed conflict.
The international community must continue to
combat sexual violence in conflict at the national,
regional and global levels. We must end the impunity
of perpetrators and provide appropriate compensation
to victims, ensuring that they become agents of change
and peace. The international community can count on
the cooperation of my Government in that undertaking.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Tsiskarashvili (Georgia): At the outset, let
me join previous speakers in commending you,
Madame, for organizing this open debate on a very
important matter. Georgia aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of the
European Union earlier in the debate.
Georgia welcomes the adoption of resolution
1960 (2010) and is proud to be its co-sponsor. We also
welcome the establishment of UN Women and the
appointment of Ms. Bachelet as the first leader of that
body. We are convinced that, under her able leadership,
there will be firm progress in solving problems that are
on the women and peace and security agenda.

13

S/PV.6453 (Resumption 1)

Despite some achievements and the fact that the
issue of women’s rights and peace and security has
been on the agenda of the Security Council and other
relevant United Nations institutions for a decade, we
all recognize that serious challenges remain in
transforming those positive developments into tangible
results. Indeed, women and children are the worstaffected segment of populations in modern conflicts, in
which they are influenced by the degradation of their
living conditions and fundamental rights.
The violation of the rights of women is one of the
principal characteristics of various conflicts across the
world in both conflict and post-conflict situations.
Unfortunately, 10 years since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), the plight of women and girls
in armed conflict is still dire. Regrettably, the war in
Georgia in August 2008 was no exception in that sense.
It resulted in the gross violations of human rights and
fundamental freedoms, including violence against
women.
Due to the sensitive nature of the crime, rapes are
frequently
underreported,
especially
in
war.
Nonetheless, the rape, torture and mutilation of ethnic
Georgian women were by registered by various
international and non-governmental organizations,
including the independent fact-finding mission headed
by Swiss diplomat Heidi Tagliavini. The documented
cases unequivocally prove the involvement of
occupying forces from a neighbouring country and its
proxies in serious violations of women’s rights,
including sexual violence and humiliating treatment,
among the other instruments of ethnic cleansing that
we have witnessed on the occupied territories of
Georgia since the early 1990s.
Even today, the rights and freedoms of Georgian
women are jeopardized in the occupied territories of
Georgia. Human rights watchdogs and international
missions are banned from monitoring the humanitarian
and human rights situation in the occupied territories.
As a result, this situation, which has deteriorated,
remains off the United Nations radar. The continuation
of the current state of affairs cannot be tolerated by the
international community.
Finally, let me reassure the Council that Georgia
supports the efforts of the entire United Nations family
to prevent, and eventually eradicate, violence against
women.

14

The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Margot
Wallström to respond to comments.
Ms. Wallström: First of all, I would like to thank
the President for her determined leadership, and that of
the United States of America, on the issue of conflictrelated sexual violence. I also wish to thank all the
Permanent Representatives and delegations for their
supportive, constructive and, I would say, inspiring
interventions.
With the adoption of resolution 1960 (2010) we
have now been given the tools to fight sexual violence
in conflict and to hold the perpetrators accountable
through international scrutiny and pressure; now we
must use them. A resolution is only as good as its
implementation. And implementation, as we all know,
requires sustained resolve as well as resources.
My team and I will consistently remind the world
of the new consensus that we have forged here in the
Security Council. We will deploy the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law to help Governments to break the
cycle of impunity. We will use the platform of the
United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in
Conflict to ensure a coordinated and coherent response
from the United Nations system, including more
effective prevention, a rapid protection response to
early warning indicators and spikes in sexual violence
and comprehensive support to survivors.
We will continue to amplify in the Chamber the
voices of survivors from war-torn corners of the globe.
We will not rest. We might even be difficult at times.
But, with the Council’s help and continued support, we
can and we will stop this scourge. For the first time, we
will name and shame the perpetrators and track their
actions in order to prevent and punish sexual violence
as an act of war.
Ten years since the Council first considered the
issue of women and peace and security, women now
are watching and waiting all over the world.
The President: I would like to thank
Ms. Wallström very much for the comments she has
just made, for spending time with us and listening to
our views and for her commitment to this issue.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
requested the floor.

10-69905

S/PV.6453 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Tolkach (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): With regard to the statement made by the
representative of Georgia, I would like to recall that, as
a result of Georgia’s armed aggression in 2008, two
independent States were formed — South Ossetia and
Abkhazia — and that there are no occupying forces on
the territory of those States, as such.

10-69905

The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

15
