UNITED NATIONS

8ECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

2257”

MEETING:

11 DECEMBER

1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (SIAgenda12257)

.. .. .. ... ... .. ... .. .. ... ... .. .. ... .. .

Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*.............
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation in Cyprus:“’
Report by the Secretary-General
on the United Nations
Cyprus (S/14275 and Add. 1) *....................*.................*

operation

in

SIPV.2257

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Officicd Records of the Security Council, The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2257th MEETING
-.

Held in New York on Thursday, 11 December 1980, at 11 a.m.
President: Mr. Donald F. McHENRY
(United States of America).

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mavrommatis
(Cyprus), Mr. Kaiapodis
(Greece) and Mr. Kirca
(Turkey) took places at the Council table.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh,
China, France, German
Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics,
United Kingdom
of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

3. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to recall that, in
the course of this morning’s consultations,
the members of the Council agreed that the Council would
extend an invitation to Mr. Nail Atalay under rule 39
of the provisional rules of procedure. If I hear no
objection, I shall take it that the Council decides to
invite Mr. Atalay under that rule.

agenda (S/Agenda/2257)

of the agenda

It was so decided.

The situation in Cy$rus
Report by the Secretary-General
on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus (S/14275 and
Add. 1)
The meeting

4. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them the report of the Secretary-General
on
the United Nations operation in Cyprus for the period
1 June to 30 November
1980 [S/14275 and Add.21.
Members also have before them the text of a draft
resolution [S/14293] which has been prepared in the
course of consultations.

was called to order at II .lO a.m.

Expression of thanks to the retiring

President
5. It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution. Unless
I hear any objection, I shall put it to the vote.

1. The PRESIDENT:
Before proceeding with the
business for this meeting, I should like, on behalf of
the Council, to pay a tribute to the President of the
Council for the month of November,
Sir Anthony
Parsons, representative
of the United Kingdom, for
the great distinction
and high diplomatic
skill with
which he presided over the work of the Council during
the month of November.
Adoption

A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution was adopted
none (resolution 482 (1980)).
One member
voting.

of the agenda

(China)

by I4 votes to

did not participate

in the

6. The PRESIDENT:
I now kcall on the SecretaryGeneral, who wishes to make a statement.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Cyprus:
Report by the Secretary-General
on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus (S/l4275 and Add.1)

7. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have noted the
action just taken by the Council in extending the
mandate of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in
Cyprus (UNFICYP)
for another six months. The
Force will therefore continue to carry out its indispensable function of helping to maintain calm in the
island and creating the conditions in which the search
for a peaceful settlement can best be pursued. As
previously indicated, I plan to achieve certain economies in this regard, and to this end I shall need all
the co-operation of the parties concerned and of the
troop contributors.

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the
members of the Council that I have received letters
from the representatives
of Cyprus, Greece and
Turkey, in which they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion, without the right
to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

8. The Council has also requested me to continue my
mission of good offlces. In my recent report to the
1

.- -__

---

Council jSll4JOO of JJ August 19801, I provided
information about the progress of the intercommunal
talks, which resumed on 9 August and entered their
substantive phase on 16 September. Since then, the
two interlocutors have met almost weekly and have
discussed the four agenda items-Varosha, initial
practical measures, constitutional aspects and terri._ .- tbrial aspects-in a good and businesslike atmosphere.
9. It is my intention, as part of the exercise of my
good offices, to continue to maintain direct personal
contact with the parties from time to time, with a view
to reviewing periodically the progress of the talks and,
as appropriate, exploring procedures that might
facilitate the conduct of the negotiations.
10. I should like to express here my thanks to
Mr. Hugo Gobbi, my Special Representative in Cyprus,
for the dynamism and devotion with which he has
carried out his responsibilities over the past few
months. I also wish to thank once again the Govemments who are making available the contingents of the
Force, as well as the financial contributors who make
possible the continuation of this operation.
11. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker is the representative of Cyprus, on whom I now call.
12. Mr. MAVROMMATIS (Cyprus): I should like at
the outset to extend to you, Mr. President, the heartfelt
congratulations of my delegation on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the month of
December. Your well-known diplomatic skills and
qualities have won the respect of all delegations and we
have no doubt that the Council, under your able
guidance, will discharge its very important functions
successfully.
13. The excellent relations that my country enjoys
with your country and the contribution of your country,
along with that of other friendly countries, to the
quest for a peaceful settlement of the Cyprus problem,
as well as your country’s continuous humanitarian
assistance to alleviate the plight of our refugees, are
for us matters of the utmost importance.
14. The very successful manner in which you conducted the negotiations that led to the adoption of
resolution 482 (1980) is also greatly appreciated.
15. I should like, similarly, to pay a tribute to the
Council President for the month of November, the
representative of the United Kingdom.
16. I should also like to thank you, Mr. President,
and through you all the members of the Council not
only for affording me the opportunity to address the
Council, but also for renewing, with the consent of my
Government, the mandate of UNFICYP, whose
presence remains’ absolutely necessary for the maintenance of conditions conducive to the finding of a
settlement of the Cyprus question.

17. The resolution just adopted welcomes the resumption of the intercommunal talks and, following
the well-established practice, I shall attempt to say a
few words about those talks.
18. By now the third cycle of the talks has been
completed and perhaps the greatest achievement has
been the fact that a constructive and cordial atmosphere has prevailed throughout all cycles. One could
only hope that such an atmosphere, so necessary in
the circumstances, also augurs well for their successful conclusion, because the undeniable fact remains.
that the chasm between the two parties remains as
deep and as wide as it was at the beginning of the
resumed talks.
19. The dialogue has until now been limited mostly
to reiteration of positions and there has been no tangible
progress on important matters of substance, although
there have been limited indications of possible agreement in equally limited areas.
20. We are well aware of the fact that the intercommunal talks might prove to be a painstaking and
protracted process and thus we have had to arm
ourselves with a large stock of patience and good will,
but even patience has its limits.
21. My Government has time and again declared that
we shall do nothing that might directly and adversely
affect the ongoing negotiating process. Consequently,
we have decided to postpone the consideration of
item 23, “Question of Cyprus**, by the General Assembly until its next session, that is, the thirty-sixth
session, and yesterday, in fact, the Assembly adopted
a decision in this regard.’
22. One would certainly agree with the statement of
the Secretary-General in paragraph 52 of his report
that
“the interlocutors will no -doubt have to face at
some point . . . the difficult issue of how and where
to start the actual give-and-take which is the essence
of an effective negotiating process.”
On the other hand one-and this, I presume, includes
the Council-should not lose sight of the fact that
until now all the “taking”, mostly in 1974, has been
from us and any “giving” has also, thereafter, been
by us, and as with everything else there are pragmatic
constraints even on giving and taking.
23. Before concluding this part of my statement,
I should like to reiterate that it is our intention to
work constantly and consistently towards the desired
goal of arriving, through the negotiating process, at
a satisfactory conclusion of the intercommunal talks
based on the high-level agreements, including the
priorities spelled out therein, United Nations resolutions and in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter.

24. Permit me now, in turning to the two most serious
and tragic aspects of the Cyprus drama, namely, those
of refugees and missing persons, to say that we
sincerely hope that we shall arrive at ways and means
for the urgent resolution of these issues.

33. The Greek Government has concurred with the
decision to renew the mandate of UNFICYP until
15 June 1981. In so doing, we are conscious of some
hopeful developments in recent months. The bicommunal talks, as was provided for in the high-level
agreement of 19 May 1979 [S/13369, paru. 521, have at
last resumed. There have been three rounds of talks
covering all four aspects of the problem. Though the -- _
results so far do not appear to be very substantial, the
overall climate has been good. That is essential for the
ultimate success of the talks, because, in the last
analysis, any viable agreement depends on the relations between the two communities and their representatives. The Greek Cypriots and the Turkish
Cypriots have been living together for centuries and
they will go on living together., They can do so only
in mutual trust and co-operation. Undoubtedly, they
have been divided in the past, both recent and remote,
by friction, suspicion and hostility, which give rise to
mutual recriminations. So it is very important to
ensure a fresh start. The bicommunal negotiations
constitute the best, if not the only, means of achieving
this. And in their present form, they may well turn
out to be the last chance for a settlement acceptable
.
to all concerned.

25. Particularly as regards the missing persons, I
should say that we are encouraged both by the
unceasing efforts ofthe Secretary-General here in New
York, in Nicosia and elsewhere to establish the
investigatory body for the tracing of and accounting
for these missing persons in accordance with the
relevant United Nations resolution and by other
efforts in Geneva by the competent group of the
Commission on Human Rights, efforts which may
soon prove to be quite effective in certain directions.
26. In concluding, I should like very much to express
once again to the Secretary-General our thanks and
appreciation for his continued and dedicated efforts.
to arrive at a satisfactory solution of all the aspects of
the Cyprus problem. Our thanks should also go to all
his distinguished collaborators-Messrs. Urquhart,
Perez de Cuellar, Gobbi, Sherry, Gorge, Picco and
Silva-who have also done so much in the right
direction.

34. My delegation has so often stated its position as
regards what is known as the Cyprus problem that it
would be almost superlluous to repeat our views.
The essence of the problem consists in applying the
fundamental principles of the Charter, which have been
reaffirmed in a long series of resolutions of both the
General Assembly and the Security Council. All those
resolutions stress the need to respect the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, constitutional- unity and nonalignment of the Republic of Cyprus and ask for the
withdrawal of all foreign occupying troops, as well as
for the return of all the refugees to their homes. These
principles are so evident and universally accepted that
it is indeed surprising that they have not been impiemented so far. Let us hope that, as I already said, the
present talks between the two communities, under the
auspices of the Secretary-General, will lead to this
desirable end in a not too distant future.

27. Appreciation is also due to the Commander and
to the officers and men of the Force for discharging
their duties in an exemplary manner.
28. Last, but not least, I should like to thank the
troop-contributing countries which not only provide
contingents for UNFICYP, but also shoulder a disproportionate part of the costs thereof. My meeting
with the representatives of these countries only
yesterday on matters of common concern afforded me
yet another opportunity to express our gratitude to
them.
29. A final word of thanks should go to all countries that contribute to the UNFICYP Special Account.
30. Let us all hope that when we meet in six months’
time I shall have much more on the positive side to
report. Ail that is needed is the political will to compromise and to rectify the illegalities of the immediate
past.

35. By the same token I should like to reiterate our
concern over the fact that it has not been possible so
far, because of the lack of co-operation of one of the
parties, to shed light on the fate of some 2,000 missing
persons in Cyprus, a number of whom are of Greek
nationality. .

31. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Greece, on whom I now call.

36. As on previous occasions, my delegation feels in
duty bound to express its deep and grateful appreciation to all those who, in whatever capacity, work
towards an equitable solution of the problem and
towards maintaining peace and calm on the unfortunate island of Cyprus. The Secretary-General has
spared no effort in pursuing this noble task. He is
assisted by very experienced and dedicated collaborators-the Under-Secretaries-General, Mr. Perez
de Cuellar and Mr. Brian Urquhart and their able

32. Mr. KATAPODIS (Greece): I should like to begin
my statement by offering you, Mr. President, my
sincerest congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of December.
Our congratulations also go to the retiring President,
Sir Anthony Parsons. Finally, I should like to thank
you and through you the other members of the Council, for giving me the opportunity to participate in the
present debate.
3

.

-

.-

staff, as well as his Special Representative in Nicosia,
Mr. Hugo Gobbi. The Force Commander, the officers
and men of UNFICYP are doing a splendid job, thus
earning the gratitude of all Cypriots. Countries contributing both troops and money are also of great help
in creating conditions that would facilitate a definitive
settlement. Needless to say, the presence of the
_-- Force on the island should not be considered a substitute for such a settlement.

.

only for the last six years. Furthermore, my Govemment’s opinion and comments concerning the report of
the Secretariat survey team for the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus, annexed to the report,
will be forwarded to the Secretary-General in the near
future.
43. The Council has just adopted resolution 482
(1980). In the third preambular paragraph there is
again the reference to the “Government of Cyprus”.
This reference is misleading since the high-level
agreements of 12 February 1977-Denktag-Makarios
[,!?I12323 of 30 April 1977, para. 5]-and of 19 May
1979-Denktag-Kyprianou--established
the basis
of an independent, bizonal, bicommunal federal
republic and provided for the merging of the two
separate Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot administrations. Therefore, the reference to the “Government
of Cyprus” in the resolution makes it impossible for us
to accept it. Nevertheless, the resolution contains two
basic and operative elements.

37. As another year of international tensions and
turmoil is about to end, and as the agenda of the
United Nations becomes more and more encumbered
with urgent and difftcult issues, it is devoutly to be
wished that one of the oldest problems of the post-war
period will at long last find a solution which would
help heal the wounds of the past and bring peace and
understanding to the ancient land of Cyprus, the
island of Aphrodite.
38. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is
Mr. Nail Atalay, to whom the Council has extended an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

44. Fist, it gives UNFICYP a mandate for another
six months. The Government of the Turkish Federated
State of Kibris declared its decision to give its consent to the extension of the mandate of the Force
until 15 June 1981. But I must emphasize once again
-and I quote from my previous statement-that

39. Mr. ATALAY: Mr. President, I should like to
thank you, and each member of this body, for giving
me the opportunity of addressing the Council.

“If UNFICYP is maintained in the island without
its modus operandi being changed and without its
present mandate being revised, then this situation
will, we fear, create a vested interest in the perpetuation of the status quo in Cyprus. The circumstances prevailing at present in the island and the
chronic deficit of the UNFICYP account are factors
which have important bearing on the mandate of the
Force as originally defined in Security Council
resolution 186 (1964),” [2230th meeting, para. 47.1

40. On behalf of my Government and on my own
behalf, I should like to take the opportunity to thank
and express our gratitude to the Secretary-General,
without whose persistent and untiring efforts the intercommunal talks would not have been resumed and
would not have continued satisfactorily. Our thanks
and gratitude also go to his staff in the Secretariat
and in the field, and to those military and civilian
personnel who have been involved in efforts to find a
just and lasting solution to the Cyprus problem.

45. Secondly, the resolution renews the mission of
good offices of the Secretary-General in the intercommunal negotiations. My Government wholeheartedly welcomes and supports this renewal. We
will spare no efforts in helping our dedicated SecretaryGeneral in his exalted task towards achieving positive
and constructive results.

41. In August last, the last-minute concurrence of
the two national communities, namely, the Turkish
Cypriot and the Greek Cypriot, was obtained for the
resumption of the intercommunal talks. That such a
concurrence was obtained is due exclusively to the
patience, tenacity and diplomatic skill of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Waldheim. We also value highly the
efforts of Under-Secretaries-General Mr. Urquhart
and Mr. Perez de CuelIar, their aides, Mr. Sherry and
Mr. Picco, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in Cyprus, Mr. Gobbi, and the Force Commander, Major-General Quinn, in the fulfilment of their
functions.

46. Finally, on behalf of my Government, I wish to
reiterate our position that direct intercommunal talks
onan-equal footing under the auspices ofthe SecretaryGeneral, in accordance with his opening statement of
9 August [S/14100, annex], is the best approach to a
just and final settlement of the question of Cyprus.

42. We have carefully studied the report of the
Secretary-General. That report provides us with a
factual assessmentof the situation prevailing in Cyprus
at the present time. We note in particular that the situation in Cyprus continued to be quiet during the period
under review. But it is important to point out here once
again that Cyprus has known continuous tranquillity

47. But also allow me to emphasize once again,
before the Council and at this very important
juncture, that the basic prerequisite of a lasting and
just solution to the problem of Cyprus is the disappearance, even if gradually, of the mistrust which
has originated from the tragic events of the past and
its replacement by an increasing desire for co-operation
4

1
I

1

among the communities.
We are hoping that the Greek
Cypriots will now show their earnest desire for such a
productive. co-operation.
The Turks of Cyprus continue to be prepared to help in the creation of the
feeling of mutual trust.

53. As for the resolution
which has just
adopted, I have three comments to offer.

been

54. My first comment concerns the third preambular
paragraph. The reference in that paragraph to “the
Government of Cyprus” is not in keeping either with
legal truth or factual reality. As Turkey has explained
its point of view on this terminology
on a number of
occasions, I shall limit myself today to saying that our
reservation on this paragraph has not altered and
retains all its validity. Accordingly,
I should like to
inform the Council that Turkey’s support for the implementation of the terms of this resolution on Cyprus
remains conditional upon the exclusion of this concept
of “the Government of Cyprus” as it now appears.

48. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Turkey, on whom I now call.
49. Mr. KIRCA
(Turkey)
(interpretation
from
French): Mr. President, may I first of all express to you
the gratitude of the Turkish delegation for the discretion and objectivity
which you have demonstrated
during the consultations you have conducted on the
question under discussion.
50. I should have preferred to be in a position not to
have to ask to be allowed to speak today, because
I think that, for all those interested, silence would
have been the best attitude in view of the positive and
constructive atmosphere of the intercommunal
talks
which are in progress in Cyprus. I should have
preferred it because our desire was to avoid any unnecessary polemics and accusations which lead only
to consequences unfavourable for the conduct of those
talks. That is still our desire. Nevertheless, I cannot
help but think that the Council could well have dispensed with the interventions
of the parties directly
concerned, and that a procedure similar to that used
yesterday by the General Assembly could have been
followed. l

55. The second comment
I should like to make
consists of informing the Council that Turkey’s various
reservations and positions on the subject of the earlier
resolution mentioned
in the resolution also remain
valid.
56. May I now formulate a third and last comment.
In the opinion of the Turkish delegation, the wording
of this resolution does not reflect sufficiently
the
developments of the last six months. Indeed, the adoption of the penultimate
resolution of the Council on
the same subject took place at a time when intercommunal talks had not yet resumed. At that time it
was therefore entirely natural and acceptable for the
Council to invite the two Cypriot communities
to
resume those talks on the basis of the lo-point
agreement. But in fact the talks were resumed, not
only on the basis of the high-level agreement of
12 February 1977 and the IO-point agreement of 19 May
1979, but also on the basis of the opening statement
of the Secretary-General
of 9 August, which refers to
those two agreements and complements
them by
certain elements of capital importance. These talks are
at present taking place on the basis of that statement,
and it could not be otherwise. It would therefore have
been much more in keeping with both historical reality
and diplomatic reality to refer in the resolution to the
opening statement of the Secretary-General.
Accordingly, the Turkish delegation interprets the last paragraph of the preamble and paragraph 2 in the sense
that I have just indicated, because we know that the
maintenance of the former wording is due solely to
practical considerations on the part of members of the
Council and that the Council, having taken note of the
report of the Secretary-General,
is certainly aware of
this important development,
which, in fact, made it
possible for the intercommunal
talks to resume and
still enables them to continue.

51. I would request you therefore, Mr. President, to
be good enough to bear with me in order that I may
bring to the knowledge of the Council a few observations on the report of the Secretary-General
and on the
resolution which has just been adopted. I would request
the members of the Council, as well as all the parties
concerned who are present here, not to take this in any
way as an allocation of blame or as accusations.
52. The Secretary-General has described the situation
prevailing in the island during the period covered by
his report as calm, and has given us details of the
meetings which were held in the context of the intercommunal
talks. That report supplies us with an
objective and realistic account of the developments
of the past six months. Although there may be a few
details on which my delegation has some difficulty,
I feel that this is not the moment to discuss them.
Having said that, I should like once again to express
our profound gratitude to the Secretary-General,
who
has succeeded in persuading the Turkish community
and the Greek community
of the island to resume
their talks, which, in the opinion of my Government,
are the best route in the search for a peaceful, just
and lasting solution to the problem of Cyprus. I note
with satisfaction the positive statements made by the
Greek side in the same sense. My Government
accordingly reaffirms its full support for the SecretaryGeneral in his mission of good offices in Cyprus, and
assures him that it remains resolved to help to facilitate
his very arduous task.

57. The resolution just adopted extends the mandate
of UNFICYP
for another six months. My Govemment accepts this renewal in view of the fact that the
Council has just been officially informed by Mr. Nail
Atalay, the representative of the Turkish Federated
State of Kibris, of the consent of its authorities thereto.
Nevertheless, I should like to note that Mr. Atalay’s
5

,

statement laid stress on the need for a revision of the
mandate of the Force, which dates back to 1964, so
as to adapt it to the current circumstances and to the
decreasing dimensions of the problem.
58. Before concluding, permit me once again to thank
the Secretary-General for the tireless efforts he is
constantly making, with complete impartiality, in the
United Nations activities in Cyprus. The Secretary
General continues to elicit our admiration for his
tenacity, his patience and his skill in his work on the
, question of Cyprus. My. Government and I wish him
every success.

like to limit myself to noting the recent and most
substantial progress achieved at Nicosia, thanks again
to the efforts of the Secretary-General, in devising an
acceptable formula agreeable to the two communities.
I would recall that it is only by working within that
framework that a satisfactory solution can be found to
this distressing problem.
62. The PRESIDENT: I see that the representative
of Cyprus wishes to speak and I now call on him.
63. Mr. MAVROMMATIS (Cyprus): I shall be :
extremely brief, Sir, in making very short replies on
two points raised by the representative of Turkey.

59. I should not wish to conclude without saying a
word of thanks for the highly important and constructive contributions of Mr. Perez de CuCllar and
Mr. Brian Urquhart, Under-Secretaries-General, and
those of Mr. George Sherry and Mr. Giandomenico
Picco. The efforts of Ambassador Hugo Gobbi,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Cyprus, and those of Mr. Remy Gorge, his assistant,
are likewise highly appreciated by the Turkish
Government.

64. The first refers to the third preambular paragraph of the resolution just adopted. My short reply
is, first, reference to the record and to the statements
we made in connection therewith in the past; secondly,
my very presence here in the capacity in which I am
acting.
65. As regards the second point, that is to say, the
opening statement made by the Secretary-General,
I should like to say that a close study of that statement and the framework within which it was made
reveals its status perfectly clearly.

60. My Government’s thanks are also extended to
the Governments of all the States which have contributed and which continue to contribute to the Force.
Through Major-General James J. Quinn, Commander
of UNFICYP, I should like to express our thanks
and congratulations to the gallant officers, noncommissioned offtcers and men of the Force for the
valuable services they have rendered to the cause of
peace.

The meeting rose at II .55 a.m.

NOTE

61. I should like to say one more word, on the
subject of missing persons. In that regard, I should

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

I Oficial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-f$th
Plenary Meetings, 89th meeting.

00300

83-61462-September

Session,

19864,050
