United Nations

Security Council

S/PV.8886 (Resumption 1)
Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8886th meeting

Thursday, 21 October 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kimani . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kenya)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Yan Binghan
Ms. Kesler
Ms. Lebbatenz
Mr. Mathur
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Hima Moussa Dioula
Mr. Mundal
Mr. Kuzmin
Ms. Andrews
Mr. Cherif
Ms. Ghazi-Bouillon
Ms. Kroeker-Maus
Mr. Phan

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security (S/2021/827)
Letter dated 13 October 2021 from the Permanent Representative of Kenya to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2021/875)

In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the Security Council
addressed to Permanent Representatives of Security Council members dated 7 May 2020
(S/2020/372), which was agreed in light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic, this official record of the Security Council will be supplemented by
a compilation of annexes (S/2021/886) containing the statements submitted by interested
non-members of the Council.

21-29893 (E)
*2129893*

S/PV.8886 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

The meeting resumed at 3 p.m.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to limit
their statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Flashing lights on the collars of the microphones will
prompt speakers to bring their remarks to a close after
four minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Sweden.
Ms. Eneström (Sweden): I am delivering this
statement on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.
The calls from civil society continue to be loud
and clear. In recent months alone, we have heard, in
this Chamber, women peacebuilders and human rights
defenders from Afghanistan, Libya, Somalia, the
Sudan, Syria, Yemen and others, describe the needs of
their communities and ask for women’s voices to count
in all peace and security efforts. We also continue to
hear that these actors are forced into a dilemma. They
must choose whether to speak up, defend their rights and
promote a better future for their societies or prioritize
their own safety and survival. That is unacceptable and
constitutes a threat — not only to the actors themselves,
but to us all.
The Nordic countries thank Kenya, in particular,
for focusing today’s debate on women leaders at the
grass-roots level. They are at the heart of the women
and peace and security agenda and lead the way towards
transformative change.
As we look ahead, the Nordic countries would like
to stress several points.
First, local women and women civil society
representatives need to directly inform peace and
security efforts. Experiences from the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali show that gender-balanced engagement
teams have significantly improved the Mission’s
exchanges with local women and led to more inclusive
dialogues. In our own region, field missions of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
are in close dialogue with women civil society actors
to inform efforts. We need to further institutionalize
such positive practices and link local initiatives to
formal peace talks. Furthermore, women civil society
briefers’ recommendations to the Security Council
and other decision-makers must be reflected in
2/30

21/10/2021

outcomes, and briefers need to be updated on how their
recommendations are taken forward. Promoting the role
and impact of women also requires funding. The Nordic
countries focus on long-term, flexible and core funding
to advance the women and peace and security agenda,
including through women’s rights organizations and
other civil society actors that work for gender equality.
Secondly, the inextricable link between participation
and protection needs to be significantly strengthened.
In that context, we welcome the recommendations in
the open letter issued by the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security and signed by over
380 civil society organizations. We call on the United
Nations and its Member States to adopt mechanisms
for preventing and addressing reprisals against women
civil society actors. However, an increased focus on
protection cannot replace, or come at the expense of,
the promotion of women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation. We need to promote participation,
protection and prevention simultaneously.
Thirdly, we need to invest in what drives peace.
The women and peace and security agenda plays a key
role in expanding the way we define security, making
it clear that a military understanding of security only
captures one of numerous factors that make up human
security. In addition to peace and political processes, we
need to invest in socioeconomic welfare, human rights,
gender equality, as well as disarmament, development,
humanitarian assistance and climate action. We urge all
actors, particularly the Security Council, to adopt this
holistic approach. In this work, advice from relevant
actors, including the Peacebuilding Commission, is
essential. We also welcome that the Secretary-General
puts a special emphasis on these aspects in his recent
report on women and peace and security (S/2021/827).
As we take stock today, it is with a sense of
frustration. Twenty-one years after the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), women are still asked to justify
their inclusion in peace and security efforts. To help
create the radical shift that is needed, women and girls
need to be at the centre of security policy, as highlighted
in the Secretary-General’s Our Common Agenda. The
Nordic countries are continuously utilizing systematic
gender mainstreaming, investing in gender-responsive
leadership and pushing forward with our comprehensive
support for the women and peace and security agenda.
Before closing, we want to sincerely thank Kenya
for enabling non-Security Council members to address
21-29893

21/10/2021

Women and peace and security

the Council in person at this open debate. We urge all
Council members to do the same.
Finally, making the women and peace and security
agenda a reality requires a systematic focus throughout
the year. We warmly welcome the trio initiative by
Ireland, Kenya and Mexico, as it is a decisive step
towards making this agenda a given in all peace and
security discussions. We hope to see more initiatives in
future. Making this agenda a reality also takes targeted
efforts, which brings me back to where I started — the
women peacebuilders and human rights defenders. We
need to invest in them and their recommendations. That
is what truly drives peace. The Nordic countries stand
ready to do our part.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Park Jang-ho (Korea): The Republic of Korea
aligns itself with the joint statement made by the
representatives of Canada, on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security, and Australia,
on behalf of the MIKTA countries, namely, Mexico,
Indonesia, the Republic of Korea, Turkey and Australia.
It is of our great pleasure to attend the first in-person
Security Council open debate since the outbreak of the
coronavirus disease pandemic. My delegation would
like to express our sincere appreciation to Kenya and
the other Council members for taking note of the
interest from the larger United Nations membership
to participate in person in today’s open debate and
taking impeccable precautions to make possible safe
participation in an inclusive debate.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General and the
newly appointed UN-Women Executive Director for
their informative briefings. My delegation would also
like to take this opportunity to congratulate her on
her appointment.
This year marks the thirtieth anniversary of the
Republic of Korea’s membership in the United Nations.
Since our admission to the United Nations back in
1991, the Republic of Korea, along with other Member
States, have witnessed a significant normative progress
in peace, political and security decision-making
processes. That includes the adoption of landmark
resolution 1325 (2000) and its subsequent and related
resolutions in this Chamber.
However, there is much to be done to address the
heightened risk of sexual violence and gender inequality

S/PV. 8886 (Resumption 1)

around the globe. For example, as presented in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2021/827), women in
Afghanistan have been prevented not only from peace
negotiations, but also from participation in public life.
In other parts of the world, including in Myanmar and
Belarus, women are attacked, tortured or detained for
their participation in political protests. Under such
circumstances, our endeavours and partnership to
ensure the full, equal and meaningful participation of
women in peace processes are all the more important.
My delegation would like to reaffirm our commitment
to participating in global efforts to implement the
women and peace and security agenda.
In particular, the Republic of Korea has been a strong
advocate of the survivor-centred approach in responding
to conflict-related sexual violence. Later this year, as a
part of an ongoing global campaign — the Action with
Women and Peace initiative — the Republic of Korea
will host the third international conference on conflictrelated sexual violence in Seoul on 25 November.
The theme of the conference will be “Strengthening
women’s roles and leadership in building and sustaining
peace through the survivor-centred approach”. It is our
expectation that the conference will provide a platform
to allow the voices of women and survivors of conflictrelated sexual violence to resonate around the world.
During our term as an elected member of the Council
back in 2013 and 2014, the Republic of Korea drew up
its first national action plan for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) for the period from 2014
to 2017, while underscoring gender mainstreaming
across the wide spectrum of Government policies. In
addition, we have been actively engaged in Council
discussions on encouraging women’s participation
in conflict resolution and peacebuilding, including
deploying gender advisers in peacekeeping operation
missions. It is a source of pride that, for many years, my
delegation has made a meaningful contribution to this
important discussion.
Advancing the role of women in peacekeeping
remains significant. In line with the Uniformed Gender
Parity Strategy 2018-2028 of the Department of Peace
Operations, the Republic of Korea will do its utmost to
increase to 25 per cent the number of women participants
in United Nations peace operations by 2028. As the host
of this year’s United Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial
Conference, the Republic of Korea is determined to
mainstream the women and peace and security agenda
throughout the entire programme of the Ministerial

21-298933/30

S/PV.8886 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

Conference. The Republic of Korea remains firmly
committed to ensuring that the voices of women in
peace operations are duly recognized, and will continue
to contribute to the promotion of the women and peace
and security agenda.
Back in August, the Republic of Korea brought 391
persons of merit from Afghanistan to Korea. More than
half of them are women and girls. One of the Afghan
girls who now resides in Korea said in a recent media
interview that she was simply happy to be learning
taekwondo in Korea with other girls and boys, and she
likes the idea of having the freedom to choose the kind
of life she wants.
When these persons of merit arrived in Korea,
many believed that Korea had changed their lives.
However, as it turns out, they are bringing changes to
the Korean society, with their renewed sense of hope
and fierce determination to pursue their dreams.
With that in mind, I again thank Kenya for hosting
today’s meaningful debate and look forward to the
international community creating more opportunities
for women and girls around the world, through our
common efforts to implement the women and peace and
security agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): The
United Arab Emirates, too, thanks Kenya for organizing
this year’s open debate on women and peace and
security, and welcomes the Secretary-General’s strong
statement on the matter earlier today.
We align our statement with that delivered on behalf
of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
We commend Ireland, Kenya and Mexico for
spotlighting those important issues and for their
trio presidency.
We also congratulate the new Executive Director of
UN-Women, Ambassador Sima Bahous, and reiterate
our support for the Organization’s crucial efforts and
for the critical recommendations she outlined in her
briefing earlier today.
As she outlined, the intensification of such crises
as traditional conflict, pandemics and climate change
underscores the urgent need for strengthened investment
in women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The
coronavirus disease and new conflicts have added to the
4/30

21/10/2021

overwhelming evidence that women are often impacted
by crisis earliest and longest. That is particularly
damaging because women’s well-being is a barometer
of the stability of their communities. Fostering the
root causes of peace is therefore dependent on robust
investment in women. Their experiences, needs and
perspectives must inform the conception and execution
of United Nations missions on the ground and in
the boardroom.
In the past two decades, we have witnessed the
evolution of the agenda’s normative framework. It is
now time to prioritize implementation with robust
enforcement mechanisms. To that effect, the United Arab
Emirates proposes the following recommendations, in
line with the Secretary-General’s focus on partnership,
protection and participation.
First, including gender expertise in the planning
and design of mission transitions is essential to their
success and needs to be a key performance indicator
for better accountability. All actors, leaders or
technical experts who design and prepare for peace
operations must be compelled to incorporate a range
of perspectives, including from local women. Gender
markers and gender advisers must become part of
standard operating procedures to ensure sensitization
and accountability.
Earlier this year, the United Arab Emirates
launched the Sheikha Fatima bint Mubarak Women,
Peace and Security Centre of Excellence, which will
provide that research, training and exchange of best
practices to bolster the inclusive approaches to peace
and security that we are looking for.
Secondly, the participation and inclusion of women
throughout the conflict continuum cannot be haphazard
or an afterthought. It must happen early, intentionally
and consistently if peace operations and processes are
to be responsive to women’s needs. There are proven
and diverse tools, from quotas to women’s advisory
boards, and each United Nations mission must utilize
them against systematized performance indicators.
Member States and the United Nations itself must
also play a part in it. While the numbers of women in
leadership positions within the United Nations have
increased, currently, only 8 of the 23 senior officials
in the field are women. Partnership and funding will
amplify all our efforts and turbocharge closing that gap.
The United Arab Emirates is therefore proud to fund
both UN-Women and the United Nations Department of
21-29893

21/10/2021

Women and peace and security

Political and Peacebuilding Affairs to enable systematic
communication and engagement with local women in
conflict resolution from the outset.
The women and peace and security agenda is
multifaceted. Its success requires a collective effort by
actors across all sectors, including more targeted and
business-friendly galvanization of the private sector.
Policy alignment and shared metrics in the nexus women
and peace and security, climate change and humanitarian
relief are especially urgent and the core focus for the
United Arab Emirates, including in our candidacy
for President of the twenty-eighth Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change in 2023. The five-year Compact on
Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian Action,
developed under the Generation Equality Forum, is
also key for implementing an intersectional approach.
As both a board member and a signatory, the United
Arab Emirates encourages all stakeholders to join.
Sadly, the singular ways conflict affects women are
again in full view in the international community today.
But we know that women are not only victimized by
conflict; they are also true agents of peace. Indeed, the
women and peace and security agenda is not a nice-tohave or box-ticking exercise for the Chamber or for many
Council members. It is not incidental to the concerns of
this organ; it is necessary for its core mandate. When we
join the Council in January, the United Arab Emirates
will continue supporting that unrivalled investment in
peace, security and economic prosperity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Ms. Joyini (South Africa): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate Kenya for its leadership of the Security
Council for the month of October.
We thank Secretary-General Guterres for his
remarks, and Ambassador Sima Bahous, Ms. Bineta
Diop and Ms. Celia Umenza Velasco for their valuable
briefings. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
most recent report on women and peace and security
(S/2021/827) during the twenty-first anniversary of the
women and peace and security agenda.
Allow me to highlight the following key points.
For South Africa, women and peace and security
remains one of the most transformative agendas as it
recognizes the crucial role that women play in peace
processes, peacebuilding, conflict prevention, mediation

S/PV. 8886 (Resumption 1)

and negotiations. Investing in the participation of local
women in peacebuilding and peacekeeping settings
can help address the barriers to women’s participation
in such processes. Equally important is funding and
directing resources to women-led peacebuilding
organizations on the ground. Gender equality should
be an integral part of peace processes and agreements.
The onset of the coronavirus disease pandemic has
also added a new layer of complexity to the women and
peace and security discourse and has required all of us
to build on how the international community prevents,
addresses and responds to global health crises and their
impact on the women and peace and security agenda. In
responding to the challenges on the ground posed by the
pandemic, as well as the opportunities it has presented
for the women and peace and security agenda, the
United Nations, Governments, regional organizations
and the private sector must deepen partnerships. That
would ensure that local gender expertise and gender
analysis are mainstreamed into the planning and the
implementation of transitions from peacekeeping
to peacebuilding.
South Africa fully supports the Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which underscores
the importance of enhancing the women and peace
and security agenda in peacekeeping operations.
United Nations peace operation mandates can and do
contribute to the implementation of women and peace
and security commitments at all levels by increasing
women’s quotas, paying increased attention to the
quality and contributions of women’s participation,
and addressing the challenges faced by women
peacebuilders and peacekeepers.
Through its national action plan, South Africa has
committed to and continues to intensify interventions
geared at supporting and enhancing the role of women
in peacebuilding processes. Those interventions
contribute towards reducing the gap in women’s
underrepresentation in mediation, negotiations and
leadership positions. We do that through local and
regional peacebuilding initiatives, notably the capacitybuilding programmes for women and youth mediators,
the Gertrude Shope Annual Dialogue Forum, the
Gertrude Shope Women Mediators Network, the
Women’s Peace Table and the Charlotte Maxeke African
Women’s Economic Justice and Rights Initiative. All
those initiatives are part of our national action plan and
take forward the legacy and efforts of South African

21-298935/30

S/PV.8886 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

female pioneers who focused on women’s rights
and emancipation.
Let me conclude by hailing African women
peacebuilders. They are fierce and determined to be
agents for change. They have the capacity and the
capability. Additionally, there are solid instruments
within the African Union to guide the work that needs
to be done. Ms. Diop this morning touched on some of
those frameworks. What is now needed is international
solidarity, determination and commitment to ensuring
their full participation in peace processes that affect
their lives.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Namibia.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): Namibia thanks you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on
the issue of women and peace and security. We are
encouraged, as always, by the overwhelming support
for this open debate. We thank the Secretary-General
and all the briefers for their invaluable input to this
meeting this morning.
As the initiator of resolution 1325 (2000), Namibia
has maintained a leadership role over the past 20 years.
We solidified that role by launching an International
Women’s Peace Centre in Windhoek, on 31 October
2020, during the twentieth anniversary of the resolution.
The Centre’s objective is to be a centre of excellence
that captures a unique niche of innovative distinction
among institutions working with women and peace
and security worldwide by taking on the challenge
of further conceptualizing and operationalizing the
concept of women’s influence in peace processes.
Further, the Centre’s main functions will be general
advocacy for the women and peace and security agenda
on networking and partnerships and on capacitybuilding and training. In that regard, Namibia commits
to elevating women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation in peace processes.
Women’s meaningful participation in peace
processes and humanitarian action is particularly
important as it is at the core of resolution 1325 (2000).
For Namibia, some bold decisions over the past several
years, including introducing a gender quota in national
politics, has resulted in women taking up 47 per cent
representation in the National Assembly today. We
hope to extend that to women in the security sector via
the programmes that the Peace Centre will work on.
6/30

21/10/2021

The full, equal and meaningful participation
of women and girls in conflict and post-conflict
situations is crucial, and within the African context,
Namibia remains a champion of the agenda, especially
in our region via the Southern African Development
Community and African Union mechanisms and through
our troop contributions to peacekeeping missions.
Public health emergencies have a differentiated
impact on women and men owing to gender roles
and structural gender inequalities, which are often
intensified in conflict-affected countries. The outbreak
of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
proved no different. Despite the negative impacts of
the pandemic, not only has COVID-19 provided an
opportunity to build more peaceful, inclusive and just
societies, it has also highlighted how critical the women
and peace and security agenda is. The agenda provides
an important perspective from which to understand
and respond to conflict and instability. It recognizes
the stratified impact of conflict on women and girls
and places women at the centre of efforts to prevent its
outbreak and achieve sustainable peace.
As we continue to grapple with the COVID-19
pandemic, we must not be distracted from the zerotolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse, nor
must we allow impunity for violations of that policy.
In the context of conflict, therefore, our call for action
continues to be to ensure that as we focus on and bring
all our energy to the battle against COVID-19, we
maintain a clear lens on peacekeeping operations.
We should develop strategies to promote women’s
participation in decision-making, including engagement
with national electoral systems and political parties to
provide an equal playing field for women candidates.
There is also a need to support leadership development
for women and girls so that we assist them in cultivating
their political potential and professional skills.
There is a need for an increased integration of
gender in national planning and budgeting as part of
our strategies to train national officials to execute plans
and programme, and hence strengthen the abilities of
women to advocate for decision-making positions and
political leadership in general.
In addition, we should broaden the space for
women’s participation in peace processes, including
by training women mediators and advocating gender
equality measures, as critical to security policies
and practices.
21-29893

21/10/2021

Women and peace and security

The increasing trajectory in military spending
highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2021/827) is of great concern. We must remember
that the women and peace and security agenda is
a means to an end, and that end is ensuring just and
peaceful societies, as well as lasting peace. Increased
military spending does not speak to that overall goal.
We must make efforts at the national level to reverse
that trend. As we celebrate the continued growth of the
depth of the women and peace and security agenda,
Namibia remains quick to caution that we must guard
against an overburdened agenda, which runs the risk of
losing its focus and value.
In conclusion, we would like to draw attention to
the strong set of recommendations compiled by the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative earlier this year,
which speak directly to the challenges of barriers to
women’s participation in peacekeeping, and we call
on all Member States and United Nations agencies to
implement them.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Espinosa Cañizares (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): I highlight Kenya’s work during its presidency
of the Security Council and its leadership in heeding the
request of the majority of delegations to resume more
inclusive and enhanced methods of participation. What
better opportunity is there to do so than on the occasion
of this open debate commemorating the twenty-first
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
on women and peace and security?
In the 2020 review of the peacebuilding
architecture, Ecuador contributed to the assessment
of the situation of women in conflict contexts.
We regret that during the pandemic, there has
been an increase in domestic violence, conflictrelated sexual violence, trafficking, harassment and
exploitation. Simply facilitating women’s participation
in responses to the crises would promote social
cohesion, development and the prevention of violence.
Although it has been proven that peace agreements
facilitated or negotiated by women last longer — and,
on that basis, the Council and the General Assembly
have encouraged the greater participation of women
at the local, regional and international levels — the
percentage of women mediators remains low.

S/PV. 8886 (Resumption 1)

Similarly, although the number of women in peace
operations may have increased slightly in the first
quarter of 2021, their participation in peace processes
remains drastically low, as we anticipated at the Arria
Formula meeting of the Security Council on 8 March
and as reflected in the statistics contained in the
report of the Secretary-General issued in September
(S/2021/827). How many more reports of the SecretaryGeneral do we need to overcome that situation? How
many more women and girls must lose their lives,
whether in or outside of conflict situations?
Our achievements remain far more modest than the
outstanding challenges we face. There is no time to lose;
it is time to take action and make investments. For that
reason, Ecuador appreciates the fact that the SecretaryGeneral’s report entitled Our Common Agenda
focuses on security policies revolving around women
and girls, based on conclusive observations of the
connection between the equal participation of women
in peacemaking activities and their effectiveness.
I would like to point out that Ecuador’s Minister of
Government, who is in charge of internal security, as
well as the General Commander of the National Police,
are both women. Furthermore, Ecuador is in the process
of incorporating more women in United Nations peace
missions, where we already have women observers.
We are only 24 months away from the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights; what better way to commemorate it than by
working towards its effective implementation?
In that context, Ecuador reiterates its commitment
to continuing to promote gender equality and the
empowerment of women, as well as their participation
in peacebuilding efforts and processes to enhance
international security. The Peacebuilding Fund has
supported institution-building activities in the border
area between Ecuador and Colombia. The SecretaryGeneral’s report on the Peacebuilding Fund (A/75/735)
reports that some 450 women on the ColombianEcuadorian border have helped to formulate community
strategies to prevent gender-based violence. The Fund’s
contribution is valuable, but much more is needed.
Ecuador co-sponsored resolution 2538 (2020),
in which we urge the Secretary-General to continue
implementing the system-wide strategy on gender parity
and the gender parity strategy for uniformed personnel.
Finally, Ecuador, which aspires to be elected to
the Council for the period 2023-2024, will continue

21-298937/30

S/PV.8886 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

to support the efforts of this principal organ in the
development and implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Marschik (Austria): Austria aligns itself with
the statement made by the observer of the European
Union (EU), as well as the statement made by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security (see S/PV.8886).
As a member of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group, I commend Kenya for the efforts
to return to a more open and inclusive format that
characterized open debates prior to the pandemic. We
also thank the briefers for sharing their perspectives
and encourage them to keep up their important work.
Austria commends the Secretary-General for his
strong commitment to the women and peace and security
agenda and former UN-Women Executive Director,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, for spearheading the
women and peace and security agenda. We look forward
to continuing our cooperation with UN-Women under
the new Executive Director, Ms. Sima Sami Bahous.
The Secretary-General’s annual report (S/2021/827)
paints a dark picture of the situation of women and girls
in conflict-affected countries, as we also heard from
the briefers earlier today. I am not going to repeat the
examples cited by others. Given the recent developments
in Afghanistan, we encourage the Secretary-General
to provide a thorough analysis of the situation there in
next year’s report.
For immediate humanitarian relief for Afghanistan,
Austria has committed €20 million, €5 million of
which as direct support for Afghan women and girls
administrated by the UN-Women country office.
Austria shares the Secretary-General’s assessment
that the women and peace and security agenda and human
security are linked and that disarmament contributes
directly to conflict prevention. Civilian harm caused
by the use of explosive weapons in populated areas, in
violation of international humanitarian law, remains
a grave concern. What we need is a strong political
declaration on that issue.
As a supporter of the Generation Equality Form
and a signatory of the Compact on Women, Peace and
Security and Humanitarian Action, Austria has pledged
8/30

21/10/2021

€11.4 million for the accelerated implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda.
The women and peace and security agenda is a
whole-of-Government engagement that needs to be
addressed within the triple nexus of humanitarian aid,
development cooperation and peacebuilding. Women
and peace and security is also a whole-of-society matter
that needs the support of men, including at the highest
leadership level, as agents for change and relies on civil
society and local women peacebuilders and mediators
to advance the women and peace and security agenda
on a daily basis.
Among the many civil society partners that we
support, Austria commends the Global Network of
Women Peacebuilders for taking the women and
peace and security agenda from the Security Council
to the ground through localization programmes and
national action plans. Of course, Austria will continue
supporting UN-Women, the Women’s Peace and
Humanitarian Fund and its rapid response window on
women’s participation in local peace processes, such as
in Afghanistan, Liberia, Mali and South Sudan.
Regarding the protection pillar, the Security
Council should systematically include the women and
peace and security agenda in all mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping and political missions. Integrated
data collection and analysis defining the vulnerabilities
and needs of the civilian population are necessary to
improve decision-making and enhance the focus of
mission efforts. Pre-deployment and in-mission training
should improve understanding of the women and peace
and security agenda and the gender perspective.
Austria endeavours to increase the number of
uniformed women in its peacekeeping and fosters the
gender perspective among all deployed personnel.
We have been deploying women as gender advisers to
EU and NATO peace operations, as well as to United
Nations peacekeeping operations as military observers,
staff officers and parts of Austrian contingents and will
do so in the future.
Let me conclude by joining in the appeal for joint
action against conflict-related sexual and gender-based
violence. The widespread impunity for sexual violence
committed in conflict is outrageous and we need
more decisive action to sanction such crimes. Austria
applauds the efforts of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Pramila Patten, for greater accountability, in
21-29893

21/10/2021

Women and peace and security

particular through closer collaboration with the
International Criminal Court. We welcome the recent
steps taken to bring perpetrators of sexual violence
to justice.
Let us commit together to accelerate the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda over the next 20 years.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Lam Padilla (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
express my appreciation to Her Excellency Ms. Raychelle
Omamo, Cabinet Secretary for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Kenya, for convening this open debate.
Our thanks are also extended to the briefers for their
valuable insights.
The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, was the culmination of a
process that spanned two decades. States are well aware
that, without the support of civil society, that would not
have been possible. For that reason, we consider the
participation of other actors concerned with the issue
to be of vital importance. It allows for a comprehensive
view of the situation at the local, national, regional and
international levels, thereby enabling States to narrow
gaps in the effective implementation of every one of
the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000). That applies
to conflict and post-conflict situations. Guatemala
is of the view, that, with the 2016 adoption of the
twin resolutions on the review of the peacebuilding
architecture (General Assembly resolution 70/262
and resolution 2282 (2016)), the General Assembly
and the Security Council strengthened the provisions
of resolution 1325 (2000) by recalling the important
role of women as agents of change in supporting
peace processes.
Landmark resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent
resolutions on the women and peace and security
agenda reaffirm the important role that women play in
conflict prevention and resolution, peace negotiations,
peacebuilding, peacekeeping, providing humanitarian
responses and post-conflict reconstruction, and stresses
the importance of their equal and full participation
in every aspect of the maintenance and promotion of
peace and security. It is incumbent on States and the
Organization to ensure effective compliance with the
provisions of the resolutions on the global women and
peace and security agenda.

S/PV. 8886 (Resumption 1)

The 2020 report of the Secretary-General
(S/2020/946) states that the women and peace and
security agenda is one of the overarching priorities of
the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which includes
commitments to ensuring the full participation of
women in political and peace processes. The systematic
integration of the women and peace and security
agenda in every stage of planning, implementation,
analysis and reporting therefore reflects the greater
representation of women in peacekeeping operations.
Guatemala concurs with that assertion and
accords special priority to the participation of women
in peacekeeping operations. According to data for
our country from the Ministry of Defence, a total of
300 women have been deployed as both military and
civilian personnel in various missions. Women in
peacekeeping have demonstrated that they can perform
in the same challenging circumstances as well as their
male counterparts. It is an operational imperative that
our countries recruit and retain women peacekeepers.
Data show that they have had a positive impact on
peacekeeping environments, including by supporting
the role of women in peacebuilding and the protection
of women’s rights.
When we talk about the women and peace and
security agenda, we must also raise the issue of the
importance of national action plans, which were a
critical result of resolution 1325 (2000). The national
action plans are a valuable tool that enable States to
realize their commitments in line with the agenda and
civil society to support them in their implementation.
They are practical documents that provide national
stakeholders with an opportunity to identify priorities,
determine responsibilities, allocate resources and
initiate strategic actions within a defined time frame
to implement policies and programmes that address
the needs and priorities of countries currently affected
by conflict and post-conflict situations. In the case of
my country, our national action plan has decisively
contributed to strengthening national legislation,
mechanisms for women and the development of
institutional initiatives that have led to internal changes
in public management.
Guatemala reaffirms the importance of national
ownership vis-à-vis this theme and its support for the
women and peace and security agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Afghanistan.

21-298939/30

S/PV.8886 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

Mr. Isaczai (Afghanistan): Afghanistan aligns itself
with the statement made earlier by the representative of
Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security.
At outset, allow me to thank the Permanent Mission
of Kenya for hosting today’s open debate. I also thank
all speakers for their solidarity and support for Afghan
women and girls.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
almost two decades ago, women in Afghanistan have
made significant progress across a range of indicators
but, sadly, this year’s women and peace and security
open debate comes on the heels of a new dark chapter
for millions of Afghan women and girls, who are about
to lose the gains they achieved with the support of the
international community.
Prior to the illegal seizure of power by the Taliban,
the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan had demonstrated
its full commitment to the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). That began with the first constitutional
Loya Jirga in 2002, when 220 women representatives
out of 1,500 participated in the grand assembly in
Kabul to draft a new Constitution after the overthrow of
Taliban regime. Subsequently, Afghanistan was among
the first countries in Asia to adopt a national action
plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
The plan sought to increase the role of women in
State-building and acknowledged the negative impact
of conflict on women and girls in particular. The
plan also envisaged the protection and promotion of
the rights of women and their role in leadership and
decision-making within all national institutions and
at all levels of Government. For the first time in our
history, female deputy ministers were appointed in
security ministries.
More than 5,000 women served as police officers,
while another 3,000 women were drafted into the
Afghan National Army. Women played a significant
role in the judiciary. A new decree in 2020 stipulated
the appointment of women deputy governors in all of
the country’s 34 provinces and the establishment of the
Office for the Prevention of Violence against Women.
In 2019, the Government increased the involvement
of women in peace efforts by launching the National
Women’s Consensus for Peace initiative and convening
a consultative Loya Jirga for peace, with women
constituting 30 per cent of the participants. Moreover,
with demand for the inclusion of women in peace talks
10/30

21/10/2021

growing, the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan included
four women in its negotiating team, while the Taliban
continued to exclude women from theirs.
Afghanistan is facing the imminent risk of turning
back in time — back to when international terrorist
groups operated freely across our territory, millions
were forced to flee, girls were banned from schools,
women were second-class citizens and human rights
were violated. Protecting Afghan women’s rights will
remain the litmus test for how serious the Council is
about the women and peace and security agenda. I
would like to repeat four concrete recommendations in
that regard.
First, we must remain steadfast and united in our
position to safeguard the progress made by women and
girls in the past 20 years and protect their rights. Any
compromise on girls’ and women’s rights in favour of
political expediency would betray our collective efforts
to promote the women and peace and security agenda
and undermine the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). As I speak, thousands of brave women and girls
are demonstrating on the streets of Kabul demanding
access to employment and education. Today is the
thirty-fourth day that Afghan girls have been denied
access to secondary school. How long do we have to
wait before those girls can return to school? How long?
Those women and girls in Afghanistan are pinning
their hopes and dreams on this very Council and world
body to help them recover their rights to work, travel
and go to school. It would be morally reprehensible if
we did nothing and let them down. In most conflict
situations, women and girls are disproportionally
affected by the negative impact and bear the brunt of
the humanitarian crisis. It is therefore essential that
the international community be deliberate in targeting
vulnerable women to ensure that humanitarian
assistance reaches them and involves Afghan women in
humanitarian activities.
Thirdly, four decades of conflict in Afghanistan
has damaged the social fabric of our country. It is time
to begin a different conversation and invest in social
healing and reconciliation. We must shun violence for
good and socialize peace as an alternative and a means
to settle our political differences. Afghan women
can play a significant role in that process as a group
predominantly affected by the conflict. The Taliban
must know that it may have won the war but that it has
yet to achieve peace.
21-29893

21/10/2021

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8886 (Resumption 1)

Peace and stability can return to Afghanistan
only when Afghans can establish a truly inclusive and
representative Government that includes women as
important stakeholders in peace and the future stability
of the country. Our failure to achieve that would not
only disenfranchise 50 per cent of our population but
would risk plunging Afghanistan into another cycle of
violence and instability for years to come.

initiative to streamline the gender perspective in all
aspects of peacekeeping. It is important to facilitate
an environment conducive to the broader participation
of women in every position in peacekeeping missions.
Furthermore, we should not only increase protection for
peacekeepers against security threats but also maintain
focus on accountability for peacekeepers, not least with
respect to any form of sexual abuse and exploitation.

Finally, I wish to thank the international community
for its generous financial contributions and unwavering
support to Afghan women.

Latvia welcomes the efforts within the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) to strengthen the
role of women in the post-conflict phase. The adoption
of the PBC’s gender strategy in 2016, as well as its
action plan, constitutes an important step in that
regard. We also welcome the fact that, for the third
consecutive year, the Peacebuilding Fund has allocated
40 per cent of its annual investment to gender equality
and women’s empowerment. Latvia is determined to be
a strong voice of the equal rights and full participation
of women as a member of the PBC in 2022.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Latvia.
Mr. Pildegovičs (Latvia): Latvia commends Kenya
for convening this important open debate. I thank the
briefers — Ms. Sima Sami Bahous, from UN-Women;
Ms. Bineta Diop, from the African Union; and Ms. Celia
Umenza Velasco, from the NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security — for their leadership in
advancing the women and peace and security agenda.
Latvia aligns itself with the statements made on
behalf of the European and the Group of Friends of
Women, Peace and Security.
Latvia is a firm supporter of the women and
peace and security agenda, which is a key element in
the efforts to strengthen international peace. The call
expressed by the Secretary-General in his report Our
Common Agenda to place women and girls at the centre
also fully applies to United Nations peacekeeping
and peacebuilding activities. Broad and meaningful
involvement by women is a prerequisite to resolve
conflicts in a sustainable way and to build lasting peace.
Today the situation is particularly worrisome
in Afghanistan, where women and girls risk losing
their hard-earned rights over the past 20 years. It
is the collective responsibility of the international
community, and in particular of the Security Council,
to prevent the looming scenario in which women would
irreversibly lose equal access to education, employment
and participation in decision-making. That will not
only worsen the status of women and girls but also
undermine prospects for the long-term stability and
future development of Afghanistan.
The efforts to ensure women’s role in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding must be stepped up in all conflict and
post-conflict situations. We support the commitment
demonstrated in the Action for Peacekeeping Plus

Latvia already contributes to facilitating the
international debate on this topic. During this year’s
session of the Commission on the Status of Women,
Latvia organized a side event on women’s participation
in the military and peacekeeping. The discussion aimed
at encouraging women to reach their full potential
as decision-makers and leaders in the military and
peacekeeping. As an elected Member State of the
Commission until 2025 and as a Vice-Chair of the
Commission’s Bureau for the next two sessions, Latvia
is committed to continue playing an active role in
shaping and re-enforcing global standards and policies
for gender equality.
The efforts to include women in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding begin at the national level. Latvia has
demonstrated a strong track record in that regard. We
have adopted and are implementing Latvia’s national
action plan on women and peace and security for the
term 2020 to 2025. More than 15 per cent of military
personnel in Latvia’s national armed forces are
women. Meanwhile, women make up 30 per cent of our
State police.
It is important to note that women occupy positions
at all levels and positions of the respective structures,
from special forces operators to executive leadership
roles. That was achieved by making military and
police fully open to women and by acknowledging
their integral role in the future of those structures. We

21-2989311/30

S/PV.8886 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

believe that is the approach that should be promoted at
national, regional and international levels.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): At the outset, I would like
to thank Kenya for organizing this annual open debate
on women and peace and security.
It is always important to recall the African role
in bringing the women and peace and security to the
Security Council. Egypt commends all the African
efforts aimed at fully implementing the women and
peace and security agenda in Africa. Last week, as
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, I had the
honour to organize an ambassadorial meeting on
women, peacebuilding and sustaining peace. The
Commission had a very rich discussion on how to
enhance the leading role of women in peacebuilding
and sustaining peace efforts.
Egypt is currently developing its first national
action plan on the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda. In that regard, Egypt
believes that adopting women and peace and security
action plans is insufficient; adequate resources should
be allocated to the implementation of such plans. Egypt
further stresses the importance of providing assistance
to African States, upon their request, to build capacities
and implement ambitious action plans, especially
for States suffering from armed conflict and those
emerging from it.
The President of the Arab Republic of Egypt was
one of the first leaders to join the Circle of Leadership
initiative to prevent sexual exploitation and abuse
in United Nations operations. Raising awareness of
sexual exploitation and abuse is an integral part of the
comprehensive training received by Egyptian forces
prior to their deployment to peacekeeping operations.
Since the seventy-first session, Egypt has taken pride
in championing General Assembly resolutions on
United Nations action on sexual exploitation and abuse.
The latest such resolution — 75/321, which adopted
last month — promotes a system-wide approach to
implementing and actualizing the zero-tolerance policy
to eliminate such heinous acts.
It is also worth highlighting the particular importance
of ensuring the effective contribution of women in
peacemaking and peacebuilding. The Aswan Forum for
Sustainable Peace and Development seeks to provide
12/30

21/10/2021

a platform to discuss challenges and opportunities
and formulate action-oriented recommendations to
enhance African women peacebuilders’ meaningful
contributions in peacebuilding settings. The Cairo
International Center for Conflict Resolution,
Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding and the Egypt
National Council for Women continue to provide
capacity-building training for Egyptian stakeholders
and relevant officials from sisterly African Countries.
Egypt is keen to stress the major importance of
ensuring the necessary balance in implementing the
four pillars of the agenda — prevention, protection,
participation and relief and recovery — while ensuring
national ownership and taking into consideration
the cultural and societal specificities of the different
countries in armed conflict or emerging from it. We also
underscore the pivotal role that regional organizations,
especially the African Union and the League of Arab
States, can play in enhancing States’ commitment to
implement the women and peace and security agenda.
In conclusion, Egypt calls for renewed political and
moral commitments to further support and empower
women in armed conflict and post-conflict situations.
Women are the fundamental agents for change during
the transition period from conflict to development.
Their empowerment is a must for a healthy and coherent
society that aims to achieve sustainable peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, my delegation would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this open debate
on an issue of the utmost importance for my country.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing this
morning. I also commend Ms. Sima Sami Bahous on
her appointment as Executive Director of UN-Women.
I thank her as well as Ms. Bineta Diop, African Union
Special Envoy for Women, Peace and Security, for
their briefings.
The women and peace and security agenda
conceived through resolution 1325 (2000) addresses
multiple aspects related to both the need to protect
women in conflict and post-conflict contexts and to
better include them in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
processes. The resolutions that followed resolution
1325 (2000) brought new dimensions to the concerns of
the Security Council and a range of new ambitions and
21-29893

21/10/2021

Women and peace and security

objectives, including the deployment of women under
the United Nations banner.
Morocco reiterates its full support for the United
Nations women and peace and security agenda. The
Kingdom of Morocco, as part of its irreversible choice
in favour of a modern, democratic and inclusive society
under the lofty vision of His Majesty Mohammed VI,
has made gender equality and respect for the promotion
and protection of women’s rights a priority both in its
national policies and in its diplomatic action. Within
this framework, over the past 20 years, Morocco has
launched several structural reforms aimed at anchoring
the principle of gender equality in its legislative and
legal system and in its development programmes and
at making gender equality a concrete and effective
reality with the adoption of a monitoring and evaluation
system taking into account gender-sensitive indicators.
The presence of women in strategic peace operations
enhances prevention, protection and recovery
mechanisms for civilian populations, especially the
most vulnerable groups, including children and women.
It goes without saying that increasing the number of
women deployed in military or police contingents in
United Nations peace operations has a very positive
impact on the implementation of these operations’
mandates. The first time Moroccan military women
participated in United Nations peace operations dates
back to 1992, within the context of the United Nations
Operation in Somalia. In 1999, Moroccan women also
participated in the Kosovo Force within the framework
of NATO.
On a humanitarian level, Moroccan women have
participated in the numerous missions involving the
deployment medical and surgical field hospitals, as
part of humanitarian actions in which Morocco has
participated or that it has initiated. Furthermore,
Morocco fully supports the Secretary-General’s
Action for Peace and Action for Peace Plus initiatives,
the Declaration of Joint Commitments by Member
States and the Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy
2018-2028 and is committed to contributing to their
implementation. Accordingly, from 2018 to 2020, the
Royal Armed Forces deployed 186 female military
personnel to United Nations peace missions. Today,
female personnel of the Royal Armed Forces are
deployed in three United Nations missions, namely,
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission

S/PV. 8886 (Resumption 1)

in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan, where they
hold various positions of responsibility.
The full and meaningful participation of women
in peacebuilding is fundamental and indispensable
for the sustainability of peace. Women’s strength and
resilience are particularly important in identifying
options and pathways to overcome crises, find common
ground and build trust within societies. The importance
of women’s participation in the peacebuilding process
also lies in its increased focus on reconciliation,
economic development, education and transitional
justice — essential elements for sustainable peace.
Women must therefore play a greater role in
peacebuilding at all levels, with the involvement of
all stakeholders.
Finally, I would like to conclude by highlighting
a few elements that could strengthen women’s
participation in United Nations peacekeeping. First,
training is crucial to advance the women and peace
and security agenda. Secondly, operational readiness is
paramount to successful deployment in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding missions. Thirdly, diversification of
deployment areas is extremely important to ensure the
greater participation of women.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bulgaria.
Ms. Stoeva (Bulgaria): Bulgaria aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of the
European Union. We also align ourselves with the
statement delivered by the Permanent Representative
of Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security, which Bulgaria joined earlier
this year.
At the outset, I would like to thank Kenya for
organizing today’s open debate and the briefers
for advocating enhanced investments in women in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding and promoting
accelerated implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda.
Bulgaria welcomes the latest report on women and
peace and security (S/2021/827) and its recommendations
and commends the Secretary-General’s efforts aimed at
ensuring women’s full, equal, effective and meaningful
participation at all levels, including in the peace
and security pillar. This year’s report focuses on the

21-2989313/30

S/PV.8886 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

indispensable role of local women in peace processes,
as well as the key contribution of civil society.
Bulgaria attaches great importance to the role of
civil society organizations and recognizes their crucial
role in the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda. Last year, Bulgaria adopted its
first national action plan on women and peace and
security — for the period 2020-2025 — which includes
input from civil society organizations as part of an
open consultation process. Allow me to also share that
active-duty and reserve enlisted women in my country
established the Bulgarian Armed Forces Women’s
Association, which is a non-governmental organization
meant to promote and enhance women’s social status in
the Armed Forces as well as implement the women and
peace and security agenda.
Bulgaria attaches great importance to women’s
full, equal and meaningful participation in all peace,
political and security decision-making processes. We
therefore condemn in the strongest terms reprisals
and threats against women human rights defenders,
women peacebuilders and women political leaders
and activists. Women must play an integral role in
peace and political transitions, conflict resolution and
peacebuilding efforts, and we urge the United Nations
to ensure their meaningful participation in all processes
under its management.
Bulgaria is integrating gender perspectives
throughout its political and military structures, and
the number of women in the Bulgarian Armed Forces
is constantly increasing, as is Bulgarian women’s
participation in international missions and operations.
Bulgaria contributes to international peace and
security with military troops under the flags of the
United Nations, NATO, the European Union and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
In 2019, the share of active female military personnel
in all missions and operations abroad was 11.1 per
cent of the Bulgarian military services. Moreover, in
2020, the Bulgarian Armed Forces received a national
distinction in the category of public organizations and
institutions for significant achievements in the effective
implementation of policies on gender equality.
The importance of prevention cannot be overstated,
especially when it comes to sexual and gender-based
violence, which can be addressed, including through the
promotion and protection of human rights and gender
equality. In the Bulgarian Armed Forces, strategies and
14/30

21/10/2021

policies combating sexual harassment are supported
by programmes and training on prevention. The issue
of protection of survivors and the survivor-centred
approach is still on the global agenda, especially
survivor access to justice. In this regard, it is crucial
to eliminate stigma and discrimination, while ensuring
sexual and reproductive health and rights and other
relevant services.
This year’s report provides yet again evidence
of the effectiveness of women’s leadership at the
highest levels. While Bulgaria recognizes the positive
developments in certain conflict-affected countries
described in the report, we are deeply concerned with
the deteriorating situation in Afghanistan and the
violations and limitations of women’s rights. Bulgaria
has committed to providing €100,000 to Afghanistan
in official development aid. In this respect, we also
recognize the need for the funding of the women and
peace and security agenda, including women’s grassroots organizations and networks.
Lastly, I would like to assure the Security Council
of Bulgaria’s commitment to gender equality, the
protection of women’s rights and the promotion of the
women and peace and security agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cyprus.
Ms. Ioannou (Cyprus): Thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today’s debate. My statement will
complement that of the European Union, to which we
fully subscribe.
We have stressed before in this Chamber the
importance of having meaningful participation by
women in peace processes, not just to satisfy the
criterion of egalitarian necessity but also in recognition
of the fact that peace is more sustainable when it
emanates from inclusive processes.
More important than participation quotas is the
task of ensuring the qualitative contribution of women
to the substantive issues under consideration in any
given peace process. This can be achieved through the
submission of concrete proposals elaborated by women
regarding the constitutional set-up and legislation in a
post-conflict environment, including but not limited to
the gender dimension.
Such input should be enabled on two levels: the
direct participation of women in all tracks of a peace
process and through a mechanism that allows local
21-29893

21/10/2021

Women and peace and security

experts to submit ideas on specific questions. The United
Nations can be instrumental in this respect through its
involvement — and, indeed, its leadership — in peace
processes and in its interaction with local actors, whose
voice it can help harness. Furthermore, its ability to
draw on successful paradigms in relevant State practice
across its membership is another crucial contribution
that the United Nations can make. In addition,
peacekeeping operations can help to create the safe
environment that is necessary for women to participate
in peacemaking and peacebuilding. That is an element
that could explicitly be included in their mandates.
Even if gender equality is enshrined in peace
instruments, that is only the first step towards an equal
status in a post-conflict society. With sexual violence
still prevalent as a weapon of war and with such crimes
continuing to be largely overlooked, nothing less
than accountability and reparations for those crimes
are needed to put a society on an egalitarian track.
Gender-based violence should come with a very high
price tag for its perpetrators, and no amnesties should
be contemplated for those or any other kind of crimes
against humanity. In that respect, the role of United
Nations operations is key. Not only do their mandates
encompass the protection of civilians but, in the
event of atrocities, United Nations missions can, and
should, be a source of fact-finding and evidence that
enables national or international prosecution. It is also
an element that should explicitly be included in the
mandates of peacekeeping operations.
Lastly, addressing the culture of patriarchy that
continues to afflict the security sector at both the
international and the national levels is a priority.
However, that will not single-handedly solve the
deeply rooted problems in the area of women and peace
and security, which are a manifestation of broader
inequalities and cannot be tackled without a more
general and comprehensive assault on the attitudes
perpetuating them.

S/PV. 8886 (Resumption 1)

together with Ireland and Mexico, on making women
and peace and security a priority of their respective
presidencies. Such leadership serves as a good example.
The battle for the individual rights of women is
one of long standing. Those are the words of Eleanor
Roosevelt, a great defender of human rights. The
same applies to the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda. Indeed, many disparities
between the normative framework and the reality on
the ground persist.
As the topic of today’s open debate emphasizes,
investing in women peacebuilders is essential to
achieving this long-term task. We would like to
highlight three areas in which Switzerland is making,
and will continue to make, a particular contribution.
First, Switzerland is dedicated to bringing more
women to the negotiating table. The full, equal
and meaningful participation of women in political
and peace processes is one of the key points of our
foreign policy strategy. In Lebanon, for example, we
are supporting a dialogue process between women
from various political parties and women active in
opposition movements. Likewise, in Switzerland,
we recently launched a network of women mediators
and peacebuilders. However, there is a need to better
link local processes with multilateral engagement.
We welcome the record number of women from civil
society who briefed the Security Council last month.
The Council should consider a more systematic followup to the briefers’ recommendations.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.

Secondly, in 2022 South Africa and Switzerland
will co-chair the Women and Peace and Security Focal
Points Network. We will work towards the systematic
implementation of existing tools, such as national
action plans. In addition, Switzerland will also give
priority to strengthening its activities in support of
women’s participation, cooperation with civil society
and protection against sexual and gender-based
violence. We are therefore also pleased to be a signatory
to the Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian
Action Compact.

Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland would like to thank Kenya for organizing
this open debate in an inclusive manner by achieving the
return to the direct participation of all Member States
in the Chamber. We would also like to congratulate
both the United Nations and civil-society briefers for
their valuable contributions. We congratulate Kenya,

The third area is the most innovative. We continue
to invest in the link between women and peace and
security and digitalization, taking into account the
significant opportunities, as well as the many risks, that
can arise. In particular, Switzerland supported a study
on the challenges and opportunities of digitalization for
women peacebuilders. The study was conducted by the

21-2989315/30

S/PV.8886 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

Global Network of Women Peacebuilders and the ICT
for Peace Foundation, based in Geneva. In addition,
this week we have just relaunched a digital application,
together with the Women’s International League for
Peace and Freedom. We are convinced that it will also
benefit Council members.
As a candidate for the Security Council in 2023
and 2024, Switzerland will maintain and strengthen
its commitment to implementing the women and peace
and security agenda. We will work to be a positive force
for peace and for innovation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malta.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): Malta thanks Kenya for
holding today’s open debate on women and peace
and security under the theme “Investing in women in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding” and for returning
to the open and inclusive format in keeping with open
debates prior to the pandemic. We greatly welcome
being back in the Chamber for this important discussion.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his message
and his report (S/2021/827), as well as the briefers for
sharing their invaluable insights and experiences.
Malta aligns itself with the statements delivered on
behalf of the European Union and the Group of Friends
of Women, Peace and Security. I would like to highlight
the following points in my national capacity.
First, the Secretary-General’s call, made a year
ago, for a radical shift in the meaningful participation
of women in our peacekeeping, peacemaking and
peacebuilding efforts still rings out loud and clear
today. We must redouble our efforts to make its
implementation a reality and to ensure that women
are fully involved as equal partners in peace from the
earliest stages of every political process.
It is encouraging that women were included as
delegates in all except just one United Nations co-led
processes in 2020. However, that was not the case for
the delegates of conflict parties. That percentage stood
at 23 per cent, and it would have been much lower
had it not been for the persistent measures supported
by the United Nations. The further progress taken
under the Secretary-General’s leadership must be
acknowledged. However, it is not a matter of crunching
numbers; it is the reality. We must do more to ensure
that all parties to peace processes include women and
girls, in all their diversity, who are fully involved. We
16/30

21/10/2021

must create the conditions on the ground that will be
conducive to women’s and girls’ full, effective and
meaningful participation. We need to identify and
mitigate obstacles concerning women’s and girls’
rights and gender provisions in peace agreements at
an early stage. Fully cognizant that time is not on our
side, the question arises as to whether we should start a
conversation about gender quotas in peace negotiations.
Secondly, we must ensure that the women and
peace and security agenda also includes protection,
prevention and relief and recovery. We cannot focus
on women’s and girls’ participation while violence
against peacebuilders, political leaders, activists and
women human rights defenders prevails. As stated in
the Secretary-General’s report,
“[the] juxtaposition of violence targeting women
and their rights, on the one hand, and their extreme
marginalization and exclusion, on the other, still
encapsulates the women and peace and security
agenda in 2021.” (S/2021/827, para. 4)
Women’s and girls’ safety and protection are
of fundamental importance in order for them to
contribute to the implementation of peace agreements
in a meaningful manner. We must also have unfettered
access to education and equal opportunities as mediators,
peacebuilders and leaders. Malta is concerned that
more than 11 million girls may not return to school
after the coronavirus disease and that the disruptions to
child-marriage prevention programmes could result in
an additional 10 million child marriages.
My third point concerns peacekeeping operations
and special political missions. We need to ensure
that United Nations missions have the right internal
gender policies and resources for their implementation.
Regular training on gender aspects is also key. Special
political missions should also have strong relationships
with national women’s organizations that can help
to strengthen national ownership of those principles
and ideas.
The fourth and final point is that the women and
peace and security agenda is also about girls, boys and
men. It is about girls because if they are not involved,
they will not have the tools and skills to carry on
the work of their predecessors when they grow to be
women. Boys and men must also be part of the solution
by addressing the drivers of patriarchy in society and
the concomitant inequality and vulnerability.
21-29893

21/10/2021

Women and peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to welcome Her Excellency
Ms. Raychelle Omamo, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Kenya, who presided over our meeting
this morning in the presence of the Secretary-General.
We also thank the briefers for their statements.
We align ourselves with the statement made on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Women in Afghanistan.
The women and peace and security agenda is part
of the State of Qatar’s priorities in the context of our
comprehensive policies at the national and international
levels, given our firm belief in the need to protect all
the rights of women and achieve women’s advancement
as a fundamental partner in all phases of peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. That is why we
support ongoing international efforts, especially since
2000, to shed light on this important topic.
Given the importance of education as a key factor
to promote the participation of women in achieving
peace and sustainable development in their societies,
the State of Qatar attaches special priority to women
and girls, particularly in conflict situations, within
targeted groups in its programmes to support education.
I note that His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad
Al Thani, Amir of the State of Qatar, is committed to
providing quality education to 1 million girls as part of
our support to the Charlevoix Declaration on providing
girls with education in times of crisis.
Next year, the State of Qatar will host the HighLevel Global Conference on Youth-Inclusive Peace
Processes, in cooperation with Finland, Colombia,
the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth and the
Education Above All Foundation. The Conference will
focus on the participation of young women in peace
operations leading to wider participation by women
in peacemaking.
As part of its effective role as a mediator to
ensure dialogue for peace in Afghanistan, the State
of Qatar included women in Afghan peace talks. As
an international partner to Afghanistan, we sought to
preserve the gains made by the Afghan people over the
past decades, especially with regard to the gains achieved
for women. We have stressed time and again the need
for comprehensiveness and respect for the human rights
of all, especially women, girls, children and minorities,

S/PV. 8886 (Resumption 1)

as well as the need to ensure the vital role of Afghan
women in the development of Afghanistan. The State
of Qatar is effectively coordinating with international
partners in that regard. We underline the importance
of women in Islamic sharia and have provided good
examples of that happening in many Islamic countries,
including the State of Qatar, in which women practice
their rights in a full and constructive manner.
Women and girls are the most affected by the
deterioration of humanitarian situations. That is why
solidarity with Afghan women and lending them
support is especially important. Consequently, the
State of Qatar facilitated talks between the United
Nations officials and the Kabul authorities leading
to assurances to facilitate humanitarian aid and not
to impede the work of humanitarian stakeholders.
We are also working to continue opening educational
institutions for girls there. In recent weeks, we have
hosted thousands of refugees and given special attention
to women and children.
The State of Qatar is also coordinating effectively
with international partners, including the Group of
Friends of Women in Afghanistan here in New York,
in order to listen to the voice of Afghan women and
protect their rights. We are currently participating
in organizing a high-level event, in cooperation with
the United Kingdom and Canada, on international
cooperation to support women and girls in Afghanistan.
In conclusion, we stress the State of Qatar’s
commitment to continue to cooperate with all parties
concerned with the women and peace and security
agenda, while providing the necessary support to
ensure its implementation on the ground. That will
contribute to achieving sustainable peace and security
all over the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nepal.
Mr. Rai (Nepal): At the outset, I would like to thank
the Kenyan presidency for organizing this ministerial
open debate on women and peace and security. I also
thank the Secretary-General and the other briefers for
their comprehensive presentations and insights.
Nepal strongly supports the women and peace and
security agenda. As a post-conflict country, Nepal has
gone through the traumatic experience of the impact
of conflict on women. In the years subsequent to the
signing of the Comprehensive Peace Accord in 2006,

21-2989317/30

S/PV.8886 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

Nepal has made a historic transformation in terms
of ensuring women’s participation in politics and
public life.
Today the Constitution of Nepal guarantees
women 33 per cent of the seats in the federal and
provincial parliaments, 40 per cent representation
in local Government, as well as alternating male/
female positions at the highest levels — President and
Vice-President and Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the
House of Representatives. Similarly, Mayors or Deputy
Mayors must be female. Furthermore, the Constitution
stipulates the inclusion of women in all State structures.
In 2011, Nepal adopted a national action plan for
the implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008), as the first country in South Asia and
the second in Asia to do so. Increased participation by
women in decision-making, the protection of women
and girls from sexual and gender-based violence and
ending impunity were the plan’s top priorities.
We also prepared our second national action plan,
in consultations with relevant stakeholders, including
victims of conflict. The plan focuses on the issues
of justice for conflict-affected women and girls, the
improvement of their livelihoods and the security of
women and children, in general.
As one of the largest and most responsible troopand police-contributing countries, Nepal has increased
the number of female peacekeepers. We strive to meet
the United Nations target for female peacekeepers in
military contingents, and we have already met other
targets related to women peacekeepers. Our female
peacekeepers have been utilizing their skills to engage
with local communities and build trust to protect
women and civilians on the ground. They are efficient
in assisting the victims of gender-based violence,
conducting capacity-building activities and gathering
intelligence to protect women and girls. Above all,
our female peacekeepers provide direct positive
motivation to the local community to embrace women
empowerment, girls’ education and gender equality.
Women must be an integral part of conflict
resolution, peacebuilding, peacemaking, peacekeeping
and post-conflict reconstruction for sustained peace.
We must devise inclusive and affirmative policies
and programmes for mainstreaming and empowering
women in order to ensure their rightful participation
in governance.
18/30

21/10/2021

Nepal is committed to the implementation of all four
pillars of the women and peace and security agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Peñaranda (Philippines): We thank Kenya for
its leadership as it convenes today’s open debate. We
also thank the Secretary-General and the briefers for
their statements.
Women’s full, equal, effective and meaningful
participation in all stages of the peace process is crucial.
Women have an indispensable role in the prevention
and resolution of conflict and in peacebuilding and
peacekeeping. Those views are embodied in resolution
1325 (2000), which the Philippines fully supported, and
in subsequent relevant resolutions.
Since 1997, Filipino women have played a very
significant role in mediation and the Mindanao peace
process — whether as members of the Government
negotiating panel, its secretariat or technical
working groups.
The Philippines is the first country in Asia to adopt
a national action plan on women and peace and security.
A product of constructive engagement between the
Government and civil society, the plan maximized the
gains of decades of gender mainstreaming work in the
country. It enabled national Government agencies and
local Government units to identify women and peace
and security interventions to be integrated into their
regular plans, budgets and accomplishment reports,
as required by the country’s landmark law, the Magna
Carta of Women. The current plan provides a framework
for promoting women’s rights and leadership roles in
peacebuilding, peacekeeping and peace negotiations.
Women were instrumental in putting to rest
the decades-long conflict between the Philippine
Government and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front.
The Government panel was led by a woman — the first
female chief negotiator in the world to sign a peace
accord with a rebel group.
In the light of the coronavirus disease pandemic, the
Philippine Defence Department seeks to increase the
financing of the women and peace and security agenda,
while recognizing that the pandemic exacerbates
gender inequality in conflict-affected, post-conflict
and humanitarian crisis contexts. Women and girls face
a higher incidence of gender-based violence and more
difficulties in accessing basic goods and services.
21-29893

21/10/2021

Women and peace and security

The Philippine National Police is mandated by law
to prioritize the recruitment and training of women.
The police force reserves at least 10 per cent of its
annual recruitment, training and education quota for
women, and has established more than 2,000 women
and children protection desks nationwide, manned by
trained women investigators.
In the region, the Philippines supports the work of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
in mainstreaming the women and peace and security
agenda into its work. The ASEAN Women for Peace
Registry, a compendium of women leaders in ASEAN
with expertise in various aspects of peace processes,
including as negotiators, mediators, facilitators,
researchers and others, is a good practice that can be
shared with other organizations. The ASEAN Institute
for Peace and Reconciliation, ASEAN’s research arm,
can also share best practices and lessons on gender
and conflict.
The Philippines reiterates its call for increasing
the participation of women in uniformed roles
and for integrating gender perspectives into all
aspects of peacekeeping. We support the increasing
deployment of women peacekeepers at all levels and in
leadership positions.
We are committed to further engaging with the
United Nations and other partners, in advancing the
women and peace and security agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg thanks the Kenyan presidency of the
Security Council for convening today’s in-person
open debate on women and peace and security, which
has allowed representatives of countries that are not
members of the Council to participate.
We also thank all participants who have contributed
to the debate by sharing their experiences. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
annual report (S/2021/827).
Luxembourg fully aligns itself with the statements
made on behalf of the European Union and the Group
of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
Last year, we celebrated the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), which was a
key milestone for the protection and promotion of the

S/PV. 8886 (Resumption 1)

rights of women and girls across the world, in particular
in armed conflict. However, much remains to be done.
The current situation in Afghanistan demonstrates
the fragility of women’s rights. Protecting their rights
means protecting the rights of the entire society.
Now, more than ever before, it is our duty to
translate our long-standing commitments into action.
The various situations on the Security Council agenda
demonstrate that it is crucial to include women at all
levels of peace processes and peacekeeping. It is a
prerequisite for conflict resolution and lasting peace.
According to a global study on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), the participation of women
increases by 35 per cent the likelihood of concluding a
peace agreement that lasts 15 years. The international
community must therefore redouble its efforts to ensure
that these agents of peace can finally play their role.
The women and peace and security agenda must
be fully integrated into all our work, be it within
the Security Council mandate, budget negotiations,
regional organizations, through national policies or
local initiatives. As underscored in the report of the
Secretary-General, greater support should be provided
to local organizations that promote women’s rights.
In line with its feminist foreign policy,
Luxembourg continues to implement its national action
plan on women and peace and security 2018-2023, in
cooperation with civil society organizations. Our action
plan takes a holistic approach and focuses on areas, such
as diplomacy and defence, development cooperation,
as well as key cross-cutting areas, including health,
education and climate change, to ensure the lasting
empowerment of women. We will continue funding
projects and initiatives aimed at combating sexual
and gender-based violence and impunity, in particular
through a gender-based strategy, as we provide official
development assistance.
This year, Luxembourg’s army established a
committee on women, whose objective is to develop
specific proposals to promote integration and the
recruitment of women into our army. We also encourage
and support the participation of women in civilian
crisis management missions. On 6 April, Luxembourg
deployed a woman police officer to the European Union
Police Mission in the Palestinian territories. She works
primarily on a project that supports women officers in
the Palestinian police force.

21-2989319/30

S/PV.8886 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

21/10/2021

Last week, Luxembourg had the honour of
being elected for the first time to the Human Rights
Council for the period 2022 to 2024. Gender equality
is a priority we shall seek to promote and strengthen.
Members can count on us in the important fight to
promote women’s rights.

more cases to justice and enabled women and girls to
participate in the peace process with less fear. That
example shows how the United Nations can bring
about tangible results with its expertise through
institution-building and collaborative partnerships on
the ground.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.

Under the Group of Seven’s Women, Peace and
Security Partnership Initiative, Japan partnered with
UN-Women to promote women’s participation in
national reconciliation and peacebuilding in Sri Lanka.
The project has three major components: raising
awareness, supporting the Sri Lankan Government’s
policy planning and providing entrepreneurship
facilities to women. The project provided opportunities
to women and girls to directly participate in the process
of building peace, recovery and rebuilding communities
after a 26-year-long conflict.

Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to the Republic of Kenya for convening
today’s important debate on women and peace
and security.
Japan supports the Secretary-General’s call for a
radical shift in the meaningful participation of women
in peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts, and is willing to share insights gained through
its support to United Nations activities and others. The
Government of Japan has supported the activities of the
United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and
Sexual Violence in Conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the Central African Republic, Somalia and
Iraq. Its activities aim to strengthen national institutions
and the judicial response to conflict-related sexual
violence, as well as to enhance access to justice for
victims and survivors. Japan believes that those efforts
provide an enabling environment for local women to be
empowered without fear, and restore their dignity so
that they can take full ownership of peacebuilding and
reconstruction efforts in their nations.
Last week, based on their work in the Central African
Republic, members of the Team of Experts shared with
Member States the difficulties they encountered and
success stories at a briefing organized by my Mission.
They experienced major challenges in ensuring the
access of victims and survivors to justice, attributed
to remoteness, stigmatization, lack of awareness and
the slow judicial process. The recent diagnostic report
of the Team of Experts also found that challenges in
the system are the result of the absence of measures
benefiting victims and witnesses, gaps in the national
legal framework and limited technical and operational
capacity in investigations, prosecution and education.
To respond to those long-standing challenges, the
project of the Team of Experts focused on building
capacity in the law enforcement sector — investigators,
prosecutors and judges — in close collaboration with
local authorities, to achieve high specialization and
expertise in judicial response. That resulted in bringing
20/30

Through bilateral means, Japan also supports
developing countries’ efforts to improve women’s
participation in conflict prevention and resolution,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. In particular, the
Japan International Cooperation Agency has been
engaged in projects to empower local women’s
organizations in that area.
While the nature of the projects I have mentioned
differs from one to another, the key to their success
is the same: ensuring the effective participation of
the host Government and its people. I hope that this
meeting will contribute to strengthening coordination,
networks and partnerships for promoting the women
and peace and security agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Pieris (Sri Lanka): May I thank the Republic
of Kenya for arranging this initiative.
Sri Lanka is deeply concerned that, despite global
policy developments and commitments to support
women, there remain significant structural barriers and
lack of access for them to be fully represented at all
levels of decision-making, including in peace processes.
We appreciate that the United Nations, as the primary
international body vested with the responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security, is
committed to increasing the number of civilian and
uniformed women in peacekeeping at all levels and in
all positions, including senior leadership positions.
21-29893

21/10/2021

Women and peace and security

The United Nations understands gender equality
as a goal to ensure equal rights, the responsibilities
and opportunities of women and men and girls and
boys. The strategy to achieve gender equality is
gender mainstreaming, which entails bringing the
perceptions, experiences, knowledge and interests of
women and men to bear on policy-making planning and
decision-making.
Sri Lanka has made a positive contribution to
global peacekeeping efforts, and the valour and
professionalism of Sri Lankan Blue Helmets are
widely appreciated.
As we seek to invest in women peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, it is essential to better understand
and address the problems they face in participating
in peacekeeping, particularly the cultural and social
aspects. We need assistance to continue advocacy to
encourage women’s participation in peacekeeping
operations, with developing countries provided with
resources, training materials and the sharing of best
practices for the recruitment and deployment of
uniformed women.
It is our considered view that women who are
already involved in informal peace processes need
to be included in formal peace processes in order to
establish meaningful gender equality and peace, and
that many women’s understandings of peacebuilding
are far broader and more holistic than those of the
United Nations or others traditionally used.
The Commission on the Status of Women
acknowledges the growth in civil war, armed conflict
and terrorism with a concomitant abuse of the human
rights of women and girls by State and non-State actors.
The changing nature of conflict means that most wars are
fought internally, often rooted in unresolved historical
bitterness relating to ethnic conflicts or disputes — or
diamonds, drugs or minerals. The protagonists are not
necessarily soldiers, but political ideologues, warlords,
drug dealers, State actors, disenfranchised youth and
young children.
In that process, we must, I believe, examine the
rationale of traditional views that are often expressed
justifying the participation of women in peacekeeping
based on the foundation that women are more
empathetic, approachable and peaceful than men;
that they are better positioned to relate to women and
children and deal with issues such as sexual violence;
and that women contribute soft skills to missions. Are

S/PV. 8886 (Resumption 1)

those not, I ask, notions discriminatory in themselves?
Does such thinking not place the burden on women?
If we are to truly make progress, we must, first
of all, change our mindset and sincerely treat women
and men on equal terms in all walks of life. I ask the
question: is it then surprising that, although women are
active in community peacebuilding, they are almost
completely absent from political negotiating tables?
Their exclusion from peace tables is notable; the
examples a matter of a disappointing record. Should
not women then, as a must, be present at negotiating
tables? The answer simply is “yes” — first, because
women are affected by conflict and, therefore, by peace
agreements; secondly, and related to the first point,
women’s inclusion in all stages of peace processes
is crucial for inclusive social justice; and finally, the
presence of women makes a difference in the sorts of
issues generally brought to formal peace processes. One
sees that inhibitive constraints on woman’s involvement
in decision-making are enormous in all regions, but
are particularly acute in conflict areas. While entire
communities suffer disastrous consequences of armed
conflict, women and girls are affected specifically
because of their subordinate position. A peace
settlement is not merely about ending a war, but also
about establishing the conditions for a new, just polity.
My second point is that woman’s absence from
negotiating tables minimizes the possibility of
inclusive, just politics arising in post-conflict times. It
has been observed that woman’s relative absence from
negotiating tables is significant, because, when they are
present or participating in less formal negotiations, they
tend to induce different issues and frequently women
adopt different approaches to conflict resolution.
I will conclude by referring to what authors of the
article “Women Waging War”, published in Foreign
Policy magazine in the May-June 2001 issue, very
pithily wrote: “Allowing men who plan wars to plan
peace is a bad habit.” They suggest that, while men
come to the negotiating table directly from the war
room or the battlefield, women generally come from
family care and civilian activism. I ask, finally, is that
not food for thought?
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to begin by thanking the delegation of Kenya for
organizing this open debate and for the particular

21-2989321/30

S/PV.8886 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

21/10/2021

emphasis put on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) to make genuine progress on this agenda.
Furthermore, I would like to express our thanks for
the briefings made by the Secretary-General, the
Executive Director of UN-Women and the Special
Envoy for Women, Peace and Security of the African
Union Commission.

missions. Within that framework, the percentage
of women in predeployment training at the Peace
Operations Training Centre of the Argentine National
Gendarmerie rose to 35 per cent of the total during
2021. Likewise, we highlight that 50 per cent of
Training Centre instructors in matters related to peace
operations are women.

In the context of the twenty-first anniversary at the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and commemorating
the twenty-sixth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action, Argentina reaffirms its
commitment to the development and implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda. Achieving
gender equality and the comprehensive empowerment
of women and girls across their full diversity and
the mainstreaming of gender issues in the peace
and security agenda are sine qua non conditions to
effectively prevent conflicts and build lasting peace. In
that context, we must step up our efforts to increase the
representation, participation and leadership of women
in all conflict-prevention and peacebuilding processes
and at all levels of decision-making.

All of those concrete actions taken to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) are in addition to Argentina’s
ongoing efforts at the international level, such as,
for example, promoting the inclusion of the issue of
women and peace and security in the regional agenda,
particularly within the Southern Common Market.

Argentina understands that there must be even
greater coordination to implement the women and peace
and security agenda. That means not only implementing
the relevant Security Council resolutions, but also the
recommendations of other relevant bodies. In order to
support women’s participation in peace processes, our
country deems that it would be helpful to see greater
participation from local networks of women mediators
with a gender perspective, crucially because that
preventative mechanism, which has been successfully
applied in various regions of the world and which
Argentina itself promoted in the southern cone of South
America, seeks to tackle the structural roots that give
rise to conflicts or violence before their symptoms
are manifested.
Argentina has continued to work intensively on
the women and peace and security agenda during
the 12 months since the previous open debate
(see S/2020/1084). We are currently finalizing
the administrative process to launch our second
national action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).
At the domestic level, the Ministry of Defence
has developed a comprehensive gender policy plan
for the period 2021 to 2023, which includes measures
to increase the number of women in peacekeeping
22/30

In conclusion, although we recognize much has been
done in improving the participation of women in peace
processes, much remains to be done. It is essential to
rethink the strategies adopted in order to obtain better
results. Argentina reiterates its profound commitment
to the women and peace and security agenda and will
continue to work towards its full implementation at the
national, regional and international levels.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Malovrh (Slovenia): Slovenia aligns itself
with the statements delivered by the observer of the
European Union and the representative of Canada on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security (see S/PV.8886) and would like to add the
following remarks in its national capacity.
We thank the Secretary-General for his annual
report (S/2021/827). We welcome in particular
intensified efforts to implement commitments under
the women and peace and security agenda and to
increase the number of women heads and deputy heads
of peace operations, peacekeepers and mediators.
The equal and meaningful participation of women
must be at the centre of peace-related activities and
decision-making processes.
Slovenia’s commitment to the women and peace
and security agenda is reflected in our Resolution on
the National Programme for Equal Opportunities for
Women and Men for the period 2021 to 2030. The
document reaffirms the women and peace and security
agenda as one of the priority areas of both Slovenian
foreign and gender equality policy.
In November 2018, Slovenia adopted its second
national action plan on women and peace and security.
21-29893

21/10/2021

Women and peace and security

We have established the Centre for Education and
Training for Participation in Peacekeeping Operations
and Missions, which also provides specific training on
women and peace and security.
Slovenia regularly deploys women as uniformed
personnel to peacekeeping operations and missions,
including in senior roles and positions. Women have
been deployed to international operations and missions
since the first Slovenian contingent of a multinational
peacekeeping force in 1997. Women currently hold
several leading positions in functional areas of the
Slovenian armed forces, including command of tactical
units and contingents abroad. Twenty per cent of
Slovenian police officers who took part in international
peacekeeping missions last year were women. In
addition, the first woman to command a United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon contingent came from
Slovenia. The percentage of women from the Slovenian
armed forces deployed to international operations and
missions stood at 10 per cent last year.
Slovenia expresses great concern about the
deterioration in the situation and the status of women and
girls in Afghanistan. The free and equal participation of
women in Afghan society, respect for human rights and
access to health services, employment and education
are essential. Slovenia reaffirms its full support for all
initiatives directed at maintaining the rights of women
and girls in Afghanistan.
Finally, we can achieve tangible results only by
working together. We have to act resolutely to halt the
pushback and regression in the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda and build on the
results already achieved. Slovenia stands ready to do
its part.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): I thank Kenya for
convening this important debate, highlighting the
urgency to invest in women in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. I also wish to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his remarks and the various briefers for
their insightful statements.
The focus of today’s debate on investing in local
women in countries hosting peacekeeping operations
and special political missions to accelerate the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda is close to Rwanda’s own experience. As one

S/PV. 8886 (Resumption 1)

of the top troop- and police-contributing countries
to United Nations peacekeeping, Rwanda considers
the protection of civilians, in particular the most
vulnerable — namely, women and children — in conflict
to be at the core of United Nations peacekeeping and
the benchmark of effective peacekeeping. We place
high value on understanding the local context and
considering the needs, concerns and perceptions of
populations that we are responsible for protecting. That
includes women, youth, internally displaced persons
and refugees, to mention but a few.
As we reflect on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), let it not escape us that the resolution
does not only address how women and girls are
disproportionately impacted by violent conflict; it also
stresses the critical role that women play in peace and
reconciliation processes. Rwanda has prioritized the
contribution of women in all stages of peacekeeping
and peacebuilding.
The Rwanda Demobilization and Reintegration
Commission, which is mandated to ensure that
all demobilized ex-combatants are socially and
economically reintegrated into their communities, uses
a distinctively gender-sensitive approach. An example
to highlight is that, in the aftermath of the 1994 genocide
against the Tutsi, when the country faced insurgencies
resulting from the instability in the Great Lakes
region, the Government empowered local ownership
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes, from their conceptualization to their
implementation. Through various initiatives, women
acted as envoys and key enablers in mobilizing former
combatants who had joined Rwanda in rebuilding.
On the conflict prevention pillar, Rwanda has
similarly engaged the experiences of women at the
grass-roots level and dedicated resources to genderresponsive security sector reform, with a focus on
fighting gender-based violence and institutionalizing
access to justice at the local level through judicial access
points. Currently, Rwandan women represent 50 per
cent of community mediators and 48 per cent of legal
advocates. In order to address gender-based violence,
we have established what we call Isange one-stop
centres, which provide free comprehensive services
to survivors of gender-based violence, including legal,
medical and psychosocial support, all in one place.
Rwanda believes that addressing the challenges
faced in enhancing the role of women in the peace

21-2989323/30

S/PV.8886 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

agenda will require building effective partnerships
with different stakeholders, including peacekeeping
host nations, the private sector and regional and
international entities. This month, Rwanda joined the
Steering Committee of the Elsie Initiative Fund for
Uniformed Women in Peace Operations. We very much
look forward to working with all those involved to foster
partnerships with national and regional stakeholders to
meaningfully increase the participation of women in all
United Nations peace operations.
We know — and have sufficient evidence — that
a major differentiating factor between women being
victims of violence in armed conflict or being peace
actors instead is their meaningful involvement in the full
spectrum of peace at all levels. Let us all work together
to make that happen and hold one another accountable
on the basis of robust data and performance evaluation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): At the outset, I would
like to thank Kenya for organizing this important open
debate. I would also like to express my appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his valuable report
(S/2021/827) and thank all the briefers for their
insightful interventions.
After almost 21 years since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, with the new challenges and threats facing
stability and lasting peace, we believe that just
accelerating the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda is no longer a sufficient
postulate. The multidimensional nature of conflicts and
the scale of their possible consequences for societies
require strong commitment and decisive action to make
a meaningful change in the approach to the women
and peace and security agenda. Such actions should go
hand in hand with greater promotion and protection of
women and girls’ rights.
Poland centres its efforts on activities to increase
the number of women in uniformed services — the
army, the police, the border guard and the customs
service. The number of women in those organizations
corresponds to the potential of their involvement in
peacekeeping missions. In that spirit, Poland actively
promotes policies that address the potential barriers
that women face in the process of recruitment and
their participation with regard to the scope of their
engagement in peace operations.
24/30

21/10/2021

One of the most evident dire aspects of conflicts
is the increasing number of cases of conflict-related
sexual violence against women and children. Poland
has committed itself at international forums to
introduce measures that will ensure accountability for
the perpetrators for such acts and strengthen prevention
efforts that fight against impunity for peacekeepers who
commit sexual exploitation and abuse. The protection
of the most vulnerable groups, such as women and
children, remains one of the priorities of Poland’s
Human Rights Council membership for the term from
2020 to 2022.
The protection of women and girls from conflictrelated sexual violence and providing assistance to
the victims of violence is also one of the priorities of
Polish humanitarian aid and development assistance.
We are pursuing those objectives with the support of
UN-Women, the United Nations Population Fund and
UNICEF and through bilateral cooperation in that
sphere, providing protection and health care as well as
creating a conducive environment for the empowerment
of women and girls, among other goals.
Particularly
serious
challenges
in
terms
safeguarding women’s and girls’ rights and freedoms
have arisen with regard to recent political developments
in Afghanistan. Ensuring continuous access to education
for girls is critical in that regard. We cannot allow the
reversal of the hard-won gains involving the recognition
of women’s rights and their protection, as well as their
full equal and meaningful participation in all spheres
of life. As a member of the Group of Friends of Women
in Afghanistan, Poland stands ready to support all
initiatives within the European Union-United Nations
framework aimed at safeguarding the achievements
of the past two decades in the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda.
Peacekeepers play a central role in delivering
and enabling transitions and preparing the ground for
peacebuilding actors. If our objective is to achieve
sustainable peace, women must be engaged in all
stages of the peace process, including mediation,
formal negotiations and post-conflict recovery and
reconciliation. That is why it is so important that
considerations involving the women and peace
and security agenda be mainstreamed into the
implementation of mission mandates.
In that spirit, Poland strongly supports recently
adopted resolution 2594 (2021), on United Nations
21-29893

21/10/2021

Women and peace and security

transitions, and hopes that it will translate into more
inclusive action on the ground. Poland also endorses
the work of the Peacebuilding Fund and its strategy for
2024, with its emphasis on the role of women and youth.
Lastly, we call for establishing a women and
peace and security coordination mechanism among
peace, humanitarian and development actors and host
authorities. The creation of a common framework or set
of tools for concrete work and progress on the ground,
as well as the regular exchange of expertise, experiences
and lessons learned, could be useful in that regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): It is good to be back
in the Chamber in person.
I will make some complementary remarks
to the intervention made by the observer of the
European Union.
Portugal commends the Kenyan presidency of the
Security Council for convening this open debate.
The long-term stabilization of societies emerging
from conflict presupposes women’s full, equal and
meaningful participation in peace processes. That was
recognized by resolution 1325 (2000), which underlined
the importance of including women in ceasefire and
peace processes, as well as decision-making and
policymaking. As the Secretary-General pointed out in
his 2020 report (S/2020/946), women’s organizations
and networks have proven to be essential leaders in
emergencies and indispensable to maintaining social
cohesion and preventing conflicts. However, women
have remained mostly absent throughout conflict
cycles. The radical shift called for by the SecretaryGeneral is therefore urgently needed.
Women in several countries are already actively
engaged in the prevention of conflicts, as well as
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and mediation efforts.
But a more purposeful and ambitious approach should
be put in place by the United Nations system as a whole.
To that end, the priorities laid out in resolution 2594
(2021) should be swiftly followed through on, including
the need to ensure that comprehensive gender analysis
and technical gender expertise are embedded in all
stages of planning, implementation and the review
of operations.

S/PV. 8886 (Resumption 1)

Portugal supports the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative. Precedence should be given to investments
in community-based local women’s networks and the
promotion of women’s leadership in conflict prevention,
resolution and mediation. Especially important are
grass-roots women’s groups, in particular those
mobilizing for peace and the promotion of human rights,
such as the Spotlight initiative, of which Portugal has
been a supporter since 2019.
As the concept note (S/2021/875, annex) rightly
points out, the proportion of women in military and
police components has significantly increased in recent
years. Portugal is among the Member States that have
contributed to that positive outcome. In addition,
my country has translated the women and peace and
security agenda into three successive national action
plans for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
In conclusion, through incremental but firm
steps, the United Nations and its States Members can
help women help their communities and, in doing so,
reinforce global peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Dominican Republic.
Mr. Blanco Conde (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): I am also very pleased to be here once again
in the Security Council Chamber. We are grateful for
the convening of this open debate and thank the briefers
for their valuable contributions.
During its membership of the Council, the
Dominican Republic joined in efforts to defend and
advance the women and peace and security agenda,
including in its assumption, together with Germany, of
the co-chairmanship of the Informal Expert Group on
Women and Peace and Security. We remain commitment
to strengthening the Council’s normative framework in
this area, in which, unfortunately, progress has been
persistently jeopardized by the glaring reality that
gender inequalities in peacebuilding continue and
women remain unacceptably excluded.
We firmly believe that women must play a broad and
crucial central role in conflict prevention and resolution
and peacekeeping. In that regard, we reiterate that no
process must be implemented if it is to the detriment
of women’s rights or young people. No peace process
will be credible — much less sustainable — without
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women.

21-2989325/30

S/PV.8886 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

The gender perspective and the protection of
women and girls’ human rights must not be addressed
as an isolated or circumstantial issue. It must be at the
forefront of the deliberations of the Security Council
and must be addressed in a cross-cutting and coherent
manner, including in the renewal of the mandates of
peacekeeping missions. We therefore commend the
Secretary-General’s decision to focus his 2022 report
on this theme to make women’s rights one of the most
visible and identifiable indicators in the work of the
United Nations in the area of peace and security. In
order translate those aspirations into reality, States
must invest in girls and women and ensure that women
participate in public life. It comes as no surprise to
us that the women account for only 23 per cent of the
public administration in countries in conflict.
Factors such as climate change intensify conflicts,
as in the case of the Lake Chad region and the Sahel,
where women and girls are disproportionately affected
by food insecurity, poverty, armed conflict, violent
extremism, gender discrimination and sexual violence.
How long will women’s bodies remain a battlefield?
Conflict-related sexual violence is a recurring, invisible
phenomenon with high levels of underreporting. It is
regrettable and concerning that none of the ceasefire
agreements reached between 2018 and 2020 included
gender-based provisions or provisions relating to the
prohibition of sexual violence.
Like gender-based violence, hate speech and
disinformation are being widely used to repress
women’s views, but what is more worrisome is that,
on many occasions, the choice has been made simply
to look the other way. Civil society and women human
rights defenders, as well as their physical space, must
be protected and supported by the Council so that they
can carry out their critical work without fear of reprisal.
Financial and human resources should be increased
and allotted to the gender component of peacekeeping
operations. Initiatives undertaken by Governments to
incorporate gender equality into security sector reform
are a crucial part of that work. This is an issue that
my country’s Ministry of Defence has assumed with a
great sense of responsibility.
In closing, despite the progress that has been made,
the challenges and difficulties are still enormous and
much remains to be done. We need to move from rhetoric
to action and ensure the effective implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda.
26/30

21/10/2021

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Ms. Chan Valverde (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
For the past 21 years, we have come to the Council to
commemorate the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
which has yet to fulfil its promise. It is not lack of
interest or capacity that is holding women back from
the full participation envisioned by the resolution; it is
discrimination, pure and simple. Discrimination lies at
the heart of every issue faced by women, regardless of
our identity or status. It operates in all spheres of our
lives and is by no means accidental; discrimination is
indeed both political and systemic.
Addressing the problem of women’s inclusion
in political and peace processes must be about more
than making physical space for us or making sure that
there are enough women in the room. It must be about
democratizing and reframing our discourse around
women and girls and transforming these spaces so that
they are truly capable of honouring our different roles,
experiences and contributions to society. On that note,
allow me to stress three points,
First, while the emphasis of the women and peace
and security agenda is rightly on the participation of
women and girls, it falls short in its framing of gender.
The resolutions under the women and peace and security
umbrella define gender in a binary sense, ignoring the
vulnerability of trans and gender-non-conforming people
and individuals of diverse sexual orientations, gender
identities, gender expressions and sex characteristics.
The binary framework is especially concerning because
we know that lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
intersex people are at particular risk throughout the
conflict cycle. It is crucial to incorporate a broader
understanding of gender into the agendas of women
and men alike. Such an understanding should take into
account disaggregated data on the full gender spectrum
in order to better understand the gendered impacts of
conflict and weapons, including small arms and light
weapons, cyberoperations, landmines and more.
Secondly, Costa Rica welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s most recent report on women and peace and
security (S/2021/827) and the recognition that attention
to excessive levels of global military spending has
been lacking in women, peace and security normative
frameworks, both globally and nationally. In fact,
disarmament and demilitarization have been almost
entirely absent from debates on this issue and from
21-29893

21/10/2021

Women and peace and security

national action plans. It is with a sense of urgency
that we must bring these two issues to the table and
to consider how gender norms, including militarized
masculinities, impact conflict and armed violence,
as well as the production, manufacture, acquisition,
possession and use of deadly weapons.
Thirdly, none of the resolutions on women and
peace and security explicitly mentions widows or
widowhood. However, these resolutions can serve as a
framework for integrating the specific needs of diverse
women — including armed-violence widows — in needs
analysis and recovery. Far from being helpless victims,
widows have also been at the forefront in calling for
the cessation of fighting, addressing root causes of
violence and conflict, and building sustainable peace.
This is recognized in the resolution introduced by the
Group of African States in the Third Committee. This
acknowledgement should be echoed in the walls of
the Council.
In conclusion, it is important to reinforce that the
four pillars of the women and peace and security agenda
are not optional. They represent binding commitments.
But Costa Rica strongly believes that it is the prevention
pillar that needs the most attention and the most work.
It is our duty to implement a robust prevention agenda
both for armed violence and armed conflict and for
gender discrimination, at both the national and the
international levels.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Ms. Oehri (Liechtenstein): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this important open debate on women
and peace and security. Liechtenstein thanks your
delegation in particular for bringing the membership
back to the Security Council Chamber for the first truly
open debate since the beginning of the coronavirus
disease pandemic. We hope that this meeting will set
a precedent for the return of the wider United Nations
membership in a safe manner to this Chamber, in the
true spirit of multilateralism.
Women’s full, equal and meaningful participation
in all stages of conflict prevention and resolution has
been a key pillar of the women and peace and security
agenda since its inception in 2000. Resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions acknowledge genderresponsive approaches to sustaining peace and women’s
crucial role as agents of change. For instance, resolution

S/PV. 8886 (Resumption 1)

2594 (2021), adopted in September, recognizes the role
of women and girls in peacekeeping transitions.
In many parts of the world, women have brought
political change and contributed to sustainable peace
as peacekeepers, mediators, lawyers, journalists and
human rights defenders, among others. Women’s
participation in peace talks has increased the probability
of peace agreements lasting two years by 20 per cent,
and those lasting 15 years by 35 per cent. Yet women
remain largely underrepresented ,such as in United
Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities, and
their contribution is often overlooked and understudied.
The relationship between the women and peace
and security agenda and respect for international
humanitarian law is one area that deserves further
research, especially given the increasing erosion of
respect for that body of law in recent times. To this end,
and in light of the twentieth anniversary of the women and
peace and security agenda, Liechtenstein has launched
a research project with the Georgetown Institute for
Women, Peace and Security to better understand the
effects of the presence of women in armed forces on
respect for international humanitarian law. The recently
launched study “Women in Uniform” shows how the
changing gender make-up of the military affects its
operations and culture, which can also have an impact
on compliance with international humanitarian law.
We remain deeply concerned about the situation
of women and girls in conflict, such as in Yemen,
Myanmar and the Tigray region of Ethiopia. We note in
particular the precarious situation of women and girls
in Afghanistan, who have fought with great courage and
resolve for their rights and freedoms. Their hard-won
gains are now under serious threat, and the Security
Council has an obligation to ensure that these gains
are not reversed. Liechtenstein calls for the respect
and protection of all human rights, including women’s
and girls’ rights to free expression and movement,
quality education and employment. Liechtenstein calls
on those who are effectively in control to comply with
their obligations under international human rights law
and relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2593 (2021).
That resolution encourages all parties to seek an
inclusive, negotiated political settlement with the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women
that responds to the desire of Afghans and adheres to
the rule of law. Peace cannot be built by imposing a

21-2989327/30

S/PV.8886 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

patriarchal society on women and girls. Any backsliding
on women’s political participation would be disastrous
for Afghanistan’s future and its prospects for peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Aidid (Malaysia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s important open debate in the
pre-pandemic format on women and peace and security
with an emphasis on women in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. Malaysia would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his remarks and briefers for
their briefings.
Malaysia remains convinced that women’s
participation is key to the success and longevity of
peace processes. As an elected member of the Security
Council in 2000, Malaysia supported the first and
landmark resolution on the topic, resolution 1325 (2000).
We also co-sponsored resolution 2538 (2020) on women
in peacekeeping, in 2020, in line with our commitment
to the women and peace and security agenda and the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
Malaysia continues to support efforts aimed at
enhancing the performance of peacekeeping operations
through supporting the full participation of women
in peace processes and making peacekeeping more
responsive to gender. In this regard, Malaysia has
recently deployed to Lebanon its largest number of
women peacekeepers serving under the United Nations
banner, a deployment consisting of 85 female personnel.
We are convinced that their participation will contribute
to promoting inclusiveness towards sustainable peace
and development.
At the same time, Malaysia supports efforts
to continuously update peacekeeping training
programmes so as to meet new challenges, including to
equip women peacekeepers with necessary skills, tools
and equipment at the operational and strategic levels.
We also believe that peacekeeping missions and peace
operations must be adequately supported to respond
to and prevent incidences of sexual and gender-based
violence in conflict areas. In this context, Malaysian
peacekeepers are continually trained, including in
areas of prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse, in
their predeployment training programme.
Malaysia also calls for greater efforts and
initiatives by Member States, United Nations entities
and civil society organizations in building capacity and
28/30

21/10/2021

advancing the women and peace and security agenda
at the national, regional and international levels. We
continue to support UN-Women, including through
consistent financial contributions in support of women’s
meaningful participation and the integration of gender
perspectives in peace and security processes.
At the regional level, Malaysia is committed to
working closely with other States members of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in
advancing the women and peace and security agenda.
In 2017, ASEAN adopted the Joint Statement on
Promoting Women, Peace and Security in ASEAN
at the thirty-first ASEAN summit. This commitment
was subsequently reaffirmed by the Joint Statement of
ASEAN Foreign Ministers, in 2019. In September 2020,
ASEAN held a Ministerial Dialogue on strengthening
women’s role in achieving sustainable peace and
security and reiterated our determination to enhance
the role of women in conflict prevention and resolution,
post-conflict reconstruction and rehabilitation. The
Ministerial Dialogue also expanded the network of
women in peace and security in Southeast Asia. At
present, ASEAN is finalizing its regional plan of
action on women, peace and security. In the area of
peacekeeping, the ASEAN women military and law
enforcement officers have made a positive impact
through their active participation in United Nations
peacekeeping operations globally.
Sustainable peace, gender equality and inclusive
institutions are at the heart of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. In this regard, Malaysia
remains committed to advancing the women and peace
and security agenda and ensuring the full mainstreaming
of women in all areas of peace and security thank you.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Ms. Ighil (Algeria): At the outset, I would like to
congratulate Kenya for its leadership in the presidency
of the Security Council for this month, and I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
debate on women and peace and security. I also thank
the briefers for their insightful briefings.
As we hold this debate amid our recovery efforts
from an unprecedented pandemic that brought to light
deep-seated disparities that especially affect women
and girls and pose severe threats in conflict zones, it is
due time to take stock of what we have achieved since
the inception of the women and peace and security
21-29893

21/10/2021

Women and peace and security

agenda in order to strengthen our commitment to the
full and effective participation of women in United
Nations-led peace processes. In this regard, the past 20
years have seen greater attention being given to the role
and representation of women in United Nations peace
operations. Increasingly robust mandates on women,
peace and security have been adopted with a greater
understanding of the need to use gender expertise
and analysis.
The proportion of women in military and police
components has begun to increase at a faster rate in recent
years, reaffirming the broad agreement that prospects
for successful peacekeeping and peacebuilding
activities are better where women have greater levels
of empowerment. However, despite this significant
progress, it is clear that more efforts are needed to
place women’s participation and leadership at the core
of conflict-prevention and peace-settlement efforts.
Against this backdrop and building upon our
commitment to the empowerment of women, Algeria
endeavours to promote the role of women as key actors
for peace at both the national and regional levels.
Indeed, as part of its implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), Algeria has adopted a national action plan
that will serve as a road map to define the country’s
priorities in the promotion of the role of women in
peace processes. This action plan was elaborated
by a multisectoral and multidisciplinary committee
composed of representatives of civil society, thereby
ensuring an inclusive and grass-roots approach.
Within the League of Arab States, Algeria led
the establishment of the Emergency Committee for
the Protection of Women in Armed Conflict, which
enabled the creation of an institution dedicated to peace
in connection with the Arab Women’s Committee. An
Algerian woman ambassador has been appointed to be
part of the “Mediators for Peace” mechanism set up by
the Committee in February 2020.
At the level of the African continent, the role of
women, who are the main victims of conflicts, crises
and forced displacement, remains major. In this regard,
Algeria has always advocated the strengthening
of the participation of women in peace processes
and conflict management within the African Union
(AU). Accordingly, Algeria hosted the first General
Assembly of the Network of African Women in Conflict
Prevention and Mediation, FemWise-Africa, which
aims at institutionalizing the place and role of women

S/PV. 8886 (Resumption 1)

in peace negotiations. These meetings helped shape the
debate on the importance of developing strategies to
accelerate women’s action in peacebuilding efforts and
stimulate dialogue among AU member States in order
to develop guidelines for gender-sensitive actions in
conflicts and post-conflict recovery processes.
My delegation believes that the success of our
common endeavour lies in the political will to empower
women and strengthen their ability to be at the centre
of the peacebuilding architecture. Two areas of action
should be considered in that regard.
First, we should reinforce the participation of women
in conflict resolution and peacekeeping operations. In
that regard, we should provide the necessary training
for mediators and envoys who participate in mediation
and ceasefire negotiations and in achieving peace and
preventive diplomacy. We should ensure that peace
agreements include provisions to strengthen the role
of women in conflict resolution, as was the case with
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
emanating from the Algiers process.
Secondly, we should reinforce dialogue and
engagement with the relevant stakeholders, such
as regional and national organizations and civil
society members that deal with peace, security and
development, in order to better understand the role
of women in a wide range of mediation and conflictprevention activities, especially in Africa.
Let me conclude by stressing that, more than
20 years after the establishment of the women and
peace and security agenda, the responsibility for its
implementation falls to us. As part of the international
community, we should strengthen our joint action
to meet the challenges faced by women and give the
United Nations the proper means to put women at the
centre of peace efforts worldwide. We can deliver on
the peace agenda only if we recentre the role of women
as a key element in achieving progress. Algeria is fully
dedicated to that common goal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the delegation of the Republic
of Kenya for holding this annual open debate on women
and peace and security under the theme “Investing
in women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding” to
shed light on women’s contribution and their role

21-2989329/30

S/PV.8886 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

in all phases of peacekeeping, peacemaking and
peacebuilding. I also thank the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. António Guterres, and all the briefers
for their valuable briefings. I sincerely congratulate
Ms. Sima Bahous, Executive Director of UN-Women,
on assuming that international important position. I
wish her success.
The women and peace and security agenda is a main
priority of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative that
was developed by the Secretary-General and supported
by the Kingdom of Bahrain. This topic has received
growing attention in the past 20 years, especially since
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), which stresses
the need for equal participation of women and men at
all levels, especially in decision-making, and including
women in peacebuilding and peacekeeping operations
during crises and conflicts facing humankind.
The Kingdom of Bahrain is keen to support all
genuine endeavours, especially those made during
difficult circumstances that the world is witnessing
today. We have noble goals of achieving an additional
paradigm shift to support the participation of women
in various peace operations and opening new horizons
for women in an equal and effective way in the
development sphere.
Under the leadership of the King of the Kingdom
of Bahrain, His Majesty Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa,
women are a top national priority, where they contribute
to maintaining the highest levels of social security,
ensuring the participation of women in all fields. Under
the leadership of His Royal Highness Crown Prince
and Prime Minister Salman bin Hamad Al Khalifa,
the Government is making ongoing efforts to develop
the necessary projects, programmes and plans so as to
include women as active members in comprehensive
development processes.
This year the Kingdom of Bahrain celebrates
the twentieth anniversary of the Supreme Council
for Women, presided over by Her Royal Highness
Princess Sabeeka Bint Ibrahim Al Khalifa, spouse
of His Majesty the King. The Supreme Council for
Women is a national structure that contributes to the
advancement of Bahraini women. It promotes their
effective role in building families and society, while
advancing comprehensive development based on the
integrated foundations of justice and equal partnership.

30/30

21/10/2021

The Supreme Council for Women is keen to effectively
participate in all efforts of relevant regional and
international bodies, including enhancing the role of
Bahraini women in their contribution to achieving
international peace and security, by ensuring their
presence in different regional and international forums.
The joint work for granting the second edition
of the Princess Sabeeka Bint Ibrahim Al-Khalifa
Global Award for Women’s Empowerment has started.
UN-Women, with the cooperation with the Supreme
Council for Women in the Kingdom of Bahrain, is now
accepting nominations for the award, which seeks to
show the efforts and contribution of Governments,
businesses and civil society organizations, as well as
accomplished experts, towards empowering women and
girls around the world. The main focus of the award,
which was first launched in 2018, is to encourage and
recognize national efforts in all countries to enable
women and establish a global forum to publicly express
appreciation for achievements by institutions and
individuals in empowering women. The focus is also
on the impact of including women in development
processes at the institutional and the country levels.
The award also represents a message to the world
from the Kingdom of Bahrain about the great importance
of the role of women in development leading to stability
and comprehensive peace.
In conclusion, we, in the Kingdom of Bahrain,
stress our support for all international efforts towards
the advancement and progress of women in achieving
gender equality at the development and humanitarian
levels so as to promote their participation as active
partners in security, peace and sustainable justice.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
Before concluding, I would like to once again thank
all the participants who joined us today. I would also like
to thank the Member States and regional groups that to
date have submitted written statements on the subject
of today’s discussion. Statements that are received by
the end of today will form part of the compilation of
statements from this meeting, and we look forward to
receiving more.
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

21-29893
