S/PV.9237

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9237th meeting

Monday, 9 January 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ishikane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Bongo
Mr. Issahaku
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-00910 (E)
*2300910*

S/PV.9237

The situation in the Middle East

The current mandate expires tomorrow. By confirming
its extension today, the Council can send a strong signal
of support for the Syrian people and for all humanitarian
actors, in particular the United Nations and its agencies
and partners, who work tirelessly to assist them.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2023/18, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Brazil and Switzerland.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I deliver this statement
on behalf of Switzerland and Brazil. We thank Japan
for convening this meeting and for providing us with an
opportunity to say a few words before the voting as the
new co-penholders on the Syrian humanitarian file in
the Security Council.
We would like to express our deepest appreciation
to our predecessors — Ireland and Norway — for their
exemplary efforts at the head of this important task over
the past two years. In that regard, we must also convey
our sincere gratitude to all members of the Council,
past and present, for their constructive engagement and
full cooperation towards the fulfilment of our shared
responsibilities. That that end, and building upon such
fundamental groundwork, we proceeded last week to
put draft resolution S/2023/18 into blue.
As we know, the text we are about to consider is
instrumental in maintaining the flow of life-saving aid to
the Syrian people. It ensures the continuation of crucial
work to address urgent needs, under the auspices of the
United Nations and in full accordance with all relevant
provisions. The draft resolution before us confirms the
extension of the border crossing at Bab Al-Hawa for an
additional six months, until 10 July 2023, in accordance
with paragraph 2 of resolution 2642 (2022), and requests
the Secretary-General to provide a special report on the
humanitarian needs in Syria no later than 10 June 2023.
2/8

09/01/2023

Brazil and Switzerland look forward to working
together as we set out in this new year to contribute,
to the best of our abilities, to the advancement of the
Syrian humanitarian file, in a spirit of transparency
and inclusiveness. We hope to be able to continue to
count on members’ steadfast support going forward.
We commend the draft resolution to the Council, and
we ask all members to support it.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting. I make this
statement before the voting, on behalf of the 10 elected
members of the Security Council (E-10), in Ecuador’s
capacity as coordinator for the month of January.
We remain concerned by the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in Syria, and we believe that
rapid, unimpeded and sustainable humanitarian access
is needed. The needs of the affected population have to
be at the centre of our work.
The E-10 reiterates its appreciation for the manner
in which, in July 2022, delegations rallied to adopt
resolution 2642 (2022) and worked together to achieve
a compromise text. We are here today to confirm
an additional six-month extension, as required in
paragraph 2 of the same resolution.
It allows for the much-needed delivery of
humanitarian assistance to be continued under the close
coordination and monitoring of the United Nations and in
line with the humanitarian principles of independence,
impartiality, neutrality and humanity. We appreciate
the role played by the previous co-penholders, Ireland
and Norway, over the past two years and have full
confidence in Brazil and Switzerland as the new
co-penholders on the Syria humanitarian file. The E-10
looks forward to the full and effective implementation
of resolution 2672 (2023), including the cross-border
mechanism, in order to address the dire and urgent
needs of the Syrian people, and reiterates the need for
the Council to also take into account the necessity of
providing more certainty and predictability for the
humanitarian organizations. I reiterate that the E-10
remains committed to addressing the humanitarian
needs of the Syrian people.
23-00910

09/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East

The President: I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, China, Ecuador, France, Gabon,
Ghana, Japan, Malta, Mozambique, Russian
Federation, Switzerland, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2672 (2023).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland): I am delivering this
statement on behalf of Brazil and Switzerland, as the
co-penholders of the Syrian humanitarian file.
We welcome today’s unanimous adoption by the
Security Council of resolution 2672 (2023), confirming
the continuation of the mandate for the humanitarian
cross-border mechanism in north-west Syria. It comes at
a time when the 4.1 million people in need of assistance
in north-west Syria are facing harsh winter conditions.
I therefore want to warmly thank all Council members
for their support. The resolution enables humanitarian
actors, particularly the United Nations and its agencies,
to continue to reach those in need in a coordinated and
carefully monitored manner. It extends a crucial lifeline
to the civilian population in north-west Syria, whose
needs are greater than ever, and allows humanitarian
actors to continue providing both life-saving and earlyrecovery assistance at scale. Rapid, unimpeded and
sustainable access is needed. We call on all parties to
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian aid.
We once again express our particular gratitude to
the previous co-penholders, Ireland and Norway, for
their tireless work on this file over the past two years
and for their diligent engagement paving the way for
today’s adoption. We also note with satisfaction the
continued and united support by the elected members
of the Council as we pass the baton from 2022 to 2023.
Lastly, it remains clear that a political solution to
the conflict in line with resolution 2254 (2015) must be
found to improve overall living conditions in Syria. In
our role as co-penholders with Brazil, we are guided by
the humanitarian needs of the Syrian population and the

S/PV.9237

universal principles represented by the United Nations
and its agencies and partners. Today’s adoption is an
important step to ensure that crucial life-saving aid
continues to reach those in need. We will work in a spirit
of shared responsibility with all Council members and
engage with partners on the ground towards achieving
that objective in the future.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, the delegation of the United Arab
Emirates aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of Ecuador on behalf of the 10 elected
members of the Security Council. We welcome the
Council’s unanimous adoption of resolution 2672 (2023),
extending the cross-border aid delivery mechanism
to Syria for an additional six months, and thank the
co-penholders of the Syrian humanitarian dossier for
their tireless efforts in preparing the draft resolution
for adoption without delay. We value the consensus
reached among Council members on this matter and
the priority given to the needs of the Syrian people over
political considerations.
The United Arab Emirates voted in favour of
resolution 2672 (2023), given the importance of the
mechanism in alleviating the suffering of our brother
people of Syria, who are facing a deteriorating
humanitarian situation. The mechanism has seen many
changes over the past years, and work remains to be
done to improve it to better respond to the current
conditions on the ground. It is imperative to find
solutions that respect the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria. That includes
increasing the volume and pace of cross-line aid
operations and early-recovery projects in accordance
with resolution 2642 (2022) and the resolution adopted
today, and in particular the provision of electricity to
Syrians as an indispensable basic humanitarian need.
My country also believes in the importance of
supporting demining efforts in Syrian territories,
owing to their catastrophic humanitarian consequences
for civilians, especially children and humanitarian
workers. We will focus on that issue during the
upcoming discussions on extending the mechanism
in July and will coordinate closely with Syria’s
humanitarian co-penholders and Member States.
In conclusion, we hope that the unity shown by
the Council today will prevail on all tracks related to
the Syrian crisis with a view to meeting the hopes and
aspirations of the Syrian people.

23-009103/8

S/PV.9237

The situation in the Middle East

Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
The United Kingdom welcomes the confirmation of
the United Nations cross-border mandate, which will
continue to provide life-saving assistance to those
in need in north-western Syria. We also strongly
welcome the unity of Security Council members in
their clear support for this humanitarian lifeline, and
we thank Switzerland, Brazil, Ireland and Norway for
their leadership.
There are 4.1 million Syrians who rely on the food,
medical supplies and other humanitarian products that
the mechanism provides. For now, they can breathe
a sigh of relief in the knowledge that such support
will continue. But we must ensure that we provide
more certainty to them and the United Nations and
non-governmental organization workers who serve
them. The humanitarian community consistently warns
that shorter mandates result in a perpetual cycle of
contingency planning, which limits the capacity to help
those in need. The Secretary-General has made it clear
that the humanitarian imperative demands a 12-month
mandate. Let that humanitarian call be the guiding
principle in our future discussions.
We are pleased that today the Council has played
its role in supporting the Syrian people. But the people
of Syria deserve more. A genuine political process in
line with resolution 2254 (2015) is the only sustainable
way to end the suffering for the people of Syria.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): As this is my first meeting of the Security
Council this year, I would like to welcome Japan as
President, as well as all of the other new members of
the Council.
The United States welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2672 (2023), on the crossborder humanitarian assistance delivery mechanism.
We applaud Brazil and Switzerland, as well as Ireland
and Norway, for their persistent efforts to make this
possible. I also want to extend my heartfelt thanks to
United Nations officials and aid workers for all they do,
day in and day out, to fully implement the mechanism
and address the dire needs on the ground.
Today, in extending the cross-border mechanism,
we have ensured that food, water, shelter and other
critical humanitarian assistance will continue to reach
the Syrian people. We have ensured that shipments of
medical equipment and treatments will not be cut off
from a country facing a horrific cholera outbreak. And
4/8

09/01/2023

we have ensured that the humanitarian workers I met
with during my two trips to the Bab Al-Hawa border
crossing will continue to do their heroic work. Today’s
vote allows the Syrian people to breathe a sigh of relief.
But while this lifeline will continue to operate, so much
more could have been done — and so much more still
needs to be done.
In July of last year, the Council was unable to
extend this mandate for a straightforward 12 months.
As a result, it has been harder and costlier for aid
workers to procure, hire and plan, and it has hindered
the selection and implementation of early-recovery
projects, which some critics of the mechanism claim
to want. A 12-month extension is needed for the
United Nations, and it is needed for our humanitarian
partners and for recipients. While it is important that
the Council came together today, let us be honest with
ourselves: this resolution represents the bare minimum.
In fact, renewing the resolution never should have been
a subject of debate. The debate we need to have is how
to strengthen the mechanism to reach more people with
more assistance.
In the coming months, we must show the Syrian
people that we will continue to put their humanity first,
that we will do everything in our power to increase
predictable access to those in need, because right now
needs across all of Syria, from the north-west to the
north-east and all 14 governorates of Syria, are greater
than they have ever been. The United Nations has stated
that 15.3 million people will need assistance in 2023.
That is a 5 per cent increase from last year. The vast
majority of those in need are women and children.
If we are going to meet this moment, we must back
up our words with action and, more specifically, with
adequate funding. And that is why we have long called
on the international community to provide generous
support to the Syrian humanitarian appeal for the
Syrian people. Yet the United Nations response plans
for vulnerable people inside Syria and Syrian refugees
in their host communities are badly underfunded. We
encourage those countries that criticize this lack of
funding to step up and help ease the suffering of the
Syrian people.
For our part, the United States is proud to be
the leading donor to both response plans. Even as
humanitarian needs around the world have spiked, our
commitment to the Syrian people is unwavering. Still,
we know that the Syrian people will not be able to enjoy
23-00910

09/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9237

the full peace, security and dignity that they deserve
until the conflict is over. And to that end, we call for
an immediate nationwide ceasefire and meaningful
engagement in an inclusive political process, in line
with resolution 2254 (2015).

experience and shortcomings in the implementation of
the resolution over the past six months so as to ensure
its full and effective implementation in the future and
make greater contributions to continuously improving
the humanitarian situation of all Syrians.

The United States will not support Al-Assad
regime-led reconstruction until there is lasting progress
on a political solution to the conflict. We once again
urge the Al-Assad regime to do what is necessary, after
so many years and after so much violence, to end this
brutal war and work towards a just and sustainable peace.

First, the sovereignty of Syria and the ownership
of the Government of Syria must be fully respected.
Cross-border assistance is a temporary arrangement
made under special circumstances, and the transition
to cross-line assistance must eventually be made in
an orderly manner so that the latter becomes the main
channel for humanitarian assistance to Syria. To that
end, the frequency and size of convoys of cross-line
assistance to north-west Syria must be significantly
increased, and cross-line assistance to the Rukban
refugee camp should resume as early as possible.
All the parties should ensure adequate supplies and
funding for cross-line assistance, step up coordination
with all the relevant parties, in particular the parties
in de facto control of north-west Syria, in order to
effectively improve the access environment for crossline assistance.

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): The
renewal of the cross-border humanitarian mechanism
is essential, as it remains a vital mechanism for
millions of Syrians. I welcome the efforts of Ireland
and Norway, as well as of Brazil and Switzerland, to
reach agreement on the renewal of resolution 2642
(2022), which enables the mechanism to continue until
July. France voted in favour of resolution 2672 (2023)
to join in the consensus. However, humanitarian actors
would need a mandate of at least 12 months and the
opening of a second cross-border crossing in order to
ensure more sufficient delivery of humanitarian aid for
the benefit of the population. Guaranteeing sustainable
and unhindered humanitarian access is the prerequisite
for ensuring effective assistance to the population.
The needs in Syria remain immense, and the
humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate. The
Security Council must live up to its responsibilities,
and France remains fully engaged in that regard. Our
position and that of our European partners is clear:
we will continue to provide support to respond to the
needs of the population. Moreover, we recall that any
change in France’s or the European Union’s position
regarding normalization, reconstruction and the lifting
of sanctions is subject to the regime committing to a
credible and inclusive political process, in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015), adopted unanimously by
the Council.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China voted in favour of resolution 2672 (2023) to
extend the cross-border humanitarian aid mechanism
to Syria. We commend Brazil and Switzerland for
their efforts as co-penholders, as well as Norway
and Ireland their previous efforts to that end. At the
same time, we hope that the Security Council and the
relevant United Nations agencies take this extension
as an opportunity to comprehensively sum up the

Secondly, vigorous efforts must be made for
quality and efficiency gains in early-recovery projects.
At present, the overall funding for early-recovery
projects needs to be improved. Early-recovery projects
in different sectors are seeing mixed progress, and
there are major differences in project implementation
among different regions. China urges all donors to
put the well-being of all Syrians first and promptly
and properly resolve those problems. The removal of
explosive remnants of war is important for restoring the
normal work and life of the Syrian people and should
be included in the scope of early recovery as early
as possible.
Thirdly, unilateral sanctions impede humanitarian
access in Syria, restrict its access to humanitarian
resources and run counter to the efforts by the
Council and the international community to improve
humanitarian access in, and increase humanitarian
resources for, Syria. The recent report of SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/933) also points out that unilateral
sanctions inhibit humanitarian agencies from procuring
supplies and dispersing funds. China once again urges
the relevant countries to immediately and fully lift the
unilateral sanctions on Syria.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Our delegation has made the difficult

23-009105/8

S/PV.9237

The situation in the Middle East

decision to support the adoption of resolution 2672
(2023), which extends until 10 July this year the United
Nations mandate for the use of the Bab Al-Hawa
crossing, through which humanitarian aid is delivered
from Türkiye to the terrorist-infested Syrian enclave.
This, however, should not be interpreted as a change in
our principled position on the cross-border mechanism.
Needless to say, the resolution in its current form
does not reflect the aspirations of the Syrian people,
who, in addition to effective humanitarian efforts,
expect the Security Council to respect Syria’s territorial
integrity and sovereignty — not in words, but in deeds.
The preservation of the cross-border mechanism, which
encroaches upon the universally recognized norms of
humanitarian assistance, in no way helps to advance
that objective.
Our vote today is our way to express our
appreciation to the previous co-penholders, Norway
and Ireland, for the way in which they approached the
negotiations on this resolution this time, as well as an
advance gesture of trust in the new co-penholders on
the Syrian humanitarian dossier in the Council — the
delegations of Brazil and Switzerland. We trust that
they will live up to this gesture and demonstrate a truly
non-politicized and objective approach to addressing
the growing problems in Syria. The resolution provides
six months and useful mechanisms in that regard,
including three rounds of the informal interactive
dialogue and the issuance of the report of the United
Nations country team in Syria on the adverse impact
of the illegitimate unilateral sanctions, which must be
submitted to the Security Council in full.
It is important that everyone clearly understands
that there can be no talk of an automatic extension of
the cross-border mechanism. Expectations for a new
six-month extension in July will be borne out only if
the approach of the members of the Security Council
towards the provision of humanitarian assistance to
Syria changes fundamentally by then.
For the moment, we see that the Western delegations
continue to treat this topic opportunistically and have
no intention of conscientiously implementing the
provisions of resolutions 2585 (2021) and 2642 (2022).
They never cared, and continue not to care, about
the needs of ordinary Syrians. All that our Western
colleagues are interested in is maintaining the crossborder mechanism as a tool to exert political pressure
over Damascus, as well as supporting the Hayat
6/8

09/01/2023

Tahrir Al-Sham terrorists, who continue to benefit
from deliveries through this mechanism. Instead of
providing an honest assessment of the current situation
and working to improve it, our Western colleagues in
the Security Council are focusing efforts on inflating
the myth that deliveries through the cross-border
mechanism allegedly cannot be supplanted by crossline deliveries, which do not violate the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Syria.
To that end, the Western delegations — unfortunately,
alongside the United Nations agency representatives
who do their bidding — are doing all they can to create
a smokescreen around the real statistics related to
humanitarian assistance. Council members were able
to observe these diversionary manoeuvres during three
rounds of informal interactive dialogue. But not even
those efforts helped to conceal the fact that there are
grave geographical imbalances in the implementation
of early-recovery projects in Syria. The facts speak for
themselves — half of the funds go to Idlib, and only
35 per cent of the funds reach the territories in which
the majority of the Syrian population resides. This is a
stark example of the politicized approach of Western
States to the issue of humanitarian assistance.
To this day, Western delegations continue to
extol their efforts to provide deliver humanitarian
assistance to Syria and are carefully sidestepping
another extremely uncomfortable issue: their criminal
unilateral sanctions that have an adverse impact on
ordinary Syrians. It is those sanctions that are the
main factor behind the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in Syria. Essentially, Western countries are
deliberately worsening the situation, trying to delay the
process of normalizing the situation in the country as
much as possible in order to discredit the efforts of its
legitimate Government.
In the same vein, they create artificial obstacles to
the return of refugees from neighbouring countries to
Syria owing to fears that in the event of a mass return
of fellow citizens, the Syrian Government will reap
political dividends. We believe that such unscrupulous
political games concerning Syria must end. That is not
only our position, but also the will of the Syrian people.
In other words, we are in favour of the provision of
humanitarian assistance to all Syrians, without double
standards or discrimination, and for that to be done in
good faith, without politicization and without parallel,
unilateral and asphyxiating measures that invalidate
23-00910

09/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East

any humanitarian assistance. I truly hope that we
will be able to reach this seemingly simple and clear
objective by July. We urge our colleagues not to waste
time and to cast aside the mantra about the alleged
lack of alternatives to the cross-border mechanism,
which hinges solely on their unwillingness to abandon
this mechanism.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.
Japan welcomes the adoption of the resolution 2672
(2023), which renews the cross-border aid mechanism
for another six months.
We especially appreciate the tireless efforts of
Norway and Ireland, as former co-penholders, and
Brazil and Switzerland, as current co-penholders, to
pave the way for this important decision. The unity
of the 10 elected members of the Security Council
on this issue remains crucial, and we stand behind
this resolution.
As a result of prolonged conflict surrounded by
a complex political landscape in Syria and beyond,
humanitarian needs in Syria have reached record levels.
According to the special report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/933), an estimated 15.3 million people across
Syria this year will desperately rely on life-saving
assistance, such as food, water, shelter, education and
vital medical supplies.
We acknowledge the divergent views among
the Council members on the effectiveness of each
aid modality in Syria. At this moment, however, the
existing cross-border operation through Bab Al-Hawa
crossing remains the most effective option, provides a
satisfactory level of transparency and meets the basic
needs of the Syrian people, including women and
children in the north-west, at both scale and scope,
as indicated by the Secretary-General’s assessment.
While Japan welcomes the renewal of the cross-border
mechanism for another six months, we strongly believe
that the mandate should be at least one year, as six months
is not sufficient to provide the necessary assistance.
Given the dire humanitarian situation in Syria,
it is critical to appropriately evaluate and address the
need for early-recovery activities, including basic
infrastructure-related projects, such as electricity and
water. Japan is willing to further support such earlyrecovery programmes.

S/PV.9237

Additionally,
cross-line
assistance
could
complement cross-border assistance through the
meaningful cooperation of the Syrian Government and
other relevant actors on the basis of this resolution.
However, the cross-border mechanism remains a vital
lifeline for millions of Syrians.
Finally, the Council must prioritize the needs of
the Syrian people and expand its assistance through all
available modalities. Japan will continuously support
the Syrian people, under the concept of human security,
because it is our duty to alleviate the humanitarian
crisis, placing people at the centre and leaving no one
behind, while continuing to seek a political solution to
the Syrian conflict in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): The
Syrian Arab Republic has been making every effort to
provide basic services to the Syrian people. It has been
working relentlessly to improve their living conditions
and is cooperating with the United Nations and its
humanitarian agencies to provide assistance to all
Syrians without discrimination.
Syria has engaged positively with the important
aspect included in resolution 2585 (2021) for the first
time, namely, support for early-recovery activities,
since those projects are fundamentals for improving
the humanitarian situation in Syria and in reducing
dependence on life-saving humanitarian assistance.
The efforts that were made before the adoption of
resolution 2642 (2022) led to adding the electricity
sector to the list of the sectors most in need for earlyrecovery activities and projects.
The significant efforts by Syria to improve the
humanitarian situation of Syrians have been met
with real challenges and countless difficulties that
until today have hindered the achievement of tangible
progress in the humanitarian situation. Some Western
States continue to politicize humanitarian work and to
demonstrate lack of any true will to achieve progress in
the humanitarian situation, as reflected in their failure
to deliver on their pledges to fund the humanitarian
response plan, and their unflagging imposition of
illegitimate, unilateral and coercive measures on the
Syrian people. All of that has aggravated the suffering

23-009107/8

S/PV.9237

The situation in the Middle East

of Syrians and made it impossible to achieve the goals
that we had hoped to achieve pursuant to the resolutions
I mentioned.
While the Security Council was considering
the extension of resolution 2642 (2022), the Syrian
Arab Republic was keen to brief the Council on our
assessment of what has been achieved during the past
year and a half and on important aspects to be included
in any new resolution according to the following.
First, we reaffirm that electricity and energy for
basic services be provided and that renewable-energy
projects be implemented to support the electricity
sector. There is a need also to include vital sectors
within early-recovery projects to particularly support
field work in the area of mine clearance and the removal
of unexploded remnants for the great importance of
saving the lives of civilians.
Secondly, it is crucial to expand early-recovery
projects in the context of the humanitarian response
plan, both quantitatively and qualitatively.
Thirdly, efforts are essential for providing basic
services to guarantee the dignified, safe and voluntary
return of refugees and support for returning internally
displaced persons in Syria.
Fourthly, the negative repercussions of the unilateral
coercive measures on humanitarian work in Syria and
on the efforts of the United Nations and its agencies in
that regard must be acknowledged, as described in the
report of the Secretary General (S/2022/933) pursuant
to resolution 2642 (2022).

8/8

09/01/2023

Fifthly, as also mentioned in the Secretary-General’s
report, donors must be called upon to live up to their
commitments and fund the humanitarian response plan
in Syria, particularly as the plan’s funding did not reach
50 per cent until the end of last year.
Sixthly, focus on enhancing the delivery of
assistance from inside Syria is essential for achieving
real progress in that area, taking into account that
assistance delivered from within Syria is in line with
the fundamental principles of humanitarian work, in
particular respect for Syria’s sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity.
In conclusion, my delegation underscores that
making progress in the humanitarian situation in
Syria requires ongoing development and improvement
process. The technical extension of resolution 2642
(2022) is therefore not adequate for supporting that
process. Accordingly, Syria emphasizes that it will
continue assessing the implementation of that resolution
through meetings of the informal interactive dialogue
to be held by the Security Council to take stock of
the progress achieved between now and the end of the
resolution’s mandate on 10 July.
My country remains ready to work with Council
members, especially the two co-penholders, to
guarantee that any relevant resolution adopted by the
Council in the future will respond to the aspirations of
the Syrian people and their humanitarian needs while
fully respecting Syria’s sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

23-00910
