UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

st

*
MEET1

82

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Pt&y

Provisionalagenda(S/Agenda/2361)

,,...........

..........I.............

1

Adoption of the agenda . . ..*....**.......,................I..,....,....

I

Complaint by Seychelles:
Report of the Security Council Commission of Inquiry established under
resolution 496 ( I98 I) (S/14905/Rev.l) . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . .

I

SIPV.236 I

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
*‘.i <
Documents of the Security Counc)l’isymbol S;.‘. .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Ofjciul Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement rn which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
*
The resolutions of the Security ~Councif, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2361st MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 21 May 1982, at 6.15 p.m.
2. The PRESIDENT
fintc~~p,.(,totic,fl
j;w/u
C'/~i,t~~.w):
I should like to inform members of the Council
that
I have also received
letters from the representatives
of Afghanistan.
Barbados.
Bulgaria,
the German
Democratic
Republic.
Grenada,
Hungary.
Mali.
Mozilmbique.
Nicntiqun.
Pakistan.
Sao Tome :\nd
PI*incipe, the United Republic of Tanzania.
Viet Nnm
ilnd Yugoslavia
in which they request to hc invited
to participate
in the discussion
of the item on the
Council‘s
ikgcnd:\. In conformity
with the usual
pvocticc I prtrpasc,
with the consent of the Council.
to
invite thuhc I’cprt‘\cntativcs
tu pi\rticipatc
in the discu\\ic>n bvithout the right to vott’. in acccll*d:!ncc with
the I’clcvilnt provi\iuns
of the C’h:\rtcr ;Lnd IXIIC .17 of
the pl’~~vi&~ni\l
QUICKc>f proccdurc.

7. The PI-?i:SIDI:NT
fifrtf,~./)l.r'ttltir,ll
,/~JI~F
(‘Iri/r~~~v~:
I \hould
like to inform mcmhcr\
of the C’ouncil that
alth~~ugh thcrc is ;I long liht of 4pc:kkcr\ for thih meeting.
tracing to the latcncsh of the hour only \cvcn 4pcilkCI.h
\\ill hc hci1I.d thi\ cvcning.
The I.cmilining
\pci\kcts
\\ill be htxrd at the nest meeting of the C’ouncil on
this item.
4. MI.. NISIBC~RI
(Jilp:m): With rcpnrd to the qt~t‘stion before us. I should like to remind the mcmhcrs
of the Council
that ilt our meeting on this item last
December.
my delegation
stated that the aggression
by mercenaries
ug;tinst the Republic of Seychelles
OII
25 November
1981 was an extremely
regl.ettiLbIe incident, involving
a CICW violation
of the terlitc>l-ial integrity cJf the Republic
of Seychelles and a threat to its
political
independence
[2.114th uwtin,y, prrtr. 38 I.
At the same time. my delegation
pointed
out that
since there were ;I number- of factual uncertnintit’s
swwunding
the incident,
it was imperative
that the
Council
be presented
with all relevant
information
in order to enable its members
to determine
appropriate meilsures
to be taken [ihid.,
plan.
41 I.

Commission
cannot
exclude
that furthel
significant information relating to its mandate may
become available, particularly
during the course
of the trial on the hijacking charges . I . in South
Africa.”
sion. The

My delegation
has, in various forums of the
United Nations, repeatedly stressed the need to
strengthen the fact-finding capacity of some of its
organs, including the Security Council. Thus, it strongly supported Council resolution 496 (1981) of 15 December 1981 establishing a Commission of Inquiry to
investigate the complaint made by the Republic of
Seychelles. My delegation was privileged to serve as
a member of that Commission.
5.

10. In the light of recent testimony that was given
by Michael Hoare in a South African court and somewhat sensationally reported by major international
news media. my delegation is of the view that the
Commission’s reservations have been fully vindicated.
The information that continues to be made available
following the Commission’s
submission of its report
on 15 March should be closely examined. In this
connection, I should like to call the attention of the
Council members to the sixth recommendation
contained in paragraph 293 of the report. which reads iIs
follows:

6. I should like to take this opportunity to place on
record my deep admiration for the leadership and
wisdom of the Chairman of the Commission of Inquiry.
Mr, Azores Typaldos of Panama, and the spirit of
teamwork displayed by him and the other member of
the Commission, Mr, Craig, of Ireland. The staff of
the Secretariat also deserves a high tribute for its
unflagging support and professional assistance in
advancing the work of the Commission.

“Should the Security Council so desire. the Commission might be authorized to furnish a supplcmentary report in due course containing any further
information relative to its mandate.”

7. I wish also to thank Mr. Azores Typaldos for his
helpful and comprehensive introduction of the Commission’s report dated I5 March 1982. As is clear from
the report, the members of the Commission made
every effort to fulfil the mandate entrusted to them
by resolution 496 ( 1981) to investigate the origin,
background and financing of the mercenary aggression of 25 November I981 against the Republic of
Seychelles, as well as to assess and evaluate economic
damages. I believe that in pursuance of the mandate
the Commission did its best to leave no stone unturned in seeking with objectivity and fairness to
establish the facts concerning the incident at Mahi
International Airport.

I I. My delegation is of the view that the Council’s
first task is to consider whether or not to request the
Commission to submit another report supplementary
to the one before us. Certain ambiguities on the tinancing may also be clarified if further information
is collected from diverse sources including Michael
Honre and Gerard Hoareau, a Seychellois resident
in South Africa who seems to have been closely involved in the actual attack.
12. Another aspect of the incident which I should
like briefly to touch upon relates to economic damages.
There is no doubt that the economy of Seychelles
suffered as a result of the unprovoked
mercenary
attack last November. As the report points out in
paragraph 27 I,

8. According to the findings of the Commission,
there is no doubt whatsoever that the primary objective of the mercenaries was to overthrow the Government of Seychelles with the alleged goal of installing Mr. James Mancham as the head of State,
Seychelles was clearly the victim of aggression: its
sovereignty and territorial
integrity were unquestionably violated by mercenaries from outside the
country, although some Seychellois exiles were
apparently also involved.

“While the numbers involved in this aggression
may be small, . . . given the small size and limited
resources of Seychelles, the aggression posed iI
grave threat to the sovereignty and independence
of the country and seriously disrupted its daily life.”

9. The Commission was able to interview the mercenaries who were in custody in Seychelles while
awaiting trial for their serious offences, and its hearing
of them constitutes a very important part of the report
before us. Owing to legal constraints in South Africa,
however, the Commission was unable to question
those mercenaries-particularly
Michael Hoare, the
central figure of the mercenary operation-who
returned to South Africa aboard a hijacked Air India
aircraft immediately
after the abortive attack. The
report is very candid in this regard in stating in par&
graph 274 that the available information is incomplete
and that:

13. In this regard we are pleased to note that the
direct physical damages to the airport have been
repaired, thanks to the diligent efforts of the Government and people of Seychelles, with the co-operation
of friendly countries,
14. However. we cannot ignore another aspect of
the incident, and that is its impact on the national
economy of Seychelles. The major industry in that
country is tourism, which in recent years has generated nearly 70 per cent of its foreign exchange earnings
and absorbed more than IO per cent of its work force.
Because tourism is highly sensitive to political, social
and economic disturbances, the attack unquestionably dealt a serious blow not only to that industry but

“The Commission does not have full knowledge of
the origin and background of the mercenary aggres2

tu the national economy as a whole. Although the
report says it is too early to make a definitive assessment and evaluation of damages to the tuurist industry.
it cim be assumed that the Seychelle’s economy will
be adversely affected in 1982 as a result of the mercenary attack. We are confident. however, that the
efforts of the leaders and people of Seychelles. with
international
co-operation.
will enable the country
to overcome its economic difficulties in the neal
future,
15. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) fi/lf(~/‘/,,.c’totion ~?orn R~.s.ritr~): First of all.
Sir. allow me to congratulate you on the way you are
discharging your responsibilities
as President of the
Council for the month of May and to express the hope
that under your competent leadership the Council will
successfully carry out the difficult tasks facing it.
16. I should also like to thank Mr. Kamanda wa
Kamandu for his successful leadership of the work of
the Council during April.
17. We listened with great attention to the clear and
convincing statement of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Seychelles,
who put forward his Government’s position on the item now before the Council.
From the very beginning, the Soviet delegation has
vigorously supported the appeal made by Seychelles
to the Council.
On 25 November 1981, in violation
of the generally accepted norms, standards and principles of international
law, a brazen act of provocation was carried out against that small country. A group
of mercenaries intruded upon its territory in order to
overthrow the legitimate Government of that country. and carried out military actions that caused loss
of life and material damage. In other words, aggressive
action was carried out against Seychelles, and it was
yet another specific manifestation of the implementation of the policy of international
terrorism directed by
those in imperialist circles against young. independent
States that have embarked upon the road of independent national development.
18. In December 1981, in the Council, the Soviet
Union supported resolution 496 (1981). which provided for the sending of a commission to investigate
the origin. background and financing of the mercenary
aggression as well as to assess and evaluate economic
damages.
19. It is the opinion of the Soviet delegation that the
Commission
of Inquiry, under the leadership of the
representative
of Panama, Mr. Ozores Typaldos,
carried out useful work on the whole. Its report contains significant factual material. In spite of the fact
that the obstructionist
position taken. for obvious
reasons, by the racist rkgime of South Africa did not
idlow the Commission to establish all the facts within
its sphere of competence, it is already possible on the
basis of the material in the report to trace the course
of events with sufficient clarity and to reach some
preliminary
conclusions.

20. The Commission’s
report shows incontrovertibly that a group of mercenaries carried out an act of
aggression against Seychelles and intended to overthrow the legitimate
Government
of that country.
The immediate
preparation
and planning for that
aggression. including the recruiting of the mercenaries who carried it out, took place on the territory of
South Africa, New facts contained in the statement uf
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Seychelles and in the statements of the representatives of other States, as well as the additional facts
which have come to light since the publication of the
Commission’s
report, all testify to the fact that the
South African authorities not only knew about the
aggression being prepared but were the initiators
and organizers of those actions.
21, That is a normal manifestation of the policy of
the State-terrorist
racist rkgime of Pretoria, which
intends to crush the aspirations of the people of Africa
to freedom, independence,
equal rights and social
progress. It is a customary link in the chain of the
bandit-like attacks made by the racist rCgime against
the neighbouring African countries.
22. Those actions by South Africa have repeatedly
been the subject of discussion and condemnation
in the Security Council, The Council of Ministers of
the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) at theit
thirty-eighth
session, held at Addis Ababa in February 1982. vigorously condemned the racist rigime
of South Africa for the planning, organization and
financing of armed aggression against the people and
the State of Seychelles.’
23. There is no doubt that the rulers of South Africa
could not persist in carrying out that reckless policy
if they did not enjoy comprehensive
assistance and
support from the forces of international imperialism.
24. The Soviet delegation
supports a number of
which appear in paragraph 293
recommendations
of the Commission’s
report, in particular the second,
on the need for the rapid completion of the drafting
of an international
convention
against the recruitment, use, financing and training of mercenaries. In
this connection, I would emphasize that for two s~ssions the representatives of some Western countries
in the Ad Nor* Committee on the drafting of an International convention against the Recruitment,
Use,
Financing and Training of Mercenaries have been
trying, for various reasons and on various pretexts,
to delay and hamper the drafting of this important
international legal document.
25. The Soviet delegation
shares the opinion
expressed in the statement of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Seychelles to the effect that the Commission’s report should be considered as preliminary, as
one requiring additional
work in the light of new
material. Therefore. we support the request of the
Government
of Seychelles on the need to continue

the work of the Security Council
Commission
established under resolution
496 ( 19811, so that the Commission can complete its work and present the Council with specific
recommendations
on the basis of
which the Council can take due measures
concerning
those responsible
for the aggression
and concerning
protection
of the sovereignty
of the Republic
of Seychelles.

godless and lawless men against the sister
of Seychelles
on 25 November
I98 I.

Republic

3 I. Following
the events of 25 November
I981 in
the Seychelles,
the Council
considered
the question
entitled “Complaint
by Seychelles”
at its meeting on
IS December
[23/4th n~rcting],
when it unanimously
adopted resolution
496 ( I98 I ).
32. In ptuagraph
3 of that resolution,
the Council
decided to send a commission
of inquiry composed
of three members of the Security
Council in order to
investigate
the origin,
background
and financing
of
the 25 November
1981 mercenary
aggression
against
the Republic
of Seychelles.
as well 21s assess and
evaluate economic
damages, and to report to the Security Council
with recommendations,

26. Furthermore.
the Soviet
delegation
believes
that the Council
should take far-reaching
measures
concerning
the racist rlgime
of Pretoria
in order to
prevent such attacks on independent
sovereign
States
-the
Seychelles or any other country.
27. The Soviet Union states its solidarity
with and
support for the Seychelles people,
who showed bravery and firmness in dealing with the schemes of the
henchmen of imperialism.
We heartily
wish the friendly
Republic of Seychelles success on the road that it has
chosen towards building
a new society in conditions
of peace and quiet.

33. The Council today has that report before it, contained in document
S/l4905/Rev.
I of I5 March 19X2.
In this regard, I am pleased to congratulate
the Cummission of Inquiry.
and its ~Chairman in particular,
for
the fine work done, for the excellent
report drawn up
and for the eloquent
manner
in which it was introduced. The Togo delegation
is also pleased with the
thoroughness
with which the inquiry
was carried out
and with the objectivity
with which facts and situations have been reported.

28. Mr.
AMEGA
(Togo)
(int(~,.p~‘c~tutit,n,fhm
FIYW~~: Fate has decreed.
Mr. President,
that you
should assume the presidency
of the Council
at a time
when it is considering
a problem
that is crucial fol
the third world-the
phenomenon
of mercenaries.
I am pleased to convey to you. Mr. President.
my
warm congrntulutions.
You belong to ~1 country
with
which mine hns good relations
of friendship
and cooperation.
a country
whose age-old
civilization
and
inspired
knowledge
have given its people
the great
uixdom
which you epitomize.
That gtrut wisdom und
your mastt9.y of internntionul
issues are guarontccs
of the \IICCL‘SS of our work.

34. On 25 November
1981, the Government
and
people of Seychelles,
who seek only to live in peace.
fell victim to an act of aggression
by mercenaries
whose aim was to overthrow
the Government.
The
nature of that act of aggression.
an act unanimously
condemned
by the Council,
was made even clearer by
the specific information
given us by the Commission
of Inquiry i\nd cnablcs us once again to appreciate
the
true sci\lc of those mercenary
activities
and their canscqutxces
for the life of our countries.
the countrit’s
of the third world in general and the hmnllrst among
them in pilrticulilr.
The report submitted
to the C’ouncil rc~culs once ilgi\in the now fumili;u-. classic pattern
0f I‘Cliltions hctwccn
tllc pLlyITlilStC:l’S.
rccruitcrs
illld
trilincr\
of mcrccnarics
and their l,pcrations.

29. I take thih opportunity
to pay it warm tribute
tcr yc,ur prcdcccaor.
Mr. Kumunda
wi\ Kamandu
of
Zaire. for the dedication
ilnd dctormination
thut hc
4ht)wcd Iilht month in hccking II solution
to the probIcmj of the mamcnt and for the quality
of the work
done. The rchults i\Chicvcd under his prchidcncy
ticrc‘
the LI 1)l.k of iI milstt’r we’ll vcrscd in wielding
the millIct with iI firm h:lnd and ;I supple wrist.

35. IV:C h;rvc often witnessed
an anomaly:
whet1
horde‘\ of mcrcenarics
inv;ldc
an independent
sovintcrnutional
public
opinion.
condicrcign
State.
tioned by II ccrtuin type of press, merely shrugs it off’,
or simply remains indifferent.
Rut when it comes to
bringing
those mercenaries
to triill.
the victimized
Statch
come Up il&litlSt
an ilIlIll)St
general 0lltCl.y
from
that s;lmt! body of opinion.
Attention
W;\S drawn to
this anomaly by the Minister
for Foreign
Affilirs and
Co-operation
of the Republic
of Togo at the thirtysixth session of the General Assembly
when he stated:

30. The problem
hcfore us today is a suhstantivc
prohlcm
who~c gravity ih frilly apprt‘ciutcd
hy thih
body. HCIT ilnd clscwhcrc.
my delegation
hilb milde
known
Togo’s position on matters
relating
to peace
and hccurity among nations.
It is important
to make
clc’ar once again my Govcrnmcnt’s
position
concerning
the activities
of mcrccnaries.
which
for OLII
small countries huve become ;I nightmare.
the prl)ll)npiltiun of which brings with it a thousand
dangers dctrimental to internutionul
pcxe
and security.
Furthcrmore.
the statements
made by previous
spc;lkcrs
demonstrate
the deep concern caused by this serious
infringement
of the sovereignty
of States, this flagrant
violation
of internntionnl
law-the
use of mercenaries,
From this stems the importance
of these meetings
devoted
to the premeditated
aggression
of those

“Arrest
mercenaries
and their licensed
recruiters
nnd try thorn with all possible
guarantees
for thei!
defence: you will be submerged
with letters, deckiI’iltiOllS,
article‘s in newspapers
and other met-&cious prl)pilgktndi\
publications
of asociatiuns
fL)l
the rights of I don’t know what people.“’

4

36. That is why I stressed just now the importance
of this series of Council meetings. It should allow us
to adopt firm measures to confront resolutely a scourge
which has lasted for too long. In these circumstances,
the Council must be consistent in condemning
the
activities of the forces of evil represented by mercenaries, and take effective steps to prevent their activities. Such an attitude on the part of the Council must
strengthen the efforts of the ,.4clHoc Committee on the
Drafting of an International
Convention Against the
Recruitment,
Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries. *

In paragraph 272. the Commission.
which went to
South Africa, deplored the fact that it was:
“not . . , permitted to interview the mercenaries
who returned to South Africa aboard the hijacked
Air India plane. In particular it was handicapped
by not having an interview with the lender of the
mercenaries, Michael Hoare.”
Indeed. one must wonder why the Pretoria authorities did nut allow the Commission of Inquiry to see
Michael Huare and his accomplices, who had sought
refuge in South Africa. Finally, in paragraph 281 we
read that:

37. The use of mercenaries to destabilize the Government of an independent and sovereign State is,
first and foremost, a denial of the right of peoples to
determine their own future. In order to understand
its beginnings, it may be useful to go back to the origins of colonialism
and to its philosophy,
Unfortunately, the limited framework of this debate does not
allow me to undertake such an exercise: I shall therefore confine myself to recalling that when a few years
ago our young States were joyously emerging, we
perceived that historic event as a turning point in the
lives of our peoples. However, we had not reckoned
with the will and designs of colonialism,
which, I%]
from renouncing
its despicable practices, merely
changed its face. In order to contain the qualitative
changes in international
relations which they were
obliged to accept, those who harked back to the “good
old days” invented the use of mercenaries in an attempt to destabilize
sovereign independent
States
whose only offence was to follow a policy different
from what the colonialists
would have preferred.
Thus, mercenary aggression is not an isolated act
of chance. It is the strategy of those who still dream
of reconquering the territory of others by force and of
installing
there governments
subordinate
to their
will.

“Martin Dolinschek.
who is in custody in Seychelles, stated to the Commission that he was a
serving member of the National Intelligence Service
of South Africa.”
The Pretoria authorities
deny that statement.

have refused to confirm

ut

39. No wonder that a State which, domestically.
does nut shrink from any act, however vile it may be,
of mistreatment of its own nationals, should fail outside its borders to respect international rules, Those
who still attach any credit at all to racist, fascist South
Africa must now face the facts and adopt appropriate
measures to change the domestic and foreign policy
of that country.
40. For our part, we consider South Africa’s studied
cynicism in this matter, as well as the complacency
of the authorities of that country towards the mercenaries involved in the abortive coup against the
sister Republic of Seychelles and the total impunity
which the latter have enjoyed, as sufficient proof of
that country’s role in the 25 November act of aggression.

38. The role played by South Africa in the abortive
act of force by South African mercenaries against the
sister Republic of Seychelles on 25 November
1981
is obvious. In this respect, I should like to quote
relevant passages from the report of the Commission
of Inquiry, In paragraph 278, it is stated that:

41. Moreover, South Africa, the country from which
the mercenaries came and which welcomed them
back, maintains that it is all right to conspire against
Indeed, in paragmph 200 of
a foreign Government.
the report of the Commission of Inquiry, the Minister
of Justice of the South African rigime is quoted as
saying that:

“The immediate preparations for and planning of
the mercenary aggression . , . took place in South
Africa . . . A number [of mercenaries1 were reservists in the South African defence forces. to whom
call-up papers had been issued.”

“in general terms, he was not aware of any law.
either statutory or common law, which, as such,
prohibited people from conspiring against anuthel
Government.
Only if some law had been contravened in the process might prosecution be warrnntcd.”

IR paragraph 282, we read:
“Given the tight and effective control exercised
by the security authorities in South Africa. and
the nature of the preparations for the mercenury
operation of 25 November
I981 . . . particularly
the procurement and test-firing of the weapons, the
Commission
finds it difficult to believe that the
South African authorities did not at least have knowledge of the preparations in this matter.”

42, Peace and security are a pressing need fur all
States. That is particularly true fur young States such
as ours, It is imperutive for their stability and for their
economic and social development. That is why my
delegation believes that the activities of mercenaries
must be declared a crime against humanity, a crime
5

against international
peace and security, and that
those who are guilty, once arrested, must be punished
appropriately.
In this regard, Togo, a member of the
Ad Hoc Committee on the Drafting of an International
Convention Against the Recruitment,
Use, Financing
and Training
of Mercenaries,
attaches the highest
importance
to United Nations efforts to put a stop
to the activities of mercenaries.

46. The constant attention given by the Government of Togo to the matter of international peace and
security derives from the unshakable, determination
of the Government and people of Togo to devote all
their energies and strength to economic and social
development and to promote a policy of co-operation
with all the peoples of the world that love peace and
justice. It is with that in view that Togo once again
takes this opportunity
firmly and unequivocally
to
condemn the use of mercenaries to destabilize independent and sovereign States.

43. My delegation warmly hopes that the work of
the Committee
will lead to the adoption of an international convention effective enough to eradicate this
scourge once and for all.

47. The PRESIDENT
(intclprcttrtion
from
C'hinc.vr): The next speaker is the representative of Muldives. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

44. My delegation stressed just now the importance
of this series of meetings and called for a firm stand
by the Council and the adoption of effective measures
to discourage the development of the use of mercenaries. As early as 1977, in its resolution 405 (1977),
adopted as a result of the aggression committed
against the sister Republic of Benin, the Council
solemnly declared a ban on the use of mercenaries to
overthrow or to try to destabilize the legal Government of any State. That resolution was not enough
to prevent mercenaries from preparing a few months
later an attempt to destabilize my own country-an
attempt which aborted before it was implemented
thanks to the vigilance of friendly countries and to
Togo’s armed forces. That resolution did not prevent
mercenaries from trying to overthrow the Government
of the sister Republic of Seychelles on 25 November,
That attempt fortunately
also failed, thanks to thp
vigilance of the Seychelles security forces. It is thu;
time for the Council, while awaiting the conclusion
of an international
convention against mercenaries,
to take more effective measures to prevent the development of the use of mercenaries.
Among those
measures, my delegation
thinks that the Council
must constrain South Africa to hand over Michael
Hoare and his accomplices who have taken refuge in
South Africa to the authorities of Seychelles, who
have promised to try them with all international safeguards. Thus, potential mercenaries will know that
henceforward they cannot act with impunity,

48. Mr. ZAKI (Maldives):
I thank you, Sir, and
the members of the Council for giving me this opportunity to say a few words while the Council remains
seized of a most important matter, which in my opinion
not only involves the security and independence of
one country but also constitutes a threat to the maintenance of harmony in international relations and the
preservation of international security.
49. It is a privilege for me to associate myself with
other speakers in expressing my sentiments of good
wishes to you as you assume the presidency for the
month of May. In the same breath, 1 congratulate the
representative of Zaire for the appropriate manner
in which he performed the same task during the past
month.
50. My statement today is prompted by a deep
feeling of concern as the Councii deliberates on the
subject involving the Republic of Seychelles--concern
because my country also had some experiences relating to foreign mercenaries in early 1980. Although it
was not as bitter as that of the Republic of Seychelles
late last year, our experience and the subsequent
information that we were able to gather helped us gain
a wider perception of the dire threat that confronts
the international community if it fails to take appropriate action to curb the growing numbers of groups
of people in various parts of the world who remain
ever ready to sell their fighting skills, regardless of
the objective for which they do so.

45. As for the economic consequences of the act
of aggression, the Commission
of Inquiry has noted
the extensive damage caused to the international airport of Pointe Larue at Mahe, as well as the loss of
earnings caused by the temporary closing of the airport and the drop in the resowrces that Seychelles
gains from tourism. In that respect, I should like to
express once again our total solidarity with the sister
Republic of Seychelles. 1 also express our support fat
all the recommendations
of the Commission of Inquiry
that appear in paragraph 293 of the report, particularly the sixth, relating to a complementary
inquiry,
and the first, recommending
“that financial, technical
and material assistance should be provided urgently
by Member States and international
organizations to
enable the country to deal with the difficulties it is
facing because of the mercenary aggression.”

51. While I do not wish to take up too much of the
Council’s time, I cannot help but mention that a more
detailed revelation of the distasteful facts of mercenary activities could hardly be found than that in the
cover story of the magazine N~\I* Africtrn of March
1982, under the caption “Mercenaries: Target Africa”.
I shall quote just one sentence from the article: “For
a fist full of dollars they will kill or get killed. That
is the name of the game.” Even if this directs the
reader’s attention to only a limited area of such activities, we should not be so naive as to believe that
they are or would be restricted to that area. I sincerely feel that such activities should be viewed as a dangerous reality throughout the world.
6

52. The great misfortune that befell our sister nation
the Republic of Seychelles following the aggression
of the mercenaries late last year is viewed by my
delegation as the result of wanton acts instigated and
perpetrated by people who, in our opinion, lack dignified human conscience and who have a callous
disregard not only for all norms of international
law
but also for every aspect of decent human life on
earth. We believe the Republic of Seychelles and the
Republic of Maldives have much in common. Just
like Maldives, Seychelles is a peace-loving, friendly
country, fighting hard against severe constraints to
develop and better the prospects of its people. The
Government and the people of my country entertain
the warmest friendship towards the Government and
people of Seychelles. That sincere feeling considerably reinforced my desire to make this statement
today.

not be viewed merely as isolated acts by eccentric.
deranged or unscrupulou? people. They could readily
become real major threats to smaller and poorer countries throughout the world. In short. this could be an
international
problem of great magnitude. It is fat
that reason that we give our closest attention to the
progress of the work of the implementation
of Cenet-al Assembly resolution 36/76 of 4 December 1981.
57. Countries like Maldives rely to a considerable
extent on the United Nations for the preservation
and maintenance of their security, independence und
territorial integrity, We have trust and confidence in
the functioning of the United Nations system in a
timely and effective manner so that the lofty principles
enshrined in the Charter may be upheld, respected
and acted upon, irrespective of whether a nation is
big or small. strong or weak, rich or poor.
58.

The PRESIDENT
(i/ltl’lprrtotir,n
,f>om
(‘hiThe next speaker is the representative
of
Algeria. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make a statement.

53. The report of the Security Council Commission
of Inquiry established under resolution 496 ( 1981) is.
as we all know, not quite complete or conclusive. But
this is certainly not, in my opinion, the result of any
lack of effort on the part of the members of the Commission. Indeed, they should be highly commended
for the careful and conscientious work they have
done, What stands out clearly is the extent of the
economic loss suffered by the victim of this act by
the mercenaries. My delegation thereforr sincerely
feels that the least that could be done noti would be
to initiate the necessary steps to take every possible
action to alleviate the tremendous economic burden
that has befallen our sister nation.

170s~):

59.

Mr.

ABADA

(Algerin) fi17tr,pr.rrufion
,fiw77
allow me first of all to express
the satisfaction of the Algerian delegation at seeing
you preside over the Council at a time when the international situation requires so much attention, so much
competence and so much effort to prevent the destiny of mankind from moving towards more violence,
more confrontation and more suffering.
Frc~nch): Mr. President.

60. Being a representative of a country with a long
history and an age-old civilization, a country so sensitive to the freedom and the progress of peoples, with
which Algeria is honoured to have strong bonds of
friendship, I am convinced that you will assume yout
mission with authority, conscientiousness and effectiveness.

54. In the view of my delegation, the other aspects
of this sad episode must receive the fullest attention
of this body and should be considered with utmost
seriousness. I shall not quote extracts, in order not to
take up too much of the Council’s valuable time;
suffice it to mention the following articles which
appeared in Thrj N~II’ York Ti1nc.r on the following
dates: 22 April, under the headline “South Africa
Tied to Abortive Coup”: 4 May, under the headline
“Testimony
Links South African Arms to Coup”:
10 May 1982, under the headline “Trial Gives Peek
at South Africa Intelligence Web”.

61, I must also say how much my delegation nppreciates the significant work achieved during a particularly burdensome
month by your predecessor,
Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda.
62. In speaking today on behalf of Algeria--and
I thank you for having allowed me to do so-my delegation wishes to carry out a mandate entrusted to it
as well as to other African countries by the thirtyeighth session of the Council of Ministers of the OAU,
held at Addis Ababa from 22 to 28 February 1982, to
make a collective contribution
to the Security Council concerning the study of a particularly serious aggression, and at the same time to show the support of
Africa for the Republic of Seychelles.

55. Furthermore, the unambiguous statement of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Seychelles is still very fresh in my mind. Taking into consideration the statements recorded by the Commission of Inquiry relating to South Africa, and the fact
that the rigime in Pretoria still endeavours to prolong
the inhuman policy of q,wtkrid.
my delegation earnestly appeals to the Council not to relax its vigilance
nnd its efforts to implement fully its resolution 496
( 198 1) and asks that it take whatever action may be
found necessary,

63. In doing so. Algeria is also fulfilling the duty of
friendship and solidarity with a friendly brother country whose independence
and sovereignty were so
seriously threatened, It is also an opportunity for us
to indicate the special esteem that we have for the

56. From our experience of the past and the events
connected with the Republic of Seychelles. we believe that the problem of mercenary activities should
7

-

--

Republic
ernment.

In our opinion, the result is bound to point to
the only rCgime in the region capable of financing
such an operation. because it is part of the logic of its
policy of control, domination and destabilizntion.
Let
it be clearly understood that at this stage of the inquiry.
and even well before it, to Africa any doubt about the
identity of the criminal is out of the question, for such
doubt would be paralysing, would be fatal. Let it be
clearly understood that the Republic
of Seychelles
does not have the right to doubt, nor do the frontline States. nor does Africa as ;I whole. Their independence and their security are involved.
for at any
moment. in each country of the region. the same aggressor could strike again.

of Seychelles, for its people and for its Gov-

71.

64. That small country, which everyone rightly
describes as a paradise, ought to have been allowed
to move along an easy path by exploiting all the advuntage.s of its geographical situation. Indeed, although
situated in a very important strategic area, which
arouses great covetousness in others, this country
has., preferred, ,to turn resolutely along the road of
social progress for all its people, to practise a policy
of national independence and choose non-alignment.
with all that that entails in terms of commitment and
devotion 50 the just causes of the world.

66.’ The ,qggressors who appeared once again against
the. SeJcheiles on 25 November 1981 aimed at nothing
less’ ‘than challenging those options, obtaining the
submissi&n,of the Seychelles people and leading them
into G’new form of servitude.

72. What the Commission’s
report does not contain is, moreover, significant, and the limitations with
which. in this first stage, the inquiry met. in fact reveal
the composite sketch of the criminal.
We need not
wait for the additional elements of the inquiry called
for in this first report in order to point the finger at
the Pretoria rigime and to denounce it all the more
forcefully since it sought to harm a non-aligned African
country-one
of the smallest and most vulnerable
among us, a country that so deserves to live in
freedom, dignity and honest labour.

67.‘. Whil& we’ were delighted at the new victory won
by the pedple of the Seychelles, who managed to foil
an Operation that was minutely planned and powerfully organized and carried out, we must do everything possible to shed light on this affair. to expose
a&l cbndemn its authors and instigators and to make
godd the losses suffered.

73. But as if in itself the crime of aggression was
not sufficiently hateful, it was necessary to entrust the
carrying out of that aggression to mercenaries with a
long record of misdeeds committed
against other
African peoples. Let it be understood
why Africa
bristles with anger and revulsion and is so demanding
of the international community.

65. Such options, in terms of both domestic and
foreign,affairs, affirmed with conviction by a peaceful
people, unfortunately make the Republic of Seychelles
seem an easy target for the enemies of the freedom of
peoples and of peace, for the enemies of Africa.

68. For Algeria, as for Africa as a whole, this criminal a’ct had a familiar ring to it, a!; did those other
aggressions of recent years against Angola, Zambia,
Botswana and Mozambique.
Everywhere, in the
whole of southel+n Africa. it is the Pretoria rCgime that
we find challenging the independence and sovereignty
of,Africnn peoples, challenging the OAU, challenging
the United Nations, in order to establish its imperialist
strategy of domination, destabilization and the weakening of free Africa.

74. In the aggressive implementation
of an imperial
racism, the Pretoria rigime is today attempting to
give new life to mercenarism. The intolerable effluent
of a psychology and a behaviour
that for centuries
made it possible to justify colonial conquests and to
establish relations of domination
and enslavement.
mercenarism could become. because of the unbridled
will to hegemony motivating the racist Pretoria leaders, a disturbing reality in the entire southern part
of our continent, if the international
community does
not take the necessary radical measures to eliminate it.

69. Having received its mandate from this body,
the Commission
of Inquiry whose report we are
studying at .the -present time had of course to move
with ,wisdom and perhaps with caution in conscientiously establishing the facts, and seeking out and
canfirming
the. various elements involved before
instituting ,what, in view of this consummate act of
aggression and mercenarism, can be no less than a
criminal trial.,

75. The fact that the area of destabilization
should
have been extended to Seychelles, through the secular
arm of Pretoria-the
mercenaries-confirms
quite
clearly the perilous designs against the security of the
African continent and emphasizes
the urgency of
an organized international
riposte to the constant
challenges of the (~purfh~id rCgime.

7d: ke understand and respect the steps taken by
the Commission, and Algeria wishes to pay a tribute
to the Commission and particularly to its Chairman;
but we remain convinced that the continuation of the
Commission’s
activities would enable us to place
international
responsibility
on those who are the
~OLII’CCof the aggression, who prepared and financed it.

76. The growing awareness by the United Nations
of the danger of mercenarism is established, and a
consistent doctrine has been progressively
built up.
Prohibited by the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations,’
the use of mercenaries is
8

in General Assembly
tightly made an ilCt of UggreSSiun
~&ution 33 14 (XXIX). annex. of 14 December 1~74.
which contains the Definition of Aggression.

84. The PRESIDENT

~ir~tc,p~cl/tr/ir,rrjir,,,r (*/tif~~~,~~*):
The next speaker is the representative of Huneiay,
1 invite him to take a place at the Council I;t& iId
to make his statement.

77, For its part, the Council has in similar situations
duly added to this doctrine by establishing and describing facts and by recognizing the right of victims
to reparation. specifically during the consideration
of the aggression against the People’s Republic of
Benin in I%‘7 ]rr.st~///fion 40-5 f/977)].

85. Mr. RACZ (Hungary): Sir. I should like first a#
alI to join the previous speakers who hnvr cwgralulated YOU on your assumption of the presi+wy 1~
the month of May. I wish you much SUCWYSin &ji~
the work of the Council at this delic:& rim, tikn tk
international situation is particularly complic;Ilrd,

78. Similarly,
an NL/ /zoc committee,
over which
Algeria hus the honour to preside. has received the
mandate to draft an international convention against
the recruitment, use, financing and training of mercenaries. And today we can see how necessary it is
to speed up the carrying out of this task.

86. 1 am grateful to you and the other members d
the Council for affording my delegakn this uppwtunity Lo make a statement during the discuwiuu UC
the report of the Security Council Cummissiun uf
Inquiry on the attack by South African mercenwk!,
against the Republic of Seychelles, seriously iHeelim
international peace and security.

7’9. But over und above all the actions undertaken
and the logical stands taken, there remains the political need for the exercise of the prerogatives of the
Council in the maintenance of international
peace
and security. Indeed. in order to be reliable and dis/ suasive, the system of collective security established
by the Charter of the United Nations requires the condemnation of any act of aggression and the naming
and condemning of the perpetrator of such an act.

87. This unlawful act of aggressionplanned by the
highest circles of the Government of South Africa end
carried out by professional killers trying to hide their
links to the racist rigime by using various methuds
of deception was condemned by rhe vasl mujority uf
the international community. On 14 December IYIII.
the members of the Council unanimously CO&&
the mercenary aggression against Hte Republic d
Seychelles and the subsequent hijacking OT UN Air
India aircraft [I.P,W/UT~O~4Y6 (I YR/)I.

80. Although there is no doubt that the Pretoria
; r&ime deliberately organized and financed the aggrcssion, the Council, on the basis of paragraph 282 of the
report of the Commission
of Inquiry, which recOgnizes that the South African authorities could not
help but be aware of the preparations, is duty-bound
to draw the minimum conclusion that the Pretoria
rCgime is at the very least an accomplice in this aggression.

88. Since then, a great deal of evidence bus beefi
produced by the Commission of Inquiry eslublishedby
the Security Council. In the courseof the invesligaliun
conducted by the Commission, the mercenuriescup
tured by the authorities of the Republic uf Seyckks
revealed that the authorities of South Africa gave Ihe
order to their National Intelligence Service to W&W
nize a weep ~l’c:tot against the Government of kychelles. It was the National Intelligence Service d
South Africa that recruited 44 mercenariesfrom eif#
countries, most of them from South Africa, gave Ikm
arms and money and sent them to the Republic uf
Seychelles
with the aim of overthrowing Ihal COLMtry’s legitimate Government.

81. In addition to the political and moral condemnation that the Council must level at the perpetrator
of the aggression, reparation for the damages caused
is an important element of what is expected from the
Council.
* 82. The system of international responsibility makes
this reparation the responsibility
of the perpetrator
of the aggression. Consequently, it would be appropriate for the Commission of Inquiry to be able to continue its investigations along these lines and to give
the Council a supplementary
report on the basis of
which the elements of the final verdict could be determined.

89. This

illegitimate act of aggression he3 MW
again directed the attention of the interNiIIiU@UIl
CUW
munity to the true nature of the racist rkgime uf %tuh
Africa, which continuously disregards Ihe nWS( &*
menta1.y norms of international law. It has underlined

once ;lgain

that if the international

WfllIllWi~y

is ti

going to t&e urgent measures in order tu stOp thr
dungerous international Crimintd
ilCb
Of the rib&t
+gime, tomorrow any poor and weak cuuntry c&d
fall victim to Pretoria’s armed aggression.

83. However, given the fragility and vulnerability of
the economic situation of Seychelles, and given the
Scope of the damages which the Commission CWreCtlY
assessed, international solidarity with Seychelles must
be immediately organized so that the consequences of
the uggression can he quickly eliminated.
In this
regard, the creation of a special fund for Seychelles
is required as un urgent measure. and all States must
be invited to contribute to it. ,4lger-i;l will give its full
support to any initiative along these lines.

y(). The armed aggression against the Re@lic ti
Seychelles represents il new feature Of the N&’
purslled
by
the
racist I‘igime. It WBS an HltemD( 10
ovcl.thI-o\v ;l legitimate foreign Government. II WUI Ul
attempt that put civil aviation into SerioUsduW&Y by
Y

97. The PRESIDENT
fintc’/‘/,/‘c’tc/fioll $~/n C‘hiII~J.YO):The next speaker is the representative of the
German Democratic Republic. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

the hijncking
of an aircraft. It is our view that the
regime of South Africa must bear the responsibility fol
the consequences of all the aspects of this criminal act.
9 1. It was no accident that the mercenary attack was
carried out against a non-aligned country whose in&pendent foreign policy displeases some Governments
by standing in the way of the success of their endeavours in the strategically-important
region of the Indian
Ocean.

98. Mr. OTT (German Democratic
Republic): On
behalf of the delegation of the German Democratic
Republic, I congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency for the month of May. It is OUI
expectation that under your skilful guidance the Council will contribute to the solution of important international problems in the interest of peace and security.

92. As has been emphasized many times in the
United Nations. the racist rCgime of South Africa could
not pursue its policy of rrprrrth~id
without the collaboration and active support of its Western partners
and allies. The same is true of the foreign adventures
of the racist rtgime, of its acts of armed aggression
against the front-line States and of all the attempts
aimed at destabilizing the whole region. Consequently,
the responsibility attaches also to those countries that
maintain ties of co-operation and support with the
Pretoria rCgime.

99. I also wish to pay a tribute to the work of YOUI
predecessor as President of the Council in the month
of April, Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda of Zaire.
100. My delegation is pleased to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Seychelles,
Mr. Jacques Hodoul, who is participating
in this
important meeting.

93. The year I982 has been declared by the United
Nations as the International Year of Mobilization fol
Sanctions against South Africa. We urge once again
that those countries which have not done so cease
every kind of collaboration with the racist rigime, in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council.

101. The Council is meeting again in order to deal
with the aggression committed
against the Republic
of Seychelles and with the resulting conclusions. My
delegation has already, at the meeting last December
[23/&l? mrrtirzg], taken up a position regarding this
act of terrorism and has thoroughly condemned this
aggression. The report submitted
by the Security
Council Commission
of Inquiry confirms that this
act of international
terrorism, prepared long beforehand, was directed at the sovereignty of a Member
State of the United Nations, All that violence, murder
and destruction have been taken into account, Instructive information can be drawn from the report about
the origin of the mercenaries, some of them having
already been involved earlier in similar criminal actions on the African continent.

94. As a member of the Special Committee against
Aptrrthcid since its inception, Hungary resolutely
condemns the policy of oportlwid as well as the aggressive foreign political course of the racist rCgime
and supports all practical measures aimed at putting
an immediate end to them. It is in this spirit that our
Government has condemned in the strongest terms the
attempted (*or/p d’c;rt/t by South African mercenaries
against the Government of Seychelles and has reiterated uur full solidarity with the people of Seychelles.
We hope that the international community will see to
it that such attempts do not happen again and that the
Republic of Seychelles will be fully compensated for
the damages caused by the attack,

102. In this connection the delegation of the German
Democratic Republic supports the view that great
importance attaches to the speedy conclusion of a
convention against the recruitment,
use, financing
and training of mercenaries.

95. Let me say in conclusion that although we highly
appreciate the work of the Commission of Inquiry for
having thrown light on a great many aspects of the
attack against the Republic of Seychelles, we share
the view of Foreign Minister Jacques Hodoul of
Seychelles-whom
we wholeheartedly welcome in
our midst-that
the Commission has yet completely
to fulfil its mandate by making a more comprehensive
approach to this many-sided issue, shedding a clearer
light on the origin, background and financing of the
aggression and establishing more unequivocally the
responsibility for it.

103. In the meantime, many facts and connections
have become known regarding the mercenary aggression against the Republic of Seychelles on 25 November 198 I. From the above-mentioned
report.
from the statements of the mercenaries and also from
various publications of the international
press, the fact
emerges that the Government of South Africa as well
as imperialist secret services were directly involved
in the preparation and commission of this aggression.
104. According to Thc~ NPII- York Tirncs of 4 May.
even the leader of the gang of mercenaries that committed the attack upon the sovereignty of Seychelles
has testified “that the South African Government had
approved the attempted takeover and supplied the
weapons” /.SCJ~J
SllSOS6, trnnr.~]. And on 10 May the

96. We support the extension of the mandate of the
Commission of Inquiry and the request for a supplementary report.
IO

same newspaper
reported that the mercenary
“had
met a representative
from the Central Intelligence
Agency in Pretoria and informed him of the coup
plans. The United States was interested , . . because
of *the strategic value of the Seychelles’ ” [scr S//5065,
CINfIf’ \’ 1.

capability. The same forces kindle confrontation
nlso
in other regions of the world and do not stop at military adventures.
108. These events underline the urgency of resolute
measures against the trpartl~itl
regime. The aggression against the Republic of Seychelles considerably
damaged that country.

105. Evaluation of these facts and naming of the
forces responsible are all the more imperative because
the irggression against the Republic of Seychelles is
only one link in the chain of flagrant violations
of
international law by the rrpcwtkid
regime. It is necessary only to mention the continuous aggression against
the People’s Republic of Angola and the persistent
#tempts
to destabilize
other sovereign
States in
southern Africa. For Pretoria, no measures are too
dirty to implement aggressive plans.

109. The German Democratic
Republic supports
the legitimate demand of Seychelles that the forces
responsible be brought to account and obliged to make
compensation.
It is in full solidarity with the Republic
of Seychelles.
110. As already *,tated, only a few days ago. by the
General Secretary of the Central Committee of the
Socialist Unity Party of Germany and Chairman of
the Council of State of the German Democratic
Reat Berlin, we sincerely wish
public. Erich Honecker,
all peoples of Asia, Africa and Latin America tu
succeed in shaping their lives in their own way in peace
without
imperialist
intervention
and
and security.
interference.

106. For the aggression
krgainst Seychelles,
they
mude use of purchasable unscrupulous
mercenaries:
in Nemibia,
the illegal occupution
is maintained
through terror and violence and the right of self-determimttion of the people is denied: in London, bomb
tutocks on the bureau of the African Nntionul Congress of South Afric;r ( ANC) are committed: in Moznmbique. members of the ANC are treacherously
murdcrcd.
107. The resolutions
ttdopted by the General Asscmbly ;rt its thirty-sixth
session i~rc fully .justificd in
refcrrinlf
to the increasing Pretoria-induced
threat to
internutlonal
pe:rce ;md security
and condemning
the complicity of those States which encourage South
Africa to escalate its aggressive policy, provide it with
ucnpons and xsist it in the development of its nucleirr

II

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

may be obtained
l’rom bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations.
Sales Section,
New

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

Lcs publications
des Nations
Unies
monde enrier.
Informcz-vous
aupres
des ventes.
New York ou Gentive.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nationa.

New

York

DES

NATIONS

sont cn vcnte dans les librairies
de votrc lihrnire
ou adresser-vous

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Lirho

PUBLICATIONS

DE

LAS

NACIONES

Unidas
e&n
en venta en librerias
a su librcro
o dirijase
a: Nacioncs

00300

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UN IES

et Its agences
g : Nations

depositaires
du
Unies, Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas.
Seccibn de Vrntas.
