S/PV.7574

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7574th meeting

Wednesday, 9 December 2015, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Pressman. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Li Yongsheng
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Hmoud
Mrs. Jakubonė
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Laro
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Gassó Matoses
Ms. Mulvein
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994
Report of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (S/2015/577)
Report of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (S/2015/585)
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-41209 (E)
*1541209*

S/PV.7574

ICTY and ICTR

09/12/2015

Letter dated 16 November 2015 from the President of the International Tribunal
for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since
1991, addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2015/874)
Letter dated 17 November 2015 from the President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2015/883)
Letter dated 17 November 2015 from the President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2015/884) Letter dated 20 November 2015 from the President of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2015/896)

2/35

15-41209

09/12/2015

ICTY and ICTR

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in
the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed
in the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994
Report of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (S/2015/577)
Report of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (S/2015/585)
Letter dated 16 November 2015 from the
President of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991 addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2015/874)
Letter dated 17 November 2015 from the
President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/2015/883)
Letter dated 17 November 2015 from the
President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2015/884)
Letter dated 20 November 2015 from the
President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/2015/896)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
Rwanda and Serbia to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following

S/PV.7574

briefers to participate in this meeting: Judge Carmel
Agius, President of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia; Judge Vagn Joensen, President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda;
Judge Theodor Meron, President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals; Mr. Serge
Brammertz, Prosecutor of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia; and Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda and Prosecutor of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to documents S/2015/577 and S/2015/585, containing
respectively the report of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda and the report of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
I also wish to draw the attention of members to
documents S/2015/874 and S/2015/884, containing
respectively a letter dated 16 November 2015 from the
President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and a letter dated 17 November 2015 from
the President of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda addressed to the President of the Security
Council.
I further wish to draw the attention of Council
members to documents S/2015/883 and S/2015/896,
containing respectively a letter dated 17 November
2015 and a letter dated 20 November 2015 from the
President of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals addressed to the President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to Judge Agius.
Judge Agius: I am deeply honoured to have been
elected President of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) at a crucial time in
its history, with the ultimate responsibility to guide
its closure in 2017. In many ways, this task will be
extremely challenging, but it is a challenge that I
willingly accepted, having served as Vice-President for
the past four years and as a Judge of the Tribunal since
2001. It is also a responsibility that has been entrusted
to me by my colleagues, and I intend to accomplish it
with determination and to the very best of my abilities.
In this regard, I am looking forward to working closely
with my colleague from China, Judge Liu Daqun, in his
capacity as Vice-President of the Tribunal.

15-412093/35

S/PV.7574

ICTY and ICTR

Please allow me to first pay tribute to my predecessor,
President Theodor Meron, for his outstanding work
during the past four years. His endeavours have been
vital in preparing the Tribunal for its last biennium. In
this regard, I wish to point out that the written report
being presented today (see S/2015/585) reflects the
work of the Tribunal over the last reporting period
under President Meron’s guidance. I also would like to
underscore that cooperation between the Tribunal and
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals is ongoing and will continue, in order to
ensure a smooth transition of remaining functions
and services to the Mechanism, in compliance with
resolution 1966 (2010).
Before turning to my report on the work of the
Tribunal, I wish to congratulate the United States on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council. I
would also like to express my gratitude to the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, with which
I had the honour to meet two days ago. In particular,
I should like to recognize the exceptional leadership
of Chile over the past two years. Further, I wish
to recognize the invaluable support and assistance
provided to the ICTY by the Office of Legal Affairs
and the Legal Counsel. Finally, I wish to pay tribute
to my colleague President Vagn Joensen, and to
recognize the immeasurable contribution he has made
to international criminal justice as President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), an
institution that will close its doors at the end of this
year.
I am pleased to report that the Tribunal has
continued to make progress in completing its work.
During the reporting period, four trials, involving four
individuals, and three appeals, involving 10 individuals,
were ongoing. One of the appeals, in the Prosecutor v.
Jovica Stanišić and Franko Simatović case, is scheduled
to be finally disposed of in a few days, on 15 December.
In addition, the day before that, on 14 December, the
Appeals Chamber will deliver its judgement in one of
the largest appeals cases ever, the Butare case, which
is an appeal from a judgement of the Rwanda Tribunal
and will signal the end of that Tribunal’s judicial work.
That will leave four trials and two appeals pending
before the Tribunal of which I am President.
While the Tribunal continues to make every effort
to meet the targets of its completion strategy and
the forecast judgement delivery dates, it has faced a
number of challenges, which to my great regret have

4/35

09/12/2015

caused delays in some cases. The specific lengths and
causes of these delays are outlined in the written report
that has been submitted to the Security Council in
document S/2015/874.
In the trial of Mr. Goran Hadžić , on 26 October
the Bench rendered a decision in which it stayed the
proceedings, considering by majority that while the
accused is still fit to stand trial, his health condition
precludes his detention at the United Nations Detention
Unit in The Hague. The decision to stay has been
taken for an initial, renewable period of three months.
An appeal of this decision has been lodged by the
Prosecution and I will deal with it over the next couple of
months. I am sure that Council members will agree with
me that challenges such as the health of the accused are
beyond our control and require ongoing assessment on
a case-by-case basis. The health situation of Mr. Hadžić
is being closely monitored.
The Tribunal continues to make significant progress
notwithstanding the ongoing challenges it is facing.
However, this progress has unfortunately suffered
some setback in that both the Karadžić and the Šešelj
trials will not be decided by the end of 2015, as had
been forecast. That having been said, the drafting of the
judgement in the extremely complicated Karadžić trial
is at a very advanced stage, and the Presiding Judge has
assured me that proceedings will definitely come to an
end before the end of March 2016. I am also hopeful
that the Šešelj trial will be concluded by the same
date. I have the commitment of the Presiding Judge
and his two colleagues that every effort will be made
to observe that deadline. In particular, the Presiding
Judge, on behalf of the bench, has now advised that a
written judgement is planned to be delivered during the
first quarter of 2016.
Further, I am pleased to report that the Mladić trial,
and the appeals in Prosecutor v. Mićo Stanišić and
Stojan Župljanin and Prosecutor v. Jadranko Prlić et al.
remain on target. Regarding the Prlić appeal, I wish to
highlight that this case is the most voluminous appeals
case in the history of the Tribunal and will require not
only time, but adequate uninterrupted resources. While
it will certainly be a challenge to meet the projected
time frame, the Appeals Chamber remains committed
to completing this case by November 2017. I will make
sure that, with the Security Council’s help, all measures
are taken in order to ensure an efficient and timely
completion of the case and to prevent any slippage.

15-41209

09/12/2015

ICTY and ICTR

It should be noted that the responsibility for
meeting a projected time line is that of the Presiding
Judge of a case. Nevertheless, as President I remain in
constant dialogue with the various Presiding Judges
to seek to identify potential delay factors and to work
towards early solutions, as far as possible. I can assure
Council members that all possible measures are being
implemented to prevent and address causes of potential
delay that are within the control of the Tribunal. Judges
and staff are working diligently to complete judicial
work as rapidly as possible, while maintaining our
commitment to guaranteeing procedurally just trials
and appeals. It is therefore expected that the Tribunal’s
judicial work will be completed on time. However, while
the Tribunal is currently on track, there are challenges
that must be managed if the Tribunal is to meet its
ultimate goal of closure in 2017. These challenges are
not new and have been brought to the attention of the
Security Council by my successive predecessors.
Most critically, there is the perennial and endemic
problem of staff attrition. The increasingly alarming
drain of experienced staff constitutes a serious threat
to our efforts to complete the mandate within the
projected timeline. This issue has been, and continues
to be, addressed in the proceedings of the Prlić appeal,
Mladić and Šešelj by increasing the number of staff on
the teams and allowing for the possibility of promotion
as a staff-retention measure. The Šešelj case in
particular suffered continuous departures of members
of the Chambers support team during the last reporting
period. The team has subsequently been reinforced.
The other challenge facing the Tribunal remains that
of staff morale. To ensure that staff morale is maintained
as much as possible, the Registrar has developed a fair
and transparent downsizing process in consultation
with the Staff Union, and dialogue between staff and
management is ongoing. In addition, the Registrar has
implemented other measures, including the services of
a career transition adviser to assist staff in transitioning
to other areas of employment. Of course, it is clear that
the Tribunal must continue its efforts to adopt strategies
that reduce any delays in ongoing cases to a minimum;
this obligation impacts both the fundamental rights of
the defendants and the resources of the international
community.
I wish to recall that this year was marked by the
twentieth anniversary of Srebrenica and the twentieth
anniversary of the Dayton Peace Accords, as well as the
seventieth anniversary of the United Nations. I note also

S/PV.7574

that today is the International Day of Commemoration
and Dignity of the Victims of the Crime of Genocide
and of the Prevention of this Crime. Anniversaries
provide us with an opportunity to reflect on what has
been achieved and to take stock of what remains to be
done. Further, remembering the events of the past and
paying tribute to those who suffered should strengthen
our resolve to prevent such events from ever happening
again. While the Tribunal is doing everything in its
power to address challenges to the timely completion
of its work, the obstacles it continues to face should not
overshadow its enormous achievements.
The Tribunal has been at the forefront in the
fight against impunity for international crimes, and
it continues to serve as a symbol of the international
community’s commitment to ensuring accountability
for grave crimes, such as those committed in the former
Yugoslavia, and to the laudable aim of preventing such
crimes from being committed again in future. It is also
important not to forget the pivotal role that the Tribunal
has played, and continues to play, both in setting global
standards for international criminal law and justice
and in helping strengthen the rule of law at the local
level. In this respect, critical to the broader success
of the Tribunal is an understanding of its work by the
broader international community and in particular by
the countries of the former Yugoslavia.
I wish also to thank the European Union for its
generous funding in support of the outreach projects in
the region, which are a vital tool we have to ensure that
the legacy of the Tribunal remains a priority. We indeed
have a responsibility towards the legacy that we will
leave behind. We also have a responsibility towards
victims and their families.
Despite the serious challenges that the Tribunal
is facing, we stand committed with the Security
Council to ensuring the efficient and orderly closure
of this institution by the end of 2017. We are now at a
crucial moment in the Tribunal’s history. I believe that
the Security Council and the Tribunal share the same
goals and aspirations, namely, to bring to a successful
conclusion this first big experiment in international
criminal justice after the Second World War. With the
support and encouragement of the States Members of
the United Nations, the ICTY, under my leadership,
will strive to make all of the progress required in order
to fulfil its mandate and will continue to serve as the
concrete manifestation of a commitment to ending
impunity.

15-412095/35

S/PV.7574

ICTY and ICTR

The President: I now give the floor to Judge Joensen.
Judge Joensen: I would like to begin by extending
my sincere congratulations to the representative of
the United States of America, who is presiding over
the Security Council in December, as well as the
representatives of Japan, Egypt, Ukraine, Senegal and
Uruguay for their nations’ election to the Security
Council beginning in January 2016. I wish them all the
best for a successful tour of duty.
I would also like to express the gratitude of the entire
Tribunal to the representatives of Chad, Chile, Jordan,
Lithuania and Nigeria for their nations’ service to the
Security Council as they near the completion of their
terms, and to express also my sincere appreciation to
His Excellency Ambassador Cristián Barros Melet and
his team for Chile’s effective and smooth management
of the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals, which has been instrumental in facilitating
the cooperation between the international tribunals and
the members of the Security Council.
Now, after 21 years of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) bringing those most
responsible for the genocide in Rwanda to justice, it
is my distinct honour and privilege to stand before the
Council today and provide the Council with an update
on the Tribunal’s impending closure and to speak about
some of the milestones that the Tribunal has achieved
over the past two decades.
I am proud to report that on Monday, 14 December,
the Tribunal will deliver its forty-fifth and final
judgement on appeal in the Nyiramasuhuko et al.
(“Butare”) case involving six accused. The rendering
of this judgement represents, therefore, the culmination
of more than 21 years of judicial work by both the Trial
and Appeals Chambers and marks the completion of the
Tribunal’s core judicial functions. With the completion
of this case, the ICTR will formally close its doors on
31 December 2015, and only liquidation activities will
remain to be completed during the first half of 2016.
In so doing, the ICTR will become the first ad hoc
international criminal tribunal to complete its mandate
and hand its remaining functions over to its residual
mechanism, the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.
The Tribunal’s final report to the Security Council
provides an overview of the work of the ICTR, work that
included 5,800 days of proceedings in which the ICTR
brought indictments against 93 individuals, issued

6/35

09/12/2015

55 first-instance judgements and 45 appeal judgements
and heard the powerful accounts of more than 3,000
witnesses who bravely recounted some of the most
traumatic events imaginable during ICTR trials.
From the beginning of the Tribunal’s establishment
by the Council, the judges of the ICTR were cognizant of
the importance of their role in developing international
legal concepts and providing a model for domestic
judiciaries by codifying numerous facets of international
criminal law and international humanitarian law that,
at the time of the Tribunal’s establishment, were either
undeveloped or non-existent. The seminal judgement
in the Akayesu case represented the beginning of this
very task, as the Tribunal issued the first judgement
by an international court on the crime of genocide
and became the first international court to interpret
the definition of genocide set forth in the Genocide
Convention of 1948. The judgement further provided
the first acknowledgment by an international court that
genocide against the Tutsi had occurred in Rwanda in
1994, which was subsequently treated by the Tribunal as
a fact of common knowledge that could not be disputed.
Between its first and last judgement, in Akayesu and
Butare, the Tribunal has issued many novel judgements
that have significantly impacted the evolution of
international law, including the first conviction for
rape and sexual violence as a form of genocide and the
first judgement against a Head of Government since
the Nuremburg and Tokyo Tribunals. Furthermore,
by strengthening the jurisprudence on sexual violence
crimes through the extended form of joint criminal
enterprise and by holding those in power accountable,
the ICTR has issued judgements that serve as powerful
deterrents to those who might commit similar crimes
in the future while also sending a clear message to the
international community that all those who commit
genocide or other atrocities, regardless of their position,
will no longer go unpunished.
Those milestones are but a few of the key
jurisprudential contributions that the Tribunal has made
to international justice. However, none would have
been possible without the efforts of all the Tribunal’s
judges and staff, who have faithfully served at different
periods over the past 21 years. I would therefore like
to acknowledge and thank the Prosecutor, Mr. Hassan
Bubacar Jallow, and the Registrar, Mr. Bongani Majola,
and all of the Tribunal’s former Presidents, Judges,
Prosecutors and Registrars, for the indispensable work
they have done to ensure that when the Tribunal closes

15-41209

09/12/2015

ICTY and ICTR

S/PV.7574

its doors, at the end of year, it does so with a completed
mandate in hand.

for international law and a beacon for the continued
development of international justice throughout Africa.

I would also like to take this opportunity to express
a special note of appreciation to the Legal Counsel,
Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares; the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Legal Affairs, Mr. Stephen Mathias; and
the staff of the Office of the Legal Counsel for all of
the support they have provided to my Office and to
the Tribunal as a whole. In addition, I would like to
underscore that the Tribunal would not have been able to
complete its mandate successfully without the assistance
of the Government of the Republic of Rwanda. In that
regard, I would like to inform the Council of a recent
delegation, which included myself as President, the
Prosecutor and the Registrar, which travelled to Rwanda
last month to thank its Government for the tremendous
support and cooperation it has provided to the Tribunal
over the years. Without the support from the Rwandan
Government, it would have been impossible to conduct
investigations and obtain evidence of the atrocities
committed during the genocide, o r bring to trial those
indicted by the Tribunal.

As I have done in the past, I would now like to
briefly update the Council on the progress being made
with respect to the issue of reparations for victims
of the 1994 genocide in Rwanda. As I explained
in my previous briefing to the Security Council
(see S/PV.7332), the International Organization
for Migration has completed and submitted a draft
assessment study to the Government of Rwanda. The
assessment study identifies options for reparations for
victims and survivors and describes in concrete and
operational terms how those options can be developed
and implemented in Rwanda, as well as how those
programmes may be funded. The final report of the
study will be issued in due course, and thereafter
transmitted to the relevant stakeholders, and follow-up
activities will be planned.

Further, the evolution of the Tribunal’s referral
programme, which culminated in the transfer of
eight cases from the ICTR to Rwanda, represents a
significant part of the Tribunal’s legacy, as it has not
only strengthened the relationship between the ICTR
and Rwanda but has led to substantive and procedural
reforms to the Rwandan judiciary, including the
abolition of the death penalty, which were all aimed
at meeting international fair trial standards. The
Tribunal’s referral programme as a whole has provided
the international community with a model on how
an international criminal court can cooperate with
national authorities to rebuild justice sectors in conflict
and post-conflict environments.
The Tribunal also owes a true debt of gratitude
to its gracious host for the past 21 years, the United
Republic of Tanzania. Since the Security Council
determined that the Tribunal would have its seat in
Arusha, Tanzania, the ICTR has enjoyed unwavering
support from the Government of Tanzania, which
has provided assistance in countless areas, including
assistance related to security, the transfer of witnesses,
the Tribunal’s Detention Unit and, more generally, the
Tribunal’s capacity-building and outreach programmes.
With the addition of the African Court on Human and
Peoples’ Rights, the East African Court of Justice and
the Mechanism, Tanzania continues to act as a hub

Turning to another important issue, that of
relocating the acquitted and convicted released persons
still residing in Arusha, I wish to inform the Council
that my Office and the Office of the Registrar will
continue to provide the Mechanism, which has already
assumed responsibility for that function, with all
possible support until the end of the year. I believe that
the issue remains a serious challenge to the credibility
of international criminal justice, and I shall call once
again for urgent assistance from the Security Council to
find a sustainable solution to a problem that continues
to result in acquitted and convicted released persons,
some of whom have remained in a safe house in Arusha
for over a decade, without a place to call home.
With respect to the transition to the Mechanism,
I am proud to report that the Mechanism’s reliance
on the ICTR for administrative and other services
continues to be significantly reduced. The Tribunal
has to date already transferred the human resources,
travel, procurement and about 80 per cent of its
finance functions to the Mechanism. All remaining
administrative functions will be transferred by the end
of the year.
With respect to the Tribunal’s archives, the ICTR
continues to ensure that records are prepared in a
manner that will facilitate their effective management
after being transferred to the Mechanism, and I am
happy to report that the Tribunal has transferred 80 per
cent of its records to Mechanism. Judicial records
relating to the Butare case have been separated for

15-412097/35

S/PV.7574

ICTY and ICTR

transfer following the upcoming appeal judgement,
and the Tribunal remains hopeful that the remaining
transfer of its records will be completed upon closure.
As I speak before the Council today, less than one
month before the formal closure of the ICTR, it is hard
not to reflect on the legacy of the Tribunal and what it
will leave behind for posterity. In that regard, events
marking the closure of the Tribunal were held last
week, which included the inauguration of a new Peace
Park in Arusha in memory of the victims and survivors
of the Rwandan genocide and in honour of the work
of the ICTR, and a main closing ceremony. During
those events, representatives from Members States,
along with representatives from other international and
domestic courts, Government officials and scholars
from across the world, came together to discuss the
ICTR’s contribution to peace and reconciliation in the
Great Lakes region, not only through justice but also
through the capacity-building and outreach programmes
it created over the years.
By complementing the Tribunal’s core judicial
work with other programmes, especially those
conducted in Rwanda, such as the implementation of
genocide-awareness-raising campaigns, workshops and
trainings focused on strengthening the capacity of the
Rwandan judiciary and the creation of the Umusanzu
mu Bwiyunge Information Centre, in Kigali, as well
as 10 additional provincial centres across Rwanda, the
Tribunal was able to bridge the gap between the Tribunal
and the Rwandan population and ensure that justice
was not only done but also, perhaps equally important,
was seen to be done by those directly affected by the
genocide.
In our final month of operation, the Tribunal
continues to ensure that the knowledge gained and
lessons learned throughout its existence are not only
passed on to its successor, the Mechanism, but are
also shared with other national and international
jurisdictions. Through the Prosecutor’s development of
best practices and lessons-learned manuals, including
manuals on the prosecution of sexual and gender-based
violence, on the referral of international criminal cases
to national jurisdictions and on the tracking and arrest
of fugitives from international justice, and by the
Tribunal’s sharing of expertise on criminal justice with
countries and judiciaries throughout Africa and beyond,
the Tribunal has directly strengthened the capacity
of national criminal justice systems to effectively
prosecute international crimes and ensured that the

8/35

09/12/2015

Tribunal’s work will continue to help future triers of
international crimes long after the closure of the ICTR.
As this marks my final appearance before the
Security Council as President of the ICTR, I would like
to thank once more all those who have supported the
work of the Tribunal and to express my sincere hope
that, as the ICTR closes its doors, part of its legacy will
be the tremendous potential to dispense justice held by
the Council. The success of the Tribunal is a success for
the Council as it highlights the possibilities for justice
to address conflicts and fight impunity and to provide
at least some comfort to the victims of heinous crimes.
The ICTR has proved that it is possible. It has been my
honour and privilege to serve in that endeavour.
The President: I thank Judge Joensen for his
briefing and congratulate him.
I now give the floor to Judge Meron.
Judge Meron: It is an honour to appear before
the Council once again to report on the work of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals.
Before I proceed with my remarks, I would like
to offer my congratulations to the United States on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
I also wish to express my gratitude to the Security
Council’s Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals and to offer my particular thanks to the
delegation of Chile for its superb leadership of the
Group.
As always, I must also underscore my deep
appreciation for the assistance provided to the
Mechanism by the Office of Legal Affairs, in particular
by the Legal Counsel himself, Mr. Miguel de Serpa
Soares, and the Assistant Secretary-General for Legal
Affairs, Mr. Stephen Mathias. Their support and the
support of their whole team continue to be invaluable
to the Mechanism and its continued success.
Finally, I wish to note that I appear before the
Council today along with two of my friends and
colleagues, President Vagn Joensen of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and President
Carmel Agius of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). This is a historic day for
both of them and for the Tribunals they represent.
President Joensen has presented the final report
(S/2015/577) to the Council on behalf of the ICTR, and
I wish to commend him for the integrity and dedication

15-41209

09/12/2015

ICTY and ICTR

with which he has led that Court since 2012. President
Agius, meanwhile, is appearing before the Council for
the first time as the President of the ICTY. It has been
my great pleasure to work with him closely over the past
four years when he was Vice-President of the ICTY,
and I wish him every success as he steers the ICTY
towards the completion of its own vital remaining tasks
in these, the final years of the Tribunal.
As the six-month report (see S/2015/883)
recently submitted by the Mechanism makes clear,
the Mechanism continues to carry out the mandate
entrusted to it and to do so in a manner that reflects
a commitment to the highest possible standards as
well as to the Council’s vision of a small, efficient and
economical institution. Since I last appeared before
the Council (see S/PV.7455), the Mechanism’s Judges
have issued a great number of judicial orders and
decisions, addressing everything from the enforcement
of sentences to requests for the review of judgements
to applications for the variation of protective measures
granted to vulnerable witnesses and victims. At the
same time, all three organs of the Mechanism have
continued preparations at the working level for the
historic appeals that are anticipated to begin in spring
2016 as well as for the trials of the remaining fugitives
indicted by the ICTR whose cases are the responsibility
of the Mechanism.
During the past six months, work on the legal
and regulatory framework of the Mechanism has also
progressed, and a number of new policies and other
regulatory instruments addressing matters ranging
from legal aid to access to archives are expected in the
coming months. The Mechanism has also continued
to monitor proceedings referred for trial in Rwanda
and France and to receive and respond to requests for
assistance in relation to proceedings in national courts.
The Mechanism has also continued to supervise the
enforcement of sentences in a number of States on
two continents and remains very appreciative of the
commitment and cooperation of those enforcing States.
During the reporting period, important advances
have been made at both branches in terms of the
preparation and transfer of records from the Tribunals
to the Mechanism with the great majority of ICTR
records of long-term or permanent value now in the
custody of the Mechanism. At the same time, the
Mechanism has continued to take a number of steps,
both large and small, to facilitate greater access to the
records entrusted to it.

S/PV.7574

At the Arusha branch, the past six months have been
particularly busy as the Mechanism has increasingly
assumed responsibility for the remaining functions
and obligations of the ICTR, including responsibility
for the United Nations Detention Unit in anticipation of
the closure of the ICTR at the end of 2015. A number
of ICTY administrative sections have worked together
with staff at the Mechanism and the ICTR to ensure
that all contractual arrangements and structures
are in place at the Mechanism’s Arusha branch to
ensure the uninterrupted provision of administrative
services following the closure of the ICTR. Progress
has continued on the construction of the permanent
premises in Arusha for the Mechanism. We are very
grateful for the generous support of the Government
of Tanzania and the invaluable assistance of various
offices of the United Nations Secretariat in connection
with the project. All of this, I should note, has been
accomplished at the same time that the Mechanism,
together with a number of other departments and
offices throughout the United Nations, have undergone
the labour-intensive process of transitioning to Umoja.
While the reporting period has been a productive
one, the Mechanism continues to face certain
challenges — challenges of which I have spoken before.
When the Mechanism opened its doors in Arusha on
1 July 2012, there were nine individuals indicted by the
ICTR who had yet to be arrested and brought to trial.
Thanks to Prosecutor Jallow’s considerable efforts, we
have some news to report today on which the Prosecutor
will brief the Council in a few moments. While the
Mechanism’s own fugitive-tracking activities continue,
the involvement and commitment of Member States
is essential if we are to ensure that the fugitives are
apprehended. And ensure that we must. The Council’s
continued attention to the issue is vital and very much
appreciated.
The second challenge facing the Mechanism
involves the resettlement of the small number of persons
acquitted by the ICTR or who have completed the
sentences imposed by that Tribunal. The Mechanism
continues to seek ways to promote resettlement, but,
as is true with the fugitives, we are dependent on the
involvement of the international community to solve
the humanitarian challenge posed by the issue. The
challenge is, in many respects, a challenge to and for
international justice itself.
Before concluding my remarks, I wish to take note
that, pursuant to the statement (S/PRST/2015/21) by

15-412099/35

S/PV.7574

ICTY and ICTR

the President of the Security Council of 16 November,
the Mechanism has submitted a report in connection
with the review of its work in the initial period of its
operations and provided additional information to
facilitate this important review process. I am most
grateful for the attention that you, Mr. President, and
your colleagues are giving to the review of the work of
the Mechanism. The Mechanism stands ready to offer
any further information or assistance that may be of use
to the Council in connection with the completion of the
review by 21 December, as called for by the presidential
statement.
The Mechanism has accomplished much over
the course of the initial period of its operations and,
indeed, in just the last six months as well. While much
important work remains to be done, including the
completion of those trials and appeals that are expected
to come within the jurisdiction of the Mechanism,
the Mechanism is prepared to carry out this work
efficiently, while respecting the entire panoply of fairtrial rights.
As the initial period of its operations draws to
its close — a period in which the Mechanism has
benefited greatly from the support of, and coexistence
with, the ICTY and the ICTR — the Mechanism
is increasingly standing on its own as a separate
institution, an institution that learns from the lessons
of its predecessors and fulfils its obligations and its
mandate both economically and effectively.
The Mechanism’s success in that regard depends
to a great deal on effective management focused on
seeking out new, principled ways to ensure economy
and efficiency and that takes full advantage of the
Mechanism’s novel structure and legal framework.
For instance, the statute already provides for single
judges — rather than full trial chambers, as was the case
with the ICTR and the ICTY — to address most matters
at first instance. But even where the statute calls for the
assignment of a multi-judge panel, significant savings
as compared with the ICTR and the ICTY may be
achieved as a result of pre-trial and pre-appeal judges
carrying out much of the preparatory work for cases,
with the full bench involved only if and as necessary
and in those situations remunerated only for the days
of work conducted. Such work by the full bench would
also be conducted remotely unless the bench’s presence
is required at one of the seats of the Mechanism.
I wish to assure the Council that my fellow
principals and I continue to invest all of our energies
10/35

09/12/2015

and focus in helping to ensure that the Mechanism
lives up to its promise and is truly a model of what an
international judicial institution should be. In doing so,
the Mechanism will not only be a credit to the United
Nations and to the Council. The Mechanism will
also — like the ICTR and the ICTY before it — serve as
a vital and continued embodiment of the international
community’s dedication to the fight against impunity.
In a world where armed conflicts still rage on
continent upon continent, where atrocities against
civilians continue unabated and where international
humanitarian law can still be violated with impunity — in
this world, we must not underestimate the need for,
and the importance of, such symbols of our shared and
continued commitment to principled accountability,
to international law and to respect for the rule of law.
We must not underestimate the value of institutions
such as the Mechanism that demonstrate that respect
for the rule of law must be paramount, that we cannot
and shall not tolerate impunity for serious violations
of international law, and that justice can be delivered
efficiently and economically, yet in accordance with
the highest possible standards. And it is perhaps all the
more important now, as we despair at the indescribable
violence and violations that continue to be committed
in conflicts around the globe, that the Council take
all possible steps to ensure that the important tools
at its disposal in the fight against impunity, like the
Mechanism, realize their full potential.
The President: I thank Judge Meron for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Brammertz.
Mr. Brammertz: I thank Council members for the
opportunity to again address them on the Office of the
Prosecutor’s progress in completing its mandate.
In this reporting period, we continued to make
every effort to complete our work on the Tribunal’s final
trials and appeals. As the President already mentioned,
four final trials and three appeals are ongoing. My
Office is awaiting the issuance of trial judgements in
two trials, those of Karadžić and Šešelj. On the Mladić
case, we remain very focused on responding to the
evidence presented by the defence and, in the Hadžić
case, my Office is exploring all reasonable options to
make possible the completion of that trial.
In relation to appeals, during the reporting period
my Office presented its oral arguments in the Stanišić
and Simatović case, and we note the scheduled delivery
of the appeal judgement in that case next week. Next
15-41209

09/12/2015

ICTY and ICTR

week we will also present our oral arguments in the
Stanišić and Župljanin case. And finally, the Prlić et al.
appeal is now fully briefed and we await the scheduling
of the oral arguments.
Attrition remains a persistent challenge. During
the reporting period, many of our Appeals Division
staff were recruited by the Office of the Prosector of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. Also, we have seen significant attrition
over the past few months in the Mladić trial team.
Nonetheless, my Office is overcoming those and other
challenges. We have continued to downsize, abolishing
50 per cent of our posts since January 2014. By
improving the efficiency of our operations and flexibly
managing our staff resources, we have ensured that
attrition does not delay the completion of our work. In
the final phase of our mandate, we will increasingly
look to the Office of the Prosector of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for
support through double-hatting and other cost-efficient
arrangements, just as we supported the Mechanism in
its start-up phase.
The countries of the former Yugoslavia continue to
cooperate with my Office and to respond as required to
our requests for assistance. Even at this late stage in the
Tribunal’s mandate, State cooperation remains essential
to enable the completion of our work on schedule. I
therefore trust that, with regard to the contempt case
made public last week, Serbia will continue its recent
record of full cooperation and appropriately execute the
Tribunal’s arrest warrants.
With regard to the category II cases that my Office
transferred to national prosecutors, my previous
reports noted our significant concerns about delays by
the Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina in
processing those cases. During my mission to Sarajevo
in May, the Chief Prosecutor gave me his assurances
that prosecutorial decisions would be taken by the end
of the year in all remaining category II cases. I am
pleased to report that, in large measure, that pledge has
been honoured. While a few cases may not be finalized
until early next year, it is clear that over the last six
months the Prosecutor’s Office redoubled its efforts
and redeployed significant resources to the cases
transferred by my Office a few years ago.
Throughout the region, however, there continue
to be a number of concerns. Progress in national war
crimes cases is uneven and still fragile.

S/PV.7574

In Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Prosecutor’s
Office has reported that it filed a significant number of
indictments in the past few years. That is the positive
news. My Office welcomes these results, but also notes
that the targets established in the National War Crimes
Strategy will not be met by a significant margin. My
Office encourages the Prosecutor’s Office in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to dedicate its efforts to prosecuting the
most complex and highest-priority cases, in accordance
with the National War Crimes Strategy. In addition,
cooperation between prosecutors’ offices at the state,
entity, district and cantonal levels remains problematic,
and there is general consensus that the justice sector is
not yet meeting the public’s expectations.
In Serbia, important results continue to be
achieved, including in regional cooperation and the
exhumation of mass graves. My report (S/2015/874,
annex II) emphasizes that the accountability process
in Serbia is at a critical crossroads. Further progress
in Serbia will require strong political commitment. In
this regard, the fact that last week senior Government
ministers escorted and welcomed a convicted war
criminal, General Vladimir Lazarević, back to Serbia
upon his release sends absolutely the wrong signal.
In Croatia, there was an important development in
regional cooperation with the transfer of one Category
II case from Bosnia and Herzegovina to Croatian
authorities. In addition, Croatian authorities last
week began exhumations of a mass grave believed to
contain the remains of Croatian Serbs killed during
Operation Storm. The Croatian judiciary now has the
important opportunity to visibly demonstrate that the
accountability process continues in an independent and
impartial manner.
While recognizing the progress that has been made,
it is clear that throughout the former Yugoslavia, more
accountability can and should be achieved. Victims
from every group are dissatisfied that investigations
of many notorious incidents remain unresolved after
so many years. While those who directly committed
crimes are being brought to trial, impunity remains
the rule for senior and mid-level leaders who planned,
ordered and facilitated the crimes. Regional cooperation
continues to face many challenges, and in some
respects has even regressed. These challenges can be
addressed with political will and appropriate technical
assistance. Within existing resources, my Office will
continue to support national judiciaries in achieving

15-4120911/35

S/PV.7574

ICTY and ICTR

fuller accountability, as we have since the completion
strategy was adopted.
Missing persons from all sides of the conflict must
be found and identified. Enormous progress has been
made, thanks to the work of organizations like the
International Commission on Missing Persons, but far
too many families still do not know the fate of their loved
ones. During my mission to Sarajevo a few weeks ago,
I met with national authorities responsible for missing
persons and their international partners. They were
unanimous in their opinion that if further meaningful
progress is to be achieved, those who know where
mass graves and other burial sites are located must be
encouraged to come forward. Yet today in many parts
of society, war criminals are still glorified, and people
providing information about missing persons risk being
branded traitors and exposed to possible retribution.
My Office therefore calls upon all States of the region
to undertake prominent public-awareness campaigns
encouraging witnesses, including perpetrators of the
crimes and their associates, to come forward with
information about missing persons.
As the end of our mandate approaches, my Office
has a limited window of opportunity to distil our key
operational insights and make them available to others
in the future. We believe this is critical in order to
maximize the value of investments in our work and
strengthen future prosecutions by other courts. As a first
contribution, my Office has now completed a detailed
assessment of our work on prosecuting conflict-related
sexual violence crimes, which will be published in
April next year. We have taken an honest look at the
challenges we faced, the strategies we adopted, the
results we achieved and the things we could have done
much better. We have crafted the publication to be a
practical resource for other prosecutors grappling with
similar challenges.
In conclusion, the foremost objective of my Office
is completing our remaining cases, in accordance with
the completion strategy. We will continue downsizing
staff and significantly reducing expenditures. We will
also continue to support and build capacity in national
criminal justice sectors prosecuting war crimes in the
Western Balkans. I firmly believe that as a result of the
Council’s leadership, the former Yugoslavia is today one
of the most successful examples of complementarity in
international criminal justice.
Yet the completion strategy is not simply a matter
of winding down operations and transitioning our
12/35

09/12/2015

responsibilities to national courts. At the Tribunal,
our final cases are among the most important we have
undertaken. It is anticipated that, in a few months, the
trial judgement will be delivered in the case against
Radovan Karadžić, former President of the Republika
Srpska. The significance of this moment should not be
overlooked.
While in accordance with the mandate given by the
Security Council, my Office brought many prosecutions
against military and civilian leaders from all parties to
the conflicts, the Karadžić and Mladić trials perhaps
best exemplify why the Tribunal was created, as well
as the many challenges we have had to overcome. For
that reason, their successful completion will be an
unmistakable demonstration of the commitment shown
by the Council, the United Nations and its Member
States to international peace, security and justice.
The President: I thank Mr. Brammertz for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Jallow.
Mr. Jallow: I am pleased to present once more to the
Security Council my six-monthly report (S/2015/883,
annex II)) and assessment on the work of the Office of
the Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals and for the last time in respect of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).
Permit me to begin with the Residual Mechanism.
With the imminent closure of the ICTR, the
Office of the Prosecutor of the Mechanism has taken
over the functions of the Office of the Prosecutor
of the ICTR and continues to do so gradually in
respect of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). Activities have been intensified on
tracking the three fugitives earmarked for trial by the
Mechanism. We are deploying considerable efforts to
secure their arrest and trial before the Mechanism or in
Rwanda, as appropriate. In this respect, I am pleased
to inform the Council that Ladislas Ntaganzwa, one
of the six indictees whose cases have been referred
by the ICTR to Rwanda for trial, has been arrested in
the past 24 hours and is currently in the custody of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo police. Ntagazwa,
the former mayor of Nyakizu commune in Butare, was
indicted on charges of genocide and crimes against
humanity in respect of the killings of thousands of Tutsi
in the parish of Cyahinda in Butare, of having ordered
the rape of several women, and of inciting the killings
of Tutsi.

15-41209

09/12/2015

ICTY and ICTR

S/PV.7574

We wish to thank the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and several other countries for
their cooperation in this particular operation, and at the
same time urge the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
make the necessary arrangements to ensure the transfer
of the accused to Rwanda for trial without delay, in
accordance with the order of the referral chamber of
the ICTR. The Council is requested to urge all States
to cooperate fully in the arrest and transfer of the
remaining eight fugitives. That is absolutely essential
to supplement our internal measures in tracking if these
are to yield dividends.

judgement on 14 December and will complete the
transfer of all ICTR Office of the Prosecutor records
to the Arusha branch of the Mechanism. The ICTR
evidence collection database, the shared network drives
and equipment, as well as the vault containing the
physical evidence of the ICTR Office of the Prosecutor
have now been fully transferred to and are managed by
the Office of the Prosecutor of the Arusha branch. The
Hague branch continues to work with the ICTY Office
of the Prosecutor to prepare for a gradual handover of
the ICTY records to the Mechanism in tandem with the
completion programme of the ICTY.

With regard to judicial activities, there has
recently been a significant increase in motion practice
in the Mechanism. In the past six months alone since
June, both the Arusha branch and The Hague branch
have been engaged in litigation in 23 cases. As the
Tribunals have downsized, the staff of the Mechanism
have increasingly been called upon to multi-task
in order to maximize the use of the resources of the
Prosecutor’s Office, provide for greater flexibility, and
fulfil the mandate of the Mechanism in respect of both
its core and ad hoc functions. We have also adopted
other strategies to maximize efficiency, including by
delaying recruitments in order to adapt to changes in
the ICTY trial schedule. With the staff now in place in
The Hague — 10 continuous posts and 26 ad hoc staff
members — intense preparations are already under
way for possible appeals in the cases of Vojislav Šešelj,
Radovan Karadžić and Goran Hadžić in the months
ahead.

The Mechanism is also monitoring the cases
transferred by the ICTR to Rwanda and France. The
investigation phase of the Munyeshyaka case in France
has now been concluded and, following the dismissal
of the case by the juge d’instruction, as recommended
by the French Prosecutor on 5 October, the case is now
on appeal in France. The Bucyibaruta case, also before
an investigating judge in France, is expected — I am
advised — to be completed by the first quarter of 2016
with trial, if any, anticipated to commence by the end of
2016, in which case a final decision is not likely before
mid-2017. The Uwinkindi case in Rwanda, following
closing arguments in November, is now scheduled for
judgement in December, whereas the Munyagishari
case is scheduled for 7 January 2016 for commencement
of trial.

Assistance to national jurisdictions continues to
be an important part of the work of the Mechanism
Office of the Prosecutor. In the past six months, we
have handled some 135 requests for assistance from
eight Member States and international organizations,
bringing the total of requests over the past 12 months
to 343. That represents a significant workload, which,
I am pleased to report, the Mechanism Office of the
Prosecutor continues to manage efficiently, through
the multitasking of staff, as well as other measures. In
that regard, I have promulgated several guidelines and
protocols in order to streamline procedures regarding
the provision of assistance to national jurisdictions.
The Mechanism Office of the Prosecutor has
also now taken over the bulk of investigation and
prosecution records and material from the ICTR Office
of the Prosecutor. The remaining items are scheduled
to be transferred after the delivery of the Butare

Permit me to now turn to the ICTR. Just over a week
ago, on 1 December, the ICTR held its official closing
ceremony in Arusha to mark the conclusion — save for
the judgement in the Butare case — of its work and
mandate. We are expecting the judgement in the Butare
case to be delivered on 14 December. It has been a long
and challenging journey for all involved in ensuring
accountability for the crimes committed in Rwanda in
1994 and in bringing justice to the community subjected
to one of the most horrendous humanitarian tragedies
of modern times.
The case statistics are fully set out in the report (see
S/2015/884) before the Council, as well as the overview
of the execution of our mandate, and I need not repeat
those details. Through those cases the Tribunal has
established, in a fair and transparent judicial process,
the account of what transpired in Rwanda in 1994.
It has held to account those who committed serious
violations of international humanitarian law. It has
contributed significantly in the development of the
jurisprudence and of good practices in the investigation

15-4120913/35

S/PV.7574

ICTY and ICTR

and prosecution of international crimes. The work
of the ICTR, including its jurisprudence, practices
and procedures, provides, I believe, some significant
lessons, learned from the challenges that we faced
in trying to respond to them, for national courts and
international tribunals in carrying forward the task
of the investigation and prosecution of international
crimes. The documentation of such lessons and
practices, which has already commenced in the closing
years of the ICTR, should be continued by others for the
benefit of future generations.
A debt of gratitude is owed to the many whose
support has been indispensable and critical to the
execution of the ICTR mandate. The Security Council,
the Secretary-General, the Secretariat — particularly
the Office of Legal Affairs and its leadership — and
the other organs and States Members of the United
Nations for their cooperation in tracking and arresting
fugitives and in all the other aspects of our operations;
the Government and people of Rwanda, whose support
and cooperation have been critical in assisting our
investigations, in accessing witnesses and other evidence
and in the implementation of our strategy for referral
of cases to national jurisdictions; the Government and
people of Tanzania, who have been our gracious hosts
for over two decades; the thousands of witnesses — for
both the prosecution and the defence — who have had
to travel to Arusha to testify and have recounted and
relived their often traumatic experiences in order to
provide the Court with the relevant evidence; the entire
staff of the Tribunal, in the Chambers, the Registry
and the Office of the Prosecutor, including the judges,
who have all given the best of their time and skills with
dedication and commitment.
I pay particular tribute to my predecessors,
Prosecutors Richard Goldstone, Louise Arbor and Carla
del Ponte, each of whom made a lasting and valuable
contribution to the work of the Office of the Prosecutor
and of the Tribunal; President Vagn Joensen, Registrar
Majola and their predecessors; and also, of course, our
colleagues for the defence, who are an indispensable
element of any fair judicial process. For in the end, the
legacy of a judicial process is perhaps determined more
by its fairness than by its jurisprudence or statistics.
Much has been accomplished in bringing justice
to the victims and the survivors and in bringing
accountability to the perpetrators of the genocide,
but work still remains to be done. Current gaps in
impunity need to be closed with proper accountability.

14/35

09/12/2015

Member States need to give maximum cooperation
to the Mechanism to secure the arrest and trial of the
remaining eight fugitives. Hundreds of other suspected
génocidaires must be tried in their countries of refuge
or be extradited to Rwanda for trial. The acquitted and
released persons currently under the Mechanism in
Arusha need to be relocated to where they can resume
their lives. The closure of the ICTR, the first ad hoc
tribunal of its kind to complete its work, is a momentous
event. But it is merely the end of a chapter. The global
struggle for justice and accountability must continue
and must be intensified, building on the legacies of the
ICTR, the ICTY and, indeed, of the hybrid tribunals.
Finally, I would like to place on record my
appreciation to the Security Council and to the
Secretary-General for having given me the opportunity
to serve as Prosecutor of the ICTR, and in that way,
to take leadership of the investigation and prosecution
process at the peak of the Tribunal’s workload, during
the implementation of the completion strategy, and
through the transition phase as we establish the
Residual Mechanism. I am indeed immensely grateful
to everyone for that honour.
The President: I thank Mr. Jallow for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the comprehensive briefings on the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, and
on the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals in connection with the completion strategies
for the Tribunals, in compliance with resolutions 1534
(2004) and 1966 (2010). We take this opportunity to
welcome President Agius, who succeeds President
Meron at the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, to whom we reiterate our appreciation and
gratitude.
My delegation acknowledges the significant
progress described in the most recent reports, without
losing sight of the challenges that still remain in the final
phase of work, especially in the case of the Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia, the closure of which is
planned for 2017. On that account, we appreciate the
firm commitment of the judges and of Prosecutor
Brammertz in sparing no effort to comply with the
deadlines indicated in the respective resolutions. For
that reason, we also support the extension of their

15-41209

09/12/2015

ICTY and ICTR

S/PV.7574

appointments in line with their requests. Nevertheless,
we remain convinced that both the cooperation of
certain State actors with regard to the provisions of the
statute of the Tribunal, as well as the support of the
international community as a whole, particularly the
Security Council, continue to be crucial if we are to
achieve the full completion of the respective mandates
in the effort to end impunity.

of persons that have been acquitted and released yet
remain in Arusha, deserve our collective concern and
focus as the Council, with a view to reaching a solution.
International cooperation, which has found tangible
expression in the mechanisms intended to facilitate the
dispensation of justice, is indispensable going forward
and should be intensified in both cases to ensure
accountability.

We would like to commend in particular the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, and
Judge Vagn Joensen, for having carried out their
completion strategy this year, a symbolic ceremony for
which took place 1 December in Arusha, reminding
us of the tragic events of 1994. The work done by that
Tribunal constitutes a historic milestone of which we
are proud to be a part, and its legacy will not only
serve in the successful completion of the mandate of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and the Mechanism, but will also be useful for the
design and implementation of any new tribunals that
may be established in future. The rich experience
and jurisprudence accumulated, the development and
maintenance of the archives, as well as the invaluable
task of capacity-building undertaken throughout the
region linked to the work of the Tribunal have paved
the way towards a new era in the development of
international criminal justice. Once again, we express
our satisfaction and extend our gratitude to all those
involved throughout the decades in the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. We remain confident in
the Mechanism’s ability continue the remaining work
assigned to it.

As Chair of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, Chile would once again like to
express its commitment to the work of the Tribunals
and the Mechanism. As we approach the end of our twoyear chairmanship, we reiterate that cooperation with
its completion strategy is one of the most direct ways
in which the Council can contribute to international
justice in situations of crimes against humanity.

We also appreciate the recent completion of the
report of the International Organization for Migration
on the study prepared for the Government of Rwanda
on reparations for the victims of the genocide. We look
forward to its timely publication and to the planning of
follow-up activities aimed at the prompt implementation
of that important project.
My country recognizes the significant contribution
made by the Mechanism under President Meron and
Prosecutor Jallow, and would like to reiterate our positive
assessment of the work done to date in the framework
of the recently launched review process in accordance
with presidential statement S/PRST/2015/21, adopted
on 16 November.
The question of those that have been sentenced and
yet remain at large, as well as the issue of the relocation

Echoing the content of the reports, we would like
to conclude by expressing our gratitude to all who
have contributed to the functioning of the Tribunals,
including each member of the staff. We would like to
pay special tribute to the ongoing support of the Office
of the Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs.
These Tribunals are, in the end, the way forward to
strengthen the rule of law, peace and justice — an
aspiration that we all share.
Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank the Presidents of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda,
the President of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals and the Prosecutors for the
presentation of their respective reports.
Since the presentation of the evaluation reports on
3 June (see S/PV.7455), the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia has made considerable efforts,
trying four accused in four cases in first instance and
three cases on appeal. It will also complete this month,
in cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda, the largest appeal judgement ever been
carried out by the Tribunal: the Butare case. In the same
vein, there is every reason to believe that the timeline
concerning the two rulings planned for March 2016 as
well as the completion of the work of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in December 2017
will be respected.
To date, the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia has rendered 147 rulings or judgements out
of the 161 cases for which it is responsible. The work

15-4120915/35

S/PV.7574

ICTY and ICTR

accomplished by this Tribunal should be commended,
as should its enormous contribution to international
justice. However, despite the progress made, the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
continues to encounter difficulties. The departure of a
number of qualified staff members is likely to cause new
delays. Accordingly, the necessary attention should be
paid to the analysis of the financial strategy drafted by
the Tribunal, with a view to allowing it to retain staff
members and carry out its work in accordance with
the set time frame. Similarly, the question before the
Council of extending the terms of judges should have a
positive outcome.
We welcome the fact that the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda has completed its work this year,
even though the costs and deadlines initially set by the
relevant Security Council resolutions have largely been
surpassed. The objective of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda is to combat impunity and console
the victims and their families. We would like to pay
due tribute to all of the Tribunal’s judges and staff who,
despite difficult conditions, have carried out their task
in a dignified manner. However, we regret to note that
some fugitives are still avoiding justice. We have just
been informed by the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda that one of them has just
been apprehended in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We welcome the arrest and hope that the eight
others will be found and transferred to the Mechanism
and to the national tribunals to stand trial. To that end
we reiterate our appeal to the countries where those
fugitives appear to be in hiding to engaged in greater
cooperation with the Mechanism.
We note with satisfaction the almost seamless setting
up of the Mechanism, as well as its operationalization,
which is evidenced by its numerous judgements, orders
and opinions. Its first judgement, which concerns
the Ngirabatware case, was rendered according to
the timeline. The Mechanism has ruled on various
administrative and judicial issues and is working
effectively to protect witnesses. Its two sections are
actively supporting national tribunals, and many good
initiatives are being carried out, including provisions
in terms of time and resources for future judgements
in the first instance and on appeal, the establishment of
a staff-recruitment policy, computerized networks, and
so on. We hope that those planning efforts will make it
possible to ensure that the errors of the past are avoided.

16/35

09/12/2015

In conclusion, we reiterate our support for the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
its new President, Judge Carmel Agius, as well as for
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. President Agius has sought to promote
effectiveness and transparency in order to complete the
work of the Tribunal in the stipulated time frame.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I wish to express my
appreciation to the briefers — Judge Vagn Joensen,
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR); Judge Carmel Agius, President of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY); Judge Theodor Meron, President of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals; Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of the
ICTY; and Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow, Prosecutor of
the ICTR — for their statements.
We wish to take this opportunity to congratulate
Judge Carmel Agius on his recent appointment as
President of the ICTY. We are confident that Judge Agius
will continue the excellent work of his predecessor,
Judge Theodor Meron, in providing leadership to the
Tribunal in fulfilling its mandate.
The reports and briefings have provided invaluable
insight into the progress made by the Tribunals and
the Mechanism, as mandated by the Council. We
value the work of the Tribunals and the Mechanism in
upholding the rule of law and dispensing justice for the
heinous crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda. In that regard, we are highly encouraged
by the commitment, integrity and high standards of
professionalism shown by the judges and the staff of the
Tribunals in their work, consistent with the fundamental
principles of due process and fairness.
We are also very encouraged that the Tribunals are
on track towards meeting their respective completion
dates — the ICTR by the end of this year and the ICTY
by the end of 2017. We give due recognition to and
commend Judge Joensen for his effective and successful
stewardship of the ICTR, leading to its closure by
the end of this year and transition the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, pursuant
to resolution 1966 (2010).
However, we understand that the ICTY is faced
with several challenges, in particular as regards staff
attrition, which has reached a critical level, and also
the request for extension of the terms of service for

15-41209

09/12/2015

ICTY and ICTR

its Judges, necessitated by delays in proceedings.
We believe that the delays are due to factors beyond
the Tribunal’s control, such as resignations and the
health condition of the accused. We therefore believe
that those challenges are not insurmountable. We will
continue to give the necessary support to the ICTY
in overcoming those challenges. We cannot in good
conscience ignore or refuse to assist the Tribunal in
overcoming those challenges as it approaches the last
stretch in completing its mandate.
As the closure of the ICTR approaches, we agree
that it is important to preserve its legacy in the form
of judgements, testimonies and other records related to
upholding the rule of law and the delivery of justice
regarding one of the darkest periods of modern history.
The preservation of those records would provide a
basis for future international tribunals and serve as a
reminder to humankind of the importance of combating
impunity.
We further wish to acknowledge the cooperation of
the States concerned and the regional States for their
cooperation with the Tribunals. It would have not been
possible for the ICTR and ICTY to fulfil their mandates
without the fullest cooperation of the respective
States. We encourage the concerned States to continue
their cooperation so as to enable the Tribunals and
Mechanism to fulfil their respective mandates. While
it would have been ideal for the Tribunals to fulfil their
respective mandates expeditiously and without delays,
we are of the view that our eagerness to pursue justice
should not come at the expense of due process or the
rule of law.
We need to continue sending a strong and unequivocal
message that impunity will not be tolerated or go
unpunished. Malaysia remains resolute in its position
that the perpetrators of such crimes must and will be
brought to justice to account for their crimes. That is
part of the healing, truth and reconciliation process that
communities and States have to undergo in seeking
and upholding justice. In that regard, Malaysia highly
values and underscores its full support for the work of
the ICTY, the ICTR and the Mechanism in upholding
the rule of law and justice. We deeply acknowledge
their contributions to the international justice system,
the rule of law and the maintenance of international
peace and security.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): Mr. President, the Nigerian
delegation thanks you for convening this meeting. We
also thank our briefers for their briefings.

S/PV.7574

Concerning the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), we have carefully studied
the twenty-second annual report (see S/2015/585),
which provides detailed information on its work during
the period under review. We commend the Tribunal’s
commitment to completing its proceedings expeditiously
and in accordance with due process. We note the
important work done by the Registry in coordinating
the practical arrangements necessary for the ongoing
process of downsizing the Tribunal’s operations and the
transfer of responsibilities to the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
The ICTY outreach programme has made
significant contributions to transitional justice and
post-conflict recovery in the former Yugoslavia. That
is a noteworthy legacy of the Tribunal. We commend
the ICTY media office for facilitating the work of
journalists covering the activities of the Tribunal,
which has helped to promote transparency in its work.
Concerning the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR), we are pleased to note that as of
15 November the Tribunal had completed its work at
the trial level for all 93 accused and transferred its
final outstanding cases to other competent judicial
authorities in preparation for its closure. The fact that
the judgement in the sole remaining case on appeal will
be delivered on 14 December is a significant indication
of the progress made by the Tribunal in completing its
work.
We note that the ICTR is on course to formally
cease its activities on 31 December. The progress made
in implementing its completion strategy attests to that.
The smooth handover of most judicial and prosecutorial
functions to the Mechanism is laudable. It is particularly
significant that the Mechanism has already assumed
full responsibility for monitoring cases referred to
national jurisdictions for trial, tracking fugitives,
responding to requests for mutual legal assistance and
supervising conditions of detention for the 28 persons
currently serving sentences imposed by the Tribunal.
We encourage States Members of the United Nations
to offer their full cooperation to the Mechanism in the
attainment of its mandate.
In conclusion, we may tribute to our distinguished
briefers for their astute leadership and assure them of
our continued support.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the leadership of the Tribunals and

15-4120917/35

S/PV.7574

ICTY and ICTR

the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals for their information on the progress of
legal proceedings, the pace of their completion and the
transfer of the Tribunals’s functions to the Mechanism.
We take this opportunity to congratulate Judge Agius on
his election to the post of President of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
In resolutions 2193 (2014) and 2194 (2014),
the Security Council agreed to the request of both
Tribunals for another extension of the terms of their
Judges. However, given the delays in the work of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, the
Council emphatically urged that body to redouble
its efforts to reduce the time period for the proposed
completion of cases.
We take note of the information contained in the
progress report (see S/2015/585) of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia on the steps taken
to that end. However, to date, those steps have not
produced results. We note the deferral of decisions that
had already been postponed on several occasions. We
cannot pretend that this does alleviates our concerns.
On the contrary, it creates an unfavourable backdrop
for the consideration of the extension of the terms of the
Judges and the Prosecutor of the Tribunal. The staffing
issues to which the report of the Tribunal refers can
hardly be a valid excuse for the situation.
Furthermore, one has the impression that staffing
shortages are not a reason but rather a result of the slow
pace of trials, which cannot be linked to the normal
transfer of staff to other jobs. Attention should also be
paid to the situation of defendants with serious health
problems. We believe that the Trial Chambers and the
Office of the Prosecutor of the ICTY should determine
how best to conduct the relevant ongoing investigations,
taking into account, inter alia, all of the humanitarian
considerations.
One trial is unprecedented in its length, namely,
that of Vojislav Šešelj, who spent 11 years in pre-trial
detention. We were disappointed to learn from the
report that the judgement, which was expected at the
end of the year, is still not ready and that its rendering
has been postponed once again. That is an outrageous
situation in a case whose hearing was completed in
2012. We hope that the ICTY leadership can decrease
the time needed to conclude trials and ensure the swift
completion of the work of the Tribunal in line with the
requirements and stipulations of the Security Council.

18/35

09/12/2015

We urge that all the necessary measures be taken to
that end.
We welcome the final report (see S/2015/577) of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. The report
confirms that the ICTR will complete its work and
will be considered officially closed by 31 December.
Unfortunately, that is one year after the deadline set
by the Council. Nonetheless, we would like to thank
all those who contributed to achieving the aims of the
Tribunal and strove for its proceedings to be completed.
The ICTR has had to deal with the most serious crimes,
and now we can say that, in general, it rose to the
challenge, although admittedly not without difficulties
and mistakes. However, only time will tell what the
contributions of the ICTR have been to the cause of
international justice.
With regard to the Residual Mechanism, we see
that the institution has found its feet and has become
operational. We trust that the Mechanism will be as
effective as possible in its work, given the temporary
nature of its mandate, which was established in
resolution 1966 (2010). We welcome the start of the
review process of the Residual Mechanism for its
initial four-year period, in line with the parameters
stipulated in presidential statement S/PRST/2015/21,
of 16 November. We hope that that will provide the
Mechanism with further impetus to improve the
effectiveness of its work.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome Judge Agius, President
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY); Judge Joensen, President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR); and Judge
Meron, President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and thank them
all for their briefings. I also thank Mr. Brammertz and
Mr. Jallow for their briefings.
The establishment by the Security Council of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda was
the result of the international community’s deeply
held conviction that there was a need to end the most
atrocious of international crimes, such as crimes against
humanity, war crimes and the crime of genocide. It
also wanted to ensure that criminal justice was duly
dispensed and to prevent any of those involved in such
atrocities from escaping being held accountable for
their crimes and ensure that justice was rendered. The

15-41209

09/12/2015

ICTY and ICTR

goal was to uphold the rule of law. The establishment of
such international criminal tribunals is an affirmation
that international criminal justice, stability and peace
go hand in hand. It is impossible for us to achieve
lasting peace without holding accountable those who
have committed crimes.
The two Tribunals have made major progress
recently on delivering on the objectives for which they
were set up. We find that to be true in many of the
cases that have been heard by the Tribunals, although
a few cases remain outstanding in one of the Tribunals
and have still to be heard. With respect to the ICTR
making its final ruling last week, we think that it is
a perfect opportunity to express our appreciation for
the enormous efforts made by the Tribunal to ensure
that it could duly complete its work by the date on
which its responsibilities were to be transferred to
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. It has met that deadline.
Nonetheless, Jordan remains concerned about the
fact that nine persons who have been accused or indicted
are at still at large. They are fugitives, and we call upon
the Residual Mechanism to continue to pursue them
and to work to ensure that they are apprehended, in line
with resolution 1966 (2010). The achievements of both
Tribunals and all that they have done for the rule of
law has demonstrated the wisdom of establishing the
Tribunals in the first place, and also attest to the efforts
made to support their work despite the various financial
and administrative challenges that both Tribunals have
had to face over the past few years. Despite such issues,
they have succeeded in playing a key role in developing
the principles of international criminal law.
Moreover, the interpretations and rulings provided
by the two Tribunals pertaining to the provisions of
international humanitarian law and their definitions
of legal terms in international criminal law have laid
the foundation for other international and national
courts and tribunals, including the newer International
Criminal Court itself, which refers to the work of ad
hoc International Tribunals in rendering its judgements.
That is why we call upon all national tribunals and
courts and international justice bodies to make use
of and learn lessons from the experiences of and
example set, at the judicial and administrative levels,
by the Tribunals and to benefit from their archives,
jurisprudence and achievements.
The two Tribunals were established on the basis
of constructive cooperation. We must continue to

S/PV.7574

lend such support to the ICTY while its work is still
ongoing, and make available to it all the resources it
needs so that it can complete its work by the date set by
its President. We call upon the countries of the former
Yugoslavia to continue to cooperate fully with the
Tribunal and with the Prosecutor. We would also like to
reiterate that the transition to the Residual Mechanism
must be as smooth for the ICTY as it has been for the
ICTR. We also call for the full implementation of the
completion strategy and for all trials to be duly brought
to a successful conclusion. We therefore support the
Residual Mechanism in its pursuit of ensuring that
international criminal justice has been served.
Once again, we thank those who briefed us for all
that they have achieved and for their presentations. We
pay tribute to the exceptional work they have carried
out and express our full support to them.
Mr. Gasso Matoses (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I too would like to thank the Judges and Prosecutors
representing the two International Tribunals and the
Residual Mechanism. I begin by paying tribute to the
outstanding work done over the past two years in the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
under the helm of Ambassador Cristián Barros Melet
and his team.
I would like to share some initial thoughts pertaining
to the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
We welcome the comments of Judge Agius with regard
to the Tribunal’s commitment to concluding its work
in December 2017. It is clear that the gradual loss of
experienced staff at the Tribunal and the delicate health
of some of the accused pose a challenge to concluding
ongoing proceedings. Nonetheless, we call upon the
Tribunal to make every possible effort to meet the
deadlines — of course, within the bounds of respecting
due process and fair-trial guarantees. To achieve that
goal, Spain fully supports extending the mandate of the
judges as requested by the Tribunal.
We also reiterate our concern about the pace,
effectiveness and small number of proceedings
undertaken by national authorities, particularly in
cases involving defendants of senior or mid-level
rank. We therefore call for strengthened efforts to
achieve genuine post-conflict national justice, which
is essential in strengthening the rule of law. We agree
with the Prosecutor that more can, and should, do more.
We listened very closely and carefully to Prosecutor
Brammertz’s comments and extensive explanations.

15-4120919/35

S/PV.7574

ICTY and ICTR

Generally speaking, we welcome the fact that
the level of cooperation on the part of the authorities
of Serbia, Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina
with the Prosecutor’s Office has been positive.
Nonetheless, certain aspects concern us, specifically
the communication received by the Council on Serbia’s
failure to carry out various arrest warrants and
surrender orders issued by the Tribunal. We therefore
call upon the Government of Serbia to duly abide by
the requirements of the Tribunal. We reiterate that
cooperation with the Tribunal is an unavoidable duty.
We encourage the authorities of those three countries to
continue to move forward on their regional cooperation
and to pursue joint efforts to overcome any obstacles
that might hamper such cooperation.
With regard to the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda, Spain is of the view that, as has been
said, today’s debate is rather unusual. It has special
significance because it is the last debate in which those
heading the Tribunal will participate. This is therefore
a moment to pay tribute to the men and women who,
throughout the past 21 years, have contributed to the
work of the Tribunal. The Tribunal will be closing its
doors, but its legacy will remain as a testimony, not only
to the horror of the genocide against the Tutsi people in
Rwanda, but also to the value of justice.
It is important to recognize the impact on
international law of the Tribunal’s groundbreaking
jurisprudence in the area of genocide. It has been
especially important with respect to various issues,
including its interpretation of acts of sexual violence
as elements of the crime of genocide, as explained by
Judge Vagn Joensen, as well as in cases of incitement to
genocide through the media. The Tribunal’s contribution
to peace in the Great Lakes region cannot be denied, as
Spain fully acknowledges.
We acknowledge, and indeed welcome, the
information shared with the Council by Mr. Jallow
regarding the detention of one of the remaining fugitives
indicted by the Tribunal. We urge the authorities of
Rwanda and those leading the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals to spare no effort
in finding the remaining eight fugitives and bringing
them before the Tribunal or the Mechanism itself or
Rwanda’s judicial authorities. At the same time, we
also urge States where those fugitives might be found
to cooperate with the Tribunal by arresting them and
immediately handing them over to it.

20/35

09/12/2015

With respect to the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, we believe that
the transition phase, which in the case of the Tribunal
for Rwanda is nearly complete and in the case of the
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia is well under way,
has been remarkably efficient to date. That has made
possible a smooth and uninterrupted transition in
the conduct of the work of both Tribunals, including
in cases regarding extremely sensitive issues such as
the protection of witnesses and victims. It was not an
easy task. We therefore commend those leading the
processes of all three institutions. We encourage the
Mechanism, whose initial period of activity is currently
under review by the Council, to continue to apply the
lessons learned and good practices developed by both
Tribunals.
I will conclude with some general thoughts. The
establishment of the Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and the Tribunal for Rwanda constituted a milestone
in international criminal law. Their contribution to the
development of international criminal law has been
invaluable. That legacy is the best possible tribute to the
victims and the survivors. It is critical, however, that
their work be completed by national jurisdictions, whose
genuine commitment to accountability is indispensable
in establishing the rule of law and bringing about true
reconciliation. As Judge Meron has reminded us, today
in Syria, Iraq, Libya, the Sudan and the Central African
Republic — and in many other places as well — we
are once again witnessing the terrible consequences of
contempt for the most basic elements of international
humanitarian law and international human rights
norms.
The achievements on the part of the international
criminal Tribunals, and the current work of other
instruments — I call particular attention to the
International Criminal Court — comprise a source of
hope, because they demonstrate that, through political
will and the necessary means, justice is also possible
for the victims of those conflicts. Combating impunity
must remain a priority for the Council, and the
message must be clear: those responsible must not go
unpunished, and the rule of law must, and can, prevail
in the face of barbarity.
Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): Let me thank Judge
Carmel Agius, Judge Vagn Joensen, Judge Theodor
Meron, Mr. Serge Brammertz and Mr. Hassan Bubacar
Jallow for their comprehensive briefings. For the past

15-41209

09/12/2015

ICTY and ICTR

20 years, the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) have played a crucial role
in promoting the rule of law and ending impunity by
establishing an internationally recognized system of
criminal justice, setting up a national and international
justice mechanism, leading the fight against impunity
and ensuring that many of those responsible for serious
crimes against humanity were held accountable and
brought to justice.
As the cessation of the ICTR’s activities draws near,
we commend the contribution, support and international
cooperation afforded to it by Member States, as well
as its legacy on best practices and lessons learned in
the tracking and arrest of fugitives, the prosecution of
sexual and gender-based violence and the referrals of
international criminal cases to national jurisdictions.
The final judgement, in the Nyiramasuhuko et al.
(Butare) case, which is scheduled for 14 December and
will formally mark the end of the Tribunal’s operations,
will be a landmark event in the history of international
criminal and humanitarian law. The Tribunal has played
a crucial role by contributing to peace and reconciliation
in the Great Lakes region and by pursuing justice for
the victims and survivors of the 1994 tragic events
in Rwanda. The Tribunal’s formal closure coincides
with the completion of its work and the transfer of
any residual functions to the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, which, according
to resolution 1966 (2010), has the responsibility of
tracking the remaining fugitives indicted by the ICTR.
Ensuring the arrest and prosecution of the remaining
fugitives is a top priority of the Residual Mechanism.
During the period under review, the ICTY
completed nearly all of the cases under its jurisdiction,
with four trials and two appeals still pending at the end
of 2015. We acknowledge the Tribunal’s commitment
to completing its work expeditiously, and the judges’
efforts to expedite the pending cases. We value greatly
the Tribunal’s commitment in meeting the date foreseen
for its closure in 2017, as well as the diligent efforts
to expeditiously complete the transfer of functions to
the Residual Mechanism in accordance with resolution
1966 (2010). However, we are concerned about the
continued challenges the ICTY is facing, particularly
those related to staff attrition, resulting delays in trials
and appeals, and the Tribunal’s inability to offer an
end-of-service incentive. We hope those delays will not
affect the trials that are ongoing and that the Tribunal’s

S/PV.7574

judicial work will be effectively completed by the end
of 2017.
We note that the Residual Mechanism will assume
full responsibility for the ICTR’s remaining functions
by the end of 2015. The ICTY’s closure is expected
for 2017, while the Tribunal principals and staff will
continue working to ensure a smooth transition for the
remaining functions and services, harmonizing and
adopting best practices. However, the Mechanism is still
facing two long-standing challenges — ensuring that
the nine individuals indicted by the ICTR who remain
at large are apprehended, and that the 18 individuals
who have been acquitted and released by the ICTR but
who are unable to return to their countries of origin are
relocated.
We are encouraged by the fact that the Mechanism
has continued to communicate and cooperate with
Rwanda and the States of the former Yugoslavia,
keeping them updated on the Mechanism’s activities,
the transition of responsibilities and on its assistance
to national jurisdictions. We would like to highlight the
fact that international criminal justice, through both the
Tribunals for Yugoslavia and Rwanda, has been crucial
to the recovery processes following the horrific events
that took place in those territories.
Finally, in closing these files, it is critical to
ensure that we have the cooperation and support of the
international community for the ongoing operations
tracking and capturing fugitives and for the Tribunals’
remaining work.
Mr. Li Yongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would first like to thank President Agius, Prosecutor
Brammertz, President Joenson, Prosecutor Jallow and
President Meron for their briefings on the reports of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (see
S/2015/585), the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (see S/2015/577) and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals (S/2015/896, annex).
China welcomes the ICTR’s last report, and
congratulates the Tribunal on completing its work and
its preparations to close down by the end of the year.
Through its judicial activities over the past 21 years,
the ICTR has prosecuted some of the most serious
international crimes. Meanwhile, it has also promoted
the development of international law, particularly
international criminal law, and has proudly set records
in many areas. It has also played a role in promoting
peace and reconciliation in the Great Lakes region.

15-4120921/35

S/PV.7574

ICTY and ICTR

The Tribunal’s various Presidents, Prosecutors and
staff have accomplished a great deal and for that China
expresses its appreciation.
Through its report and the events centred around
its closure, the Tribunal has already begun reviewing
and reflecting on its judicial process. We believe that
its experiences and lessons learned in prosecuting some
extremely serious international crimes and addressing
the relationship between the pursuit of justice and the
maintenance of regional peace and stability will go
down in the annals of history, for future generations to
comment on and learn from.
China would like to congratulate Judge Agius
on his election to the presidency of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), and we
welcome the fact that the Tribunal will reach a verdict
on two of its appeal cases in mid-December. We have
also noted that a number of cases have been delayed,
for various reasons, and that their initial trials will not
be completed within the expected schedule. We hope
that under President Agius’s leadership, the ICTY will
continue to fully implement the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council and, while ensuring judicial
fairness as a precondition, will rationalize its work
arrangements and use of the available resources,
overcome its difficulties and complete all of its work as
soon as possible.
China welcomes the Council’s first review of the
the work of the Residual Mechanism and appreciates the
Mechanism’s report (S/2015/883, annex I) on its initial
work and the six-month progress report. We thank the
Secretariat for submitting the summary of the report of
the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) . We
commend the progress that the Mechanism has made
since its inception and appreciate the improvements it
has instituted, in accordance with the recommendations
of OIOS. We hope that the Council’s first review of the
Mechanism will highlight the progress it has made and
the areas that still need improvement, including those
related to its request for keeping the minimum levels
necessary for staffing and financial resources, in order
to urge the Mechanism to continue to abide by Council
resolutions and conduct its work efficiently and costeffectively.
The two Tribunals and the Mechanism represent
an important effort by the international community
to punish the most serious types of international
crime and demonstrate the international community’s

22/35

09/12/2015

determination to adhere to the rule of law at the
international level. We hope that the ICTY and the
Mechanism will continue to work hard to improve and
enhance their work in order to live up to the expectations
of the international community.
Last but not least, I would like to take this
opportunity to thank Chile, in its capacity as Chair of
the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals,
and the Office of Legal Affairs for their work.
Ms. Mulvein (United Kingdom): I would like
to thank the Presidents and Prosecutors for their
presentations today. The United Kingdom is fully
committed to the principle that there must be no
impunity for the most serious international crimes, and
we continue to support the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals in their
work in tackling that.
Regarding the ICTY, I would like to welcome
President Agius in his new role and to thank President
Meron for his excellent work for the Tribunal in is
capacity as its President for the past four years. We are
pleased to note that the transition to the Mechanism is
going as planned. We understand the challenges of staff
attrition, but we hope that the ICTY staff will see their
roles through until the end of the Tribunal’s mandate.
We are pleased that the trial judgement in the
Mladić case is still on track, and we hope that continues
to be the position. It is disappointing that the Karadžić
case completion date has slipped, but we understand
the difficulties and look forward to a judgement in
March. We note the update on the Hadžić case and look
forward to receiving more information on it. We are
disappointed to hear that the date for a judgement in
the Šešelj case has slipped to early 2016. We agree with
the Office of the Prosecutor that every effort should
be made to expedite that, and we note the commitment
to a written judgement in the first quarter of 2016.
We understand that it may be a challenge to meet the
projected time frame for the Prlić appeal, but we hope
that November 2017 date will be met. We are pleased
that the other two outstanding appeals remain on track,
and we are looking forward to a judgement in one of
those next week. We support extending the Judges’
mandates in order to complete the work that remains.
We have also noted the concerns of the Office of the
Prosecutor about the pace and effectiveness of national

15-41209

09/12/2015

ICTY and ICTR

war crimes prosecutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We agree that the challenges can be overcome, and we
urge the Government to support those efforts. We are
also concerned about the fact that national war crimes
prosecutions in Serbia are at a crucial point, and we
urge the Serbian Government to support those efforts
too. We once again voice our support of the Prosecutor’s
call for a search for and exhumation of mass graves, and
the United Kingdom encourages regional Governments
to continue to support those efforts.
We are concerned by the President’s letter of
13 October with regard to non-compliance by Serbia
with the Tribunal in relation to three arrest warrants and
orders for surrender. We note the Prosecutor’s report
that cooperation is satisfactory in other respects, and
we call on Serbia, and indeed all States, to cooperate
fully with the Tribunal.
Turning to the ICTR, I would like to thank the
Tribunal’s judges, prosecutors and staff for their hard
work over the past 21 years in the pursuit of justice
for the victims and survivors of the 1994 genocide in
Rwanda. We look forward to the final judgement in the
Butare appeal next week.
Over the past 21 years, there have been some
notable developments and achievements. I should like
to name a few. The judgements recognizing sexual
violence as acts of genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity have significantly contributed to the
development of international criminal law. There was
no legal aid system at the international level when the
Tribunal commenced, and they succeeded in developing
a new system. There are many lessons to be learned
from the ICTR, and we encourage other tribunals to
profit from them and from publications such as their
manual on best practices in the prosecution of sexual
violence in crimes and their manual on tracking and
arresting fugitives. The Tribunal leaves behind a great
legacy.
We welcome the work done on preserving evidence
for use in future trials, and we very much welcome
today’s news that one of the fugitives has just been
arrested. We encourage full and prompt cooperation
by all States with the Mechanism and the Rwandan
Government to ensure the arrest of the remaining
fugitives still at large. I think that today’s arrest shows
that we must not give up on these continued efforts. We
will ensure accountability, no matter how long it takes.

S/PV.7574

Finally on the ICTR, we look forward to receiving
the report of the International Organization for
Migration’s assessment study on reparations for victims
in due course and the follow-up on that.
Moving on to the Mechanism, we are pleased
with its work in the past 6 months, and indeed since
its commencement. We particularly welcome the news
that progress continues to be made on new permanent
premises in Arusha. We would welcome an update in
due course on the negotiations on The Hague branch
premises. We welcome the fact that the recruitment
of staff is proceeding well and that staff with relevant
experience from the ICTY and ICTR are being drawn
upon. The Council is currently conducting its first
review of the Mechanism’s work, and there is good
evidence that the Mechanism is functioning well. It has
a vital role to play in the international criminal justice
system, and we have every confidence that it will carry
out the residual functions appropriately in the future.
In that respect, we would also like to thank Chile
for its leadership of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, both with regard to the review
and in other respects over the past two years.
Let me conclude by thanking the ICTR once
again for its service to international justice over the
past 21 years. I had the honour to attend the closing
ceremony events in Arusha, which were a fitting way
to mark the end of the Tribunals’s work. We wish all its
judges, prosecutors and staff well as they move on to
other things.
Mrs. Jakubonė (Lithuania): I thank Judges Carmel
Agius, Vagn Joensen and Theodor Meron and Prosecutors
Serge Brammertz and Hassan Bubakar Jallow for
their extensive briefings on the implementation of the
completion strategy for both ad hoc Tribunals. I also
take this opportunity to extend our appreciation to
Ambassador Cristián Barros Melet and his team and
to acknowledge the way in which he has guided the
work of the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals.
The implementation of the principle of accountability
is a key element in maintaining international
peace and security. The Tribunals have played an
essential role in consolidating the rule of law and in
promoting reconciliation and long-term stability. Their
jurisprudence has had far-reaching effects and has been
a source of inspiration for national and international

15-4120923/35

S/PV.7574

ICTY and ICTR

jurisdictions, in particular for the establishment of the
International Criminal Court.
The year 2015 has been a symbolic milestone, as
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
is completing its mandate. Since the establishment of
the Tribunal, more than 20 years ago, it has played a
significant role in the development of international
criminal law and international humanitarian law,
including through its jurisprudence, by recognizing
sexual violence as acts of genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes, and by providing model
examination of the role of the media with respect to
incitement to commit genocide. The contribution of the
Tribunal has not been limited only to the development
of international criminal law. It also extends to the
provision of assistance and support to victims and
witnesses, capacity-building and legacy preservation.
While the ICTR is completing its work, several
defendants among those indicted by the Tribunal still
remain fugitives. In order to arrest the fugitives, both
those under the jurisdiction of the Mechanism and those
who have been transferred to Rwandan jurisdiction, the
cooperation of all States, especially those in the region,
is necessary.
With regard to the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), that Tribunal continues
to move towards completing its work. We are aware
that a high rate of staff attrition and the advanced
age of some of the accused are factors in the delay in
meeting the established deadlines. We encourage the
ICTY to take all the appropriate measures to complete
its work expeditiously, while ensuring that trials and
appeals are conducted in a manner consistent with fairtrial standards. It is in our interests that the Tribunal
completes its case work successfully. We are of the view
is that the term of office of the judges of the Tribunal
should be extended until the completion of their cases.
The commemoration of the twentieth anniversary
of the Srebrenica genocide earlier this year (see
S/PV.7481) reminded us all of the importance of
holding the perpetrators to account. The fact that those
who were behind that tragedy are standing trial proves
that there is no escaping justice, and that sooner or later
those who committed atrocities will be held to account.
We commend the cooperation of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals with the
Tribunals in taking over their functions, including with
regard to the enforcement of sentences, the protection

24/35

09/12/2015

of victims and witnesses, the management of archives
and the relocation of acquitted and released persons.
We note the remaining challenges with regard to the
relocation of individuals who have been acquitted or
those who have served their sentences. We need to work
together to find solutions to address the situation of
eight persons acquitted by the ICTR and three persons
released by the Tribunal who need to be relocated from
Arusha.
Finally, since this is the last time that Lithuania
speaks on the subject as a non-permanent member of
the Council, I would like to pay sincere tribute to the
judges, prosecutors and officials of both Tribunals and
their overall contribution to the fight against impunity.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Venezuela) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Judge Theodor Meron, President
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, Judge Vagn Joensen, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
and Judge Carmel Agius, President of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), for their
briefings and work. We would also like to thank
Prosecutors Serge Brammetz and Hassan Jallow for
their briefings and work.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela supports
the work of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda, as well as the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, in their efforts to
bring to justice the perpetrators of genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes committed during
the conflicts that affected those countries and whose
violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights shocked the conscience of
humankind. The work conducted by those tribunals
reaffirms the commitment of the international
community to combat impunity with respect to war
crimes and crimes against humanity in order to ensure
that such acts are never repeated. Such efforts contribute
to strengthening the rule of law at the international
level.
As we near the end of the work of both Tribunals,
which are in the midst of transferring their archives
and their pending cases to the International Residual
Mechanism, we believe that this represents an important
opportunity to bolster the cooperation between that
body and the States concerned in order to ensure
completion of the mandates set out in resolution 1966

15-41209

09/12/2015

ICTY and ICTR

(2010). This support is an essential component of the
successful achievement of the goals set.
Turning first to the International Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia, we wish to underscore that, although
it is true that significant progress has been made and
judicial proceedings have been completed in 147 of the
161 individual cases that were entrusted to the court,
we nonetheless note with concern that, despite the fact
that more than two decades have elapsed since the
ICTY was established, several cases are experiencing
procedural delays, due mainly to external factors. We
hope that these difficulties can be overcome so that the
trials can be completed by the set deadline, with due
respect for the principles of due process and judicial
impartiality.
Venezuela would also like to acknowledge the work
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda,
which was highlighted at the closing ceremony held last
week in Arusha, Tanzania, and which is reflected in the
raft of jurisprudence accumulated over the years, the
safeguarding and preservation of judicial archives, the
many lessons learned and the capacity-building that has
been engaged in by this body throughout its lifetime.
All of this represents a legacy that can serve to enrich
the work of other legal bodies such as the International
Criminal Court. In a similar vein, we duly acknowledge
the influence exercised by the ICTR on the capacitybuilding of the judicial system in Rwanda itself.
We also commend the ICTR for having wrapped
up the cases of 93 accused, leaving just one single
case pending in the Appeals Chamber that involves six
individuals; it is projected that this appeals case will be
concluded by the end of this year.
With regard to the cases of the nine fugitives from
justice, six of which were referred to the jurisdiction of
the national courts of Rwanda and the other three to the
Residual Mechanism, we encourage the authorities to
locate, apprehend and try those accused as quickly as
possible in order to ensure that justice is applied to all
of the indicted.
With regard to those individuals who are serving
their sentences and those who have been acquitted,
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda has
referred these cases to the Residual Mechanism so that
it can support the relocation of the individuals that
have been acquitted, given that theirs is a humanitarian
issue that requires the cooperation of the international
community. Only thus will such persons be able to be

S/PV.7574

reintegrated into society. By the same token, we support
the strategic plan adopted by the Residual Mechanism
consisting of stepping up efforts to find appropriate
places for the relocation of these individuals and thus
provide them with appropriate levels of humanitarian
assistance. We encourage the Mechanism to maintain
the pace of work documented in the management
report in order to achieve a successful and unhindered
transition of the two Tribunals.
We would like to pay due tribute to the work of
Chile in its capacity as Chair of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals. We underscore the
work done by its delegation and the contribution it has
made to those bodies.
We would like to conclude by reiterating our
commitment to and support for the work done by
the International Tribunals in the fulfilment of their
mandates. Support for them and their work will make
it possible to fulfil the commitment made by the
international community to promote the rule of law and
put an end to impunity in the fight against genocide
and crimes against humanity, thus strengthening global
peace and security.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I should like to
thank the Presidents and the Prosecutors for the clarity
and specificity of their briefings. They have reminded
us of the significant practical issues that need to be
addressed as the Rwanda and Yugoslavia Tribunals
wind up their work. They need our continuing support
as they go through this important period.
With the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda closing this month and the International
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia expected to close in
the foreseeable future, it is timely for us to take a step
back and reflect on the value and significance of their
work.
New Zealand has a very strong sense of identification
with both Tribunals. As a Council member in 1993,
New Zealand was an early and strong advocate for the
establishment of the Yugoslavia Tribunal. In 1994, New
Zealand played a leading role in pushing the Council to
respond to the unfolding genocide in Rwanda, and later
that year we took the initiative in the Council to prepare
the draft statute and led the negotiations on the text.
When we look back at what the Tribunals have
achieved, we are all the more convinced that the
Council made the right decision in establishing these

15-4120925/35

S/PV.7574

ICTY and ICTR

bodies. We should be proud of what was created. We
should warmly thank the judges, Tribunal staff and
United Nations personnel who have worked tirelessly
to deliver justice and provide some measure of closure
to victims, and, above all, to send a clear message that
there can be no impunity for perpetrators of atrocities,
even at the highest levels.
New Zealand also congratulates all those countries
that have cooperated with the Tribunals to help bring
accused persons to trial, and those countries that
provided other forms of practical assistance to the
Tribunals, not least the Netherlands and Tanzania.
Unfortunately, the Security Council itself has been
a less supportive parent to the Tribunals than it should
have been, and it has failed to support the International
Criminal Court with regard to cases that it has referred
to it. We also believe that it is necessary to speak out
against an unfortunate trend that has developed in the
Council in recent years. A budget-driven mentality
seems to have distorted the conversation about the
role and performance of the Tribunals. While justice
must be delivered efficiently and expeditiously, judicial
machinery is inherently expensive. Judicial processes
are slow. We know this only too well from our domestic
experiences. We all knew this would be the case in 1993
and 1994, and we also knew that teething problems and
initial inefficiencies were likely; they always are when
you create something new.
We accept that there have been administrative
and other problems that might have been avoided. The
Tribunals have not been perfect. But we reject any
suggestion that this should lead to the conclusion that
the Tribunals have failed. We also take issue with any
assertion that the experience of these two Tribunals
means that future efforts to establish ad hoc tribunals
must rely solely on voluntary contributions. Beggingbowl justice is unseemly and unsustainable over
time. The experience of the Lebanon, Sierra Leone
and Cambodia tribunals has highlighted the many
challenges that a wholly voluntary funding model
presents.
It is true that we now have a standing judicial body
in the International Criminal Court (ICC). That is an
important and positive part of the way forward. But we
are nonetheless seeing an ongoing demand for ad hoc
judicial solutions, in order to meet local characteristics
or requirements related to specific peace processes.
The Special Criminal Court established in the Central

26/35

09/12/2015

African Republic is a current example of this; it
complements the ICC and responds to the need for
wider national accountability. New Zealand wants to put
firmly on record our view that a reliance on voluntary
funding alone is not adequate for such bodies.
We need to have a serious conversation about how
to practically, sustainably and cost-effectively ensure
accountability for serious international crimes. In these
conversations we need to face up to the reality that
real justice has real costs; it always has. Part of this
conversation also needs to be about how the Council
can do better in ensuring practical support for the
machinery of international justice and thus assist it in
expediting its work.
Looking forward, we reiterate our support for the
Residual Mechanism. It has an important role to play
as the Rwanda and Yugoslavia Tribunals complete their
work.
The Mechanism’s first review is under way. There
is, of course, still room for improvement, including
drawing on lessons learned from the Tribunals.
But overall, we believe the Mechanism should be
commended for its work to date. It is implementing many
of the lessons learned from the Tribunals. We would
encourage the Mechanism to work collaboratively with
Rwanda on legacy issues, including with regard to the
final location of the Rwanda Tribunal archives and
original documentation and evidence.
The Council also needs to continue to support
the Yugoslavia Tribunal through to the end of its
mandate. As we have been reminded today, some of the
judgements yet to be handed down are among the most
important that the Yugoslavia Tribunal will deliver.
We need to ensure that the Tribunal has the resources
needed to complete this important work. Negotiations
on a draft resolution to extend the judges’ terms will
begin shortly. Member State cooperation in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions continues
to be vital to the success and timely completion of the
work of all tribunals.
Finally, I would like to thank Ambassador Cristián
Barros Melet of Chile for his work in chairing the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.
Mr. Lamek (France): I would like to thank
President Agius, President Joensen, President Meron
and Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow for their
briefings.

15-41209

09/12/2015

ICTY and ICTR

France once again thanks, and reiterates its support
for, all the staff of the Tribunals for the work carried
out in order to successfully conduct the Tribunals’
judicial proceedings. We recognize the importance
of mobilizing everyone to meet the timetables set by
the Security Council. The International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) branches of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals are well under way in the transition so that the
work of justice can be pursued and brought to completion.
In that regard, we welcome the comprehensive review
of the temporary Mechanism’s report currently being
undertaken by the Council. We encourage, as we did
with the French initiative in favour of an external
audit of the functioning of the International Criminal
Court endorsed at the recent meeting of States parties
to the Rome Statute, the continuing and deepening of
this approach with respect to all international criminal
courts.
In the context of completion strategy, France
attaches great importance to the Tribunals continuing
to render justice in full compliance with the procedural
safeguards and with respect for the diversity of legal
systems. While there are many reasons for the delay
with respect to the deadlines set by resolution 1966
(2010), this delay makes it all the more critical that
greater attention be paid to the efficiency in the work
and the use of allocated resources. The credibility of
international criminal justice as a whole depends on
it. With these two goals in mind, France reaffirms
today that it might support the extension of the current
mandates beyond 31 December 2015.
Today’s debate should be an opportunity for the
Council to welcome the significant work conducted
by the Tribunals to combat impunity, promote
reconciliation and identify the work that States must now
undertake so that the effor to render justice continues
to move forward in the long term. Immediately after
the genocide in Rwanda, and in the 21 years since then,
the ICTR has been at the forefront of the global fight
against impunity by prosecuting those most responsible
for the most serious crimes committed in 1994.
The Tribunal’s legacy provides the basis for a
new era in international criminal justice. The closing
ceremony, held on 1 December in Arusha, set the stage
for recalling the importance of the work of the ICTR,
the first international criminal tribunal on African
soil and the first jurisdiction to interpret concept of

S/PV.7574

genocide established by the 1948 Convention; it has
placed justice at the heart of national reconciliation and
reconstruction.
France continues its support for the ICTR and
the Mechanism, including in apprehending fugitives
subject to arrest warrants issued by the Tribunal.
France recalls the obligation of all States to cooperate
with the Tribunal and the Mechanism in that regard. In
addition, I would to note that the two cases transferred
by the ICTR to French jurisdiction — concerning
Mr. Bucyibaruta and Mr. Munyeshyaka — are being
taken up with due diligence and all the rigour required.
This year we commemorated the twenty-second
anniversary of the founding of the ICTY. The Tribunal,
guarantor of the right to truth, the fight against impunity
and the duty to remember, was a major player in the
momentum of reconciliation at the regional level. It is
now up to the States concerned to continue building the
rule of law with full respect for the independence of the
judiciary. The adjudication of so-called intermediary
criminals should remain a national priority and be the
subject of cooperation and enhanced regional support.
The International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda constitute a major step in the fight against
impunity. While the ICTR will conclude its work
on 31 December and that the ICTY is pursuing its
completion strategy, it is time for us to appreciate the
Tribunals’ jurisprudential achievements in addition to
their work in doing justice, which we must strive to
keep alive from both a cultural memory and academic
standpoint. It is also necessary to maintain vigilance at
all times in the protection of witnesses and to give due
attention to the rights of victims.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the
Ambassador of Chile, Chair of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals, and his entire team.
I would also like to thank the representatives of the
International Tribunals and the Office of Legal Affairs
of the Secretariat for their efforts to implement the
transition plan set forth in resolutions 1966 (2010) and
2193 (2014).
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States of
America.
I would like to welcome Judge Agius, the new
President of the International Tribunal for the Former

15-4120927/35

S/PV.7574

ICTY and ICTR

Yugoslavia (ICTY), and thank Presidents Joensen and
Meron and Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow for their
critical contributions to advancing justice for victims of
mass atrocities.
The ICTY, the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR), and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals have played a
central role in both advancing justice and developing
our understanding of international criminal law and
international humanitarian law. They have served as a
demonstration that, indeed, when the Security Council
is united and when we are committed, we can ensure
that those who perpetrate the worst atrocities can be
forced to account for their crimes. Justice, after all, is
not an afterthought to our work advancing international
peace and security; it is the essence of it.
Today, the extraordinary work of colleagues around
this table and in capitals near and far has ensured that
those accused by the ICTY — all 161 out of 161 — were
brought to justice. But just as we recognize the success
in apprehending the ICTY’s fugitives, we must redouble
our efforts to ensure that the remaining fugitives of the
ICTR — and now the Mechanism — face the same fate.
It is important to name those men: defendants such
as Fulgence Kayishema, accused of orchestrating the
massacre of thousands; Charles Sikubwabo, accused
of instigating massacres at a church; Aloys Ndimbati,
a former mayor accused of being directly involved in
the massacres; Augustin Bizimana, the former Defence
Minister of the interim Rwandan Government who is
alleged to have controlled the nation’s armed forces
in planning and preparing for the genocide campaign
and preparing lists of people to be killed; Charles
Ryandikayo, who reportedly participated in the
massacre of thousands of men, women and children
who had congregated in a church, and directed militias
and gendarmes to attack the church with guns, grenades
and other weapons; Pheneas Munyarugarama, a former
lieutenant colonel in the Rwandan Army who allegedly
helped to direct and take part in the systematic killing
of Tutsi refugees who were fleeing the fighting;
Felicien Kabuga, the alleged main financier and backer
of the political and militia groups that committed the
genocide and who is accused of transporting the death
squads in his company’s trucks; and Protais Mpiranya,
commander of the Rwandan Presidential Guard, who
allegedly directed his soldiers to kill the sitting Rwandan
Prime Minister and 10 United Nations peacekeepers
guarding her home. While those men are at large, they

28/35

09/12/2015

should know that they are still at the forefront of our
minds and the Security Council’s focus, and there they
will remain until each and every one of them stands to
answer for their actions. We will not forget them, and
we must never forget their victims.
It is that commitment that led just today to the
arrest of Ladislas Ntaganzwa by Congolese national
authorities, who have indicated that they will take
the proper steps to transfer him to Rwandan custody.
Ntaganzwa, first indicted by the ICTR in 1996, is
charged with five counts of genocide and crimes against
humanity. He is alleged to have participated in the
planning, preparation and carrying out of the massacre
of more than 20,000 Tutsis at Cyahinda parish, many of
whom had gathered to take refuge from massacres in
the surrounding countryside, as well as the massacres
of thousands of Tutsis at Gasasa Hill and killings
carried out elsewhere. He is also charged with directly
ordering women to be brutally and repeatedly raped.
Today, for the first time in two decades, he is behind
bars — and so he should be.
The ICTR has concluded all trials on its docket
in 2012 and is expected to issue its last appellate
judgement in a few days. As the Tribunal prepares to
close at the end of this month, the United States wishes
to recognize the monumental legacy of the Tribunal and
its many staff, including judges, prosecutors, support
staff, investigators and defence attorneys, who took
care over the past decades to be compassionate with
victims and witnesses, to uphold with integrity the
principles of international law and to ensure that the
Tribunal advanced justice for victims. The Tribunal’s
hard work has also ensured that a smooth and efficient
transition to the Mechanism and to national courts,
where proceedings against ICTR indictees who
remain at large will take place when — I use that word
intentionally — when they are captured. The United
States is unwavering in its commitment to ensuring
that the eight remaining fugitives from the ICTR are
apprehended, as Ntaganzwa was earlier today, and
brought to justice. To that end, we continue to offer a
reward of up to $5 million for information leading to
the arrest or transfer of those fugitives.
I would also like to commend the ICTY for a
productive year. The Tribunal has completed almost all
of its cases, with only four cases remaining at the trial
level and three cases on appeal. An important appellate
decision, as we have discussed, in the Prosecutor v.
Jovica Stanišić and Franko Simatović case is expected

15-41209

09/12/2015

ICTY and ICTR

S/PV.7574

to be issued before the end of this month, and progress
has continued on all of the remaining cases. We
welcome the important efforts by the trial chambers to
expedite judgements and ensure that they are delivered
in a timely manner.

justice for victims is to ensure that they are never
victimized, that crimes that we have pledged to never
allow again do not indeed occur again and again. It is
our job to find the tools, the unity and, ultimately, the
will to act.

We also again express our deep appreciation and
admiration for Judge Meron, who recently completed
his term as the President of the ICTY, for his judicious
leadership in guiding the ICTY and the Mechanism
during the past few years. His leadership has included
helping to ensure a seamless, in our judgement, transfer
of initial functions of both the ICTY and the ICTR to
the Mechanism.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

Part of justice, of course, is recognizing what has
happened and what has not, recognizing who bears
responsibility for it and who does not. The work of the
ICTR and the ICTY has contributed enormously to our
ability to grapple with uncomfortable and shocking
truths about what human beings have done to other
human beings. In doing so, they have made our world
safer. The importance of that work is rendered all the
more important when, as we have seen in the Chamber,
some continue to resist facts or rewrite history. Twenty
years after the genocide in Srebrenica, the Council was
painfully unable to adopt one simple draft resolution
(see S/PV.7481) recognizing one simple fact — a fact
that has been established by the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia and a fact that has been
established by the International Court of Justice — that
genocide took place in Srebrenica. While that draft
resolution may have been vetoed, the truth and the
judicial findings of the ICTY and International Court
of Justice cannot be. It is a testament to the enduring
power and the importance of their work.
In conclusion, there is perhaps no more fitting day
than today, 9 December, the date newly designated
by the General Assembly as the International Day of
Commemoration and Dignity of the Victims of the
Crime of Genocide and of the Prevention of This Crime
to once again focus on the past, the unfinished work
of advancing accountability for the mass atrocities
and genocides committed in Rwanda and the former
Yugoslavia. But so too must we focus on the future.
Even as we recommit ourselves to advancing justice
for crimes that have already been committed, so too
should we use this moment to reaffirm our commitment
to respond to indicators of realized or potential future
atrocities on a massive scale, whether in Burundi or
Syria or South Sudan or beyond. After all, the ultimate

I give the floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Allow me to begin
by welcoming the Presidents of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals — Judges Agius, Joensen and Meron,
respectively — as well as Prosecutors Brammertz and
Jallow. We commend their important work and their
continued efforts to ensure accountability, and we
thank them for today’s briefings and comprehensive
reports.
Croatia pays tribute to Judge Theodor Meron,
former President of the ICTY, under whose vigorous
and diligent guidance the Tribunal achieved further
important progress in the proper interpretation and
application of international humanitarian law. During
his presidency, the Tribunal significantly contributed
to ending impunity for horrendous crimes committed
on the territory of the former Yugoslavia. We also use
this opportunity to welcome Judge Carmel Agius and
wish him every success in carrying out his new duties
as President of the ICTY.
As the ICTR completes its work at the end of this
month, we recognize its achievements and invaluable
contribution to international criminal justice. Together
with the ICTY, it has embodied the pivotal quest to fight
impunity and has paved the way for the International
Criminal Court, which Croatia strongly supports. We
commend the fact that the Residual Mechanism is
increasingly assuming responsibility for all aspects of
the work of the two Tribunals, and we commend the
ongoing progress in that regard. Croatia believes that
it is important that both Tribunals and the Mechanism
receive all the necessary support to complete their
mandates. We reaffirm our unwavering support for
their work.
Many words have been said on the matter in the
Council Chamber. When it comes to the ICTY, some
things have not changed in the past six months. We

15-4120929/35

S/PV.7574

ICTY and ICTR

are still waiting for the verdicts in certain pivotal
cases involving the masterminds of some of the most
horrendous crimes. The slow pace of the proceedings
remains a serious problem. More than two decades
after the establishment of the Tribunal, thousands of
victims and their loved ones are still waiting for justice
to be served.
Croatia reiterates the importance of completing the
remaining ICTY trials in the Šešelj, Hadžić, Mladić
and Karadžić cases. In that regard, we note with great
concern the continued suspension of proceedings in
the Goran Hadzié case. While commending the efforts
of the Office of the Prosecutor for the continuation of
the trial, we encourage the Tribunal once again to take
all the necessary steps to ensure that this significant
trial recommences forthwith. As in the case of Hadžić’s
mentor in crime, Slobodan Milošević, painfully
reminds us, justice delayed is indeed justice denied. His
death thwarted his deserved conviction.
In a completely different case, but in the same
context of prolonged proceedings, let me add that Croatia
hopes that the fact that there is a new presiding judge
in the case Prlić et al. will not affect the length of the
proceedings or the procedural results achieved. This is
the most voluminous appellate case in the history of the
Tribunal. Nevertheless, it would have been reasonable
to expect the final decision by the end of 2016, but it
seems that it will not arrive before November 2017. We
call on the Tribunal to find the ways not to prolong this
extremely complex case, keeping in mind the Tribunal’s
targeted completion strategy.
We must again draw the Security Council’s
attention to the Šešelj case and the toxic impact of
the temporary release of the accused. The fact that
this indicted war criminal is still allowed to continue
with his cynical rampage and mockery of victims,
with occasional live appearances on Serbian television
reality shows, his victims rightly regard as a slap in
the face of international criminal justice and humanity
itself. In a further abomination of justice relating to this
particular case, three persons charged with contempt
of Court for having threatened, intimidated, offered
bribes to or otherwise interfered with witnesses have
not yet been arrested and surrendered to the Tribunal.
We took careful note of the ICTY written assessment
that this represents Serbia’s serious failure to honour its
international obligations. We therefore call upon Serbia
to comply with the Tribunal’s requests without delay
and recall that full cooperation with the ICTY remains

30/35

09/12/2015

an essential condition for the candidate country in its
accession process to the European Union, as a tool for
ensuring not only continued cooperation with the ICTY,
but also for the transformation of domestic institutions
and State-building in general, including the reform of
the judiciary and consolidation of the rule of law.
The important work of the ICTY in bringing justice
to thousands of victims is not yet completed. That is
why justice must be served without any unnecessary
postponement while ensuring full State cooperation. I
will say once again what we have stated in the Security
Council on many occasions: protracted proceedings may
lead to the weakening of public trust in international
justice and its appropriate administration. We must
constantly remain mindful of that fact.
Council members may rest assured that Croatia
will continue to render its full support and assistance
to the Tribunal and its efforts to complete its work. The
lessons learned and knowledge gained from the work
of both the ICTY and the ICTR in the fight against
impunity forms an essential part of their legacy and
must not be forgotten. We are hopeful that a smooth
and efficient transition process for both branches of the
Mechanism shall ensure the protection and effective
continuation of the work of the Tribunals.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Serbia.
Mr. Obradović (Serbia): It is my great privilege
and distinct honour to speak to the Council as the
representative of the Republic of Serbia today.
Before I proceed to make my statement, allow
me to welcome Judge Carmel Agius, President of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), and congratulate him on the assumption
of that important office. He can always count on
Serbia’s cooperation and support. I also welcome
Judge Theodor Meron, President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and
Judge Vagn Joensen, President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, and thank them for their
semi-annual reports (see S/2015/585 and S/2015/577).
My welcome is also extended to the two Prosecutors,
Mr. Serge Brammertz and Mr. Hassan Jallow. Aware of
their intense and informed scrutiny, I shall undertake
to discuss my country’s contribution to the completion
strategy of the ICTY here today.
Serbia remains firmly committed to the principles
and system of international criminal justice and their
15-41209

09/12/2015

ICTY and ICTR

role in fighting impunity. Its cooperation with the
Tribunal continues faithfully, in particular in the
cases of Goran Hadžić and Vojislav Šešelj, who are on
provisional release. The ICTY Prosecutor expressed,
in his written report (S/2015/874, annex II) and today
also, his satisfaction with that cooperation, especially
in processing the requests for assistance of his Office,
as well as in maintaining direct dialogue with my
country’s governmental and judicial authorities.
My Government follows the ICTY activities
with great attention and interest, particularly those
concerning the completion of its long-lasting trials
of Serbian citizens. In that regard, let me remind the
Council that, on 23 February 2016, the Šešelj case, still
in the first instance phase, will enter its fourteenth
year. Notwithstanding that anomaly, Serbia continues
to be fully supportive of the ICTY’s commitment,
spelled out again in the report, to completing the
trials expeditiously, while ensuring that all judicial
proceedings are conducted in a manner consistent with
the fundamental principles of due process and fairness.
In that context, my country supports the new President
and his intention to implement measures to expedite
the work of the Tribunal and calls, at the same time,
on the Security Council to accord its attention to the
completion strategy of the two ad hoc Tribunals, in
particular to the measures regarding the staff attrition
proposed by President Meron in his report.
War crimes proceedings in Serbia are ongoing
and proceeding in parallel with the ICTY completion
strategy. A national strategy on war crimes issues is
being drafted and charged with the responsible task of
chairing a working group established by the Ministry
of Justice to draft that document. I expect it to be
published in a couple of days. It will include a road map
of activities and improvements needed to investigate,
prosecute and try heinous crimes committed in the
former Yugoslavia in the 1990s, measures to improve
the protection of witnesses and support victims during
criminal proceedings, some general improvements in
the defence of the accused, cooperation with and support
to national, regional and international commissions on
missing persons, and measures to advance regional
cooperation in processing war crimes. The national
strategy will also contain the positions and measures
designed to improve the overall social milieu in relation
to war crimes, their investigation and prosecution. The
key challenges identified in the reports of the ICTY, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,

S/PV.7574

and other relevant stakeholders have been taken into
account, while due respect is paid to the domestic legal
system and the independence of the judiciary.
The Government of the Republic of Serbia firmly
believes that domestic prosecution of the core
international crimes committed in the armed conflicts
of the 1990s in the former Yugoslavia is one of the most
important steps in the process of reconciliation. It is
the collective duty of the countries of the region to
investigate and prosecute those responsible without any
discrimination against the perpetrator or the victim on
the basis of national, ethnic or religious origins. Justice
must not be allowed to be hobbled by selectivity.
With that in mind, I would like to remind the
members of the Security Council of my statement at
the Council’s meeting in June (see S/PV.7455), in which
I said that, notwithstanding the recognition by both
the ICTY and the International Court of Justice that
Croatian Government forces killed many civilians of
Serb ethnicity in Operation Storm in 1995, the judiciary
in Croatia has passed only one final conviction for the
commission of the war crime of murder. And although
the revisiting of ultimate tragedies that befall innocent
people is a painful and sad exercise and there is nothing
to like about it, I still would like to have heard from
the representative of the Croatian Government what is
being done to bring justice to the Serbs, many of whom
were gunned down on the threshold of the doors of
their homes or strafed from the air in helpless refugee
columns as they fled their ancestral homes during and
after the Operation.
The Government of my country expects that the
monitoring by the ICTY Prosecutor, or the Prosecutor
of the Mechanism in the future, of the domestic
prosecution of war crimes will be expanded to
include the Croatian judiciary as well. For the report
before Council members carries only the monitoring
observations of the domestic trials of war crimes in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia and not of the trials
in Croatia.
Yet the Government of Serbia is obliged to
Mr. Brammertz and his hard-working team for their
constant support and advice to the Serbian War Crimes
Prosecutor. The provision of information and evidence
in ICTY cases is a commendable example of twoway cooperation; it benefits both the fight against
impunity domestically and the completion strategy of
the Tribunal. This process has to be intensified by the

15-4120931/35

S/PV.7574

ICTY and ICTR

Serbian side, all the more so in view of the statement
in paragraph 39 of the report of the ICTY Prosecutor.
He states, inter alia, that Serbian judicial authorities
must process war crimes cases that do not exclusively
involve Serbian nationals suspected of committing
crimes against nationals of other States. That statement,
as my Government understands it, is supportive of the
existing scope of jurisdiction of the Serbian judiciary
which, unfortunately, was recently impugned in the
European Parliament. My Government also welcomes
the joint European Union/Tribunal Training Project
for National Prosecutors and Young Professionals, as
well as the workshop organized by the Office of the
Prosecutor of the Mechanism.
Last but not least, Serbia thanks the ICTY Prosecutor
for the efforts that were invested in improving regional
cooperation on matters of war crimes and welcomes
his stated intention to closely monitor further
developments. That is also my country’s request. In
the Djukić case, the competent Serbian authorities will
respond appropriately to the request, received recently,
of Bosnia and Herzegovina for the enforcement of
the sentence in Serbia, in accordance with a bilateral
agreement.
Let me also reiterate the interest of my country
in future dialogues on questions related to the ICTY
archives and reaffirm its previous humanitarian request
with respect to the enforcement of sentences and the
possibility that convicted persons may serve their
sentences in Serbia.
Allow me now to respond very briefly to the
statements that we heard today concerning the
reported non-compliance of Serbia’s Government in
the execution of the arrest warrants in the Tribunal’s
cases of contempt against Jojić et al. Owing to the
confidentiality of the submissions of the Government
of the Republic of Serbia to the ICTY Trial Chamber
in that case, I am not at liberty to discuss the matter
in detail. Moreover, the matter is still sub judice at the
ICTY, and it would be inappropriate for me to discuss it
now in this forum. However, the issue of arrest warrants
will be resolved in cooperation with the Tribunal.
Before I conclude my statement, let me make two
very pertinent remarks.
Twenty years ago, almost to the day, a Peace
Agreement was signed in Dayton, Ohio. It put an end
to the armed conflicts and horrific atrocities in Bosnia

32/35

09/12/2015

and Herzegovina and Croatia. The three Presidents who
signed the Agreement — Alija Izetbegović, Slobodan
Milošević and Franjo Tuđman — were subjected to
ICTY investigations soon thereafter. Only one of them,
Slobodan Milošević, was indicted. The other two died
before the victims of the acts for which those men were
being investigated could ever be given the satisfaction
of seeing them indicted and arraigned.
Twenty years later, my country is hard at work,
developing good-neighbourly relations and establishing
lasting peace in a region that was once ripped apart
by suffering and war. This year, my Prime Minister
visited Srebrenica on two occasions in an effort to
promote reconciliation and offer cooperation to the
community that had suffered the kind of calamity that
only inter-ethnic and interreligious wars can provoke.
We must not be deterred in our efforts to bring about
reconciliation and cooperation, and that includes by
trying those responsible for crimes in domestic courts.
The victims will not be forgotten and the crimes must
not be allowed to be repeated.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Vukašinović (Bosnia and Herzegovina):
At the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on
your delegation’s assumption of the presidency of the
Council, and wish you every success in leading the
Council this month.
I would like to thank the Presidents and Prosecutors
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals for their reports and informative
briefings today. I also wish to take this opportunity
to congratulate Judge Carmel Agius on his election
as President of the ICTY, and to convey my thanks to
Judge Theodor Meron and Judge Vagn Joensen for their
work.
The work and practice of both Tribunals have had
a significant impact on and launched a new dynamic
within international criminal law and the national
legal systems of the concerned countries. Since the
very beginning, Bosnia and Herzegovina has fully
cooperated with the ICTY and implemented all its
decisions and rulings. We emphasize the importance
of the successful completion of the work of the ICTY,
and we encourage the Tribunal to make every effort to

15-41209

09/12/2015

ICTY and ICTR

meet the targets of its completion strategy and forecast
delivery dates of judgements in order to avoid any
further delays.
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to cooperate
with the ICTY and will continue to do so with the
Mechanism. The completion of the ICTY mandate does
not mean the end of the fight against impunity in my
country. We remain committed to strengthening the
national justice systems at all levels in order to bring
to justice persons responsible for atrocity crimes.
The National War Crimes Strategy has improved the
consistency of juridical practices throughout the entire
country at all levels, and ensures the protection and
support of victims and witnesses.
The implementation of the Strategy is a complex
process in which many institutions, at all levels of
authority, in Bosnia and Herzegovina participate.
Despite numerous challenges, important results have
been accomplished. As of June, we had reduced the
number of unresolved cases of war crimes in the
Prosecutor’s Office by 15 per cent. Some progress
has been made in resolving Category II cases. A
centralized database of war crimes cases has been
established by the Prosecutor’s Office at the state level.
The Prosecutor’s Offices in Bosnia and Herzegovina
dealing with war crimes at all levels of authority can
use the database, which promotes more effective case
management and prevents overlapping investigations.
The evaluation and selection criteria to determine case
priority have been harmonized. The harmonization
of court practices in cases of war crimes prosecuted
before the courts in my country has been strengthened
through closer cooperation among the Court of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the entity-level Supreme Court and
the Appellate Court of Brčko district.
Lack of funding has jeopardized the progress that
has been made in the implementation of the National
War Crimes Strategy. We welcome the support of the
European Union in the implementation of the strategy
and the support of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and the United Nations
Development Programme, particularly in connection
with witness protection activities and the appropriate
assistance and support to victims.
In September, the Council of Ministers of Bosnia
and Herzegovina adopted a justice sector reform
strategy for the period from 2014 to 2018. The strategy
will contribute to the long-term reinforcement of the rule

S/PV.7574

of law. It will further consolidate the judicial system,
including measures to improve judicial independence
and efficiency. Furthermore, the strategy will support
the effective implementation of the National War
Crimes Strategy.
Bosnia and Herzegovina remains committed to
promoting regional cooperation, which plays a key role
in rebuilding trust in the region. A good step in that
direction would be the conclusion of the cooperation
protocols in the prosecution of war crimes between
the Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Prosecutors’ Offices of neighbouring countries.
Intensified regional cooperation in the prosecution of
war crimes enables more efficient work on cases that
involve suspects, victims or evidence located in two or
more countries.
Finally, I would like to underline that the legacy
of both Tribunals should serve as a constant reminder
in the fight against impunity, both now and for future
generations. Bosnia and Herzegovina is dedicated to the
fight against impunity. We underline the importance
of justice for achieving true reconciliation, as well
as political stability and socioeconomic development
within the country and in the whole region.
Mrs. Byaje (Rwanda): I thank you, Sir, for inviting
Rwanda to be a part of this debate. At the outset, I
would like to thank Judge Carmel Agius, President of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia;
Judge Vagn Joensen, President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda; Judge Theodor Meron,
President of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals; Mr. Serge Brammertz,
Prosecutor of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia; Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and
Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals; as well as other previous speakers
for their respective briefings and statements.
Before delving into the topic of today’s debate,
allow me to preface my remarks with a reference to
the celebration of Human Rights Day, which we will
commemorate tomorrow, as well as the International
Day of Commemoration and Dignity of the Victims of
the Crime of Genocide and of the Prevention of this
Crime, which we commemorate today. In the light of
these important events, I invite all present to pause and
recall to memory the reality of our common failure 21
years ago, when the world turned a blind eye to the

15-4120933/35

S/PV.7574

ICTY and ICTR

worst violation of human rights that occurred in my
country, Rwanda, the worst genocide of our times. The
rationale behind this reminder is to invite us all to take
stock and to gauge whether any lesson has been learned
from that disturbing reality, and whether the Council is
currently better prepared and better equipped to avert
or stop future heinous crimes and genocide.
Sadly, we have no choice but to note that human
rights violations and abuses are becoming the norm as
we grow accustomed to unfathomable human suffering
caused by unrest and conflicts that are adversely
impacting the well-being of peoples. This state of
affairs is conducive to the spread of terrorism and the
displacement of people. Should this trend persist, the
enjoyment of freedom and human rights will continue
to remain an elusive and distant reality.
More than any other country, Rwanda understands
the adverse consequences of such despicable crimes
against humanity, which deprive people of their
basic rights. Drawing from our history — in which
such intolerance led to the creation of marginalized
communities that were treated as second-class citizens,
and the subsequent systematic slaughter of the Tutsi
during the genocide — the current leadership, in its
quest for peace, has made it a point to prevent Rwandans
from falling into the same trap by combating any form
of divisionism and genocide denial, and by ensuring
that all citizens enjoy the same privileges and equal
treatment. It is against that background that I wish to
tackle today’s topic as we mark the end of the era of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) in
international justice.
As previously stated to the Council on numerous
occasions, the Government of Rwanda believes that the
ICTR has not only played a key role in the fight against
impunity for mass atrocities, but has also produced a
substantial body of jurisprudence, including definitions
of the crime of genocide, crimes against humanity,
war crimes, as well as forms of responsibility, such as
superior responsibility. Most importantly, the Tribunal
has established that the genocide that occurred in
Rwanda was against the Tutsi as a group, and ruled that
acts of rape and sexual violence constitute crimes of
genocide if committed with the intent to destroy the
targeted group, thereby contributing to post-genocide
reconciliation and healing in Rwanda.
As we acknowledge that milestone in postgenocide Rwanda and in the history of international

34/35

09/12/2015

law and jurisprudence with the closure of the first
United Nations international tribunal, we note with
satisfaction that the 93 individuals from all walks
of life — international fugitives who had evaded
Rwandan justice and who were indicted for genocide
by the court — were mainly the masterminds of this
crime. We take note of the announcement by Prosecutor
Jallow of Ladislas Ntaganzwa’s arrest, and trust that
he will be extradited as soon as possible to face justice
in Rwanda. We deplore, however, the fact that other
fugitives are still at large, and reiterate our call on
all Member States, especially those still harbouring
them, to honour their moral obligation to the Charter
of the United Nations, as well as the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide,
and to cooperate in their arrest.
Returning to the subject of fugitives, the son-inlaw of tycoon Félicien Kabuga, Paulin Murayi, provides
financial support to the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda (FDLR), a terrorist organization
that relentlessly continues to spread its genocidal
ideology and activities in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We also regret the lack of progress in
the monitoring of cases referred to international courts
outside Rwanda. The two cases referred to Rwanda
in 2012 and 2013 have advanced. In addition, we are
extremely concerned by the decision of the French
prosecution to drop charges against Father Wenceslas
Munyeshyaka, a decision that contradicts the nature
and scale of the crimes committed. We call on the
French authorities to expedite the investigations and
proceedings in the case against Laurent Bucyibaruta.
Another outstanding issue that Rwanda is
determined to pursue is the matter of who should be
entrusted with the repository of the ICTR/International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals archives.
While it recognizes that the archives constitute a
United Nations property, Rwanda has made several
strong requests for their transfer to Rwanda upon the
completion of the Mechanism’s mandate. We believe
that there should be no ambiguity in the understanding
of the matter. In the aftermath of a conflict, archives
help to transfer historical realities into a shared
understanding of the past. The primary beneficiary
should be the sole proprietor of such materials. I
would emphasize that those archives are a part of
our history, and it is of paramount importance that
they be preserved in Rwanda for the sake of future
generations. Rwandans, as the people most concerned

15-41209

09/12/2015

ICTY and ICTR

by those historical records, which constitute the most
thoroughly depicted and comprehensive account of the
1994 genocide against the Tutsi, are indeed entitled to
them. We hope that all stakeholders will understand the
legitimacy of our request and do us justice.
Another important point that was overlooked
pertains to the compensation of the victims of the
genocide for their loss. That remains a dark spot on the
Tribunal’s legacy when compared to that of the Gacaca
courts, which recognized and honoured victims, and
provided compensation for their looted and destroyed
property.
Let me emphasize the need to fight genocide and
its ideology, and reiterate our belief that giving a media
platform to an individual convicted of the crime of
genocide is wrong and unethical. The recent media
interview with the unrepentant mastermind of the
1994 genocide against the Tutsi, Jean Kambanda, was
not only an insult to the victims but also a platform to
spread Kambanda’s evil motives, which remain fresh in
the memory of many Rwandans. We hope that Member
States will discourage such practices in their territories
in order to avoid similar incidents.
In conclusion, I wish to take this opportunity, to
thank the ICTR judges and staff for their contribution to
humankind in the fight against impunity. We wish the
best of luck to those who will still continue to work for

S/PV.7574

the Residual Mechanism and assure them of Rwanda’s
continued cooperation. Let me also thank Chile for its
leadership in chairing the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.
Allow me to end this statement with the following
words — prompted by a tweet I read this morning,
stating that the Forces démocratiques de libération
du Rwanda has claimed more lives in neighbouring
Democratic Republic of the Congo — just to stress the
following message.
Genocide is not an ordinary crime. Its devastating
effects linger forever. In Rwanda, we have been battling
them for the past 21 years. Luckily, we have been gifted
with an enlightened leadership that, in tandem with
the Rwandan population, has conducted numerous
consultations and national dialogues to address the
multifaceted challenges it faces, including ending
impunity and preventing its future occurrence. Rwanda
will diligently continue to do its part and expects the
international community and the United Nations to do
theirs.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
Once again, let me thank the Judges and the
Prosecutors for their briefings.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

15-4120935/35
