UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1995/9
22 February 1995
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3503rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 22 February 1995, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "An Agenda for
Peace", the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council welcomes the Secretary-General’s position paper
entitled ’Supplement to an Agenda for Peace’ (S/1995/1) as an important
contribution to the debate on the development of the United Nations
activities related to international peace and security in all its aspects
at the beginning of the year in which the Organization celebrates its
Fiftieth Anniversary. The Council notes that the paper contains a wide
range of conclusions and recommendations with regard to instruments for
resolving conflict. The Council is of the view that in the light of recent
developments and experience gained, efforts should be made to further
enhance the Organization’s ability to perform the tasks laid down for it
under the Charter. The Council reiterates that, in performing the abovementioned tasks, the purposes and principles of the Charter should always
be strictly observed.
"The Security Council welcomes and shares the priority given by the
Secretary-General to action to prevent conflict. It encourages all Member
States to make the fullest possible use of instruments of preventive
action, including the Secretary-General’s good offices, the dispatch of
special envoys of the Secretary-General and the deployment, with the
consent as appropriate of the host country or countries, of small field
missions for preventive diplomacy and peacemaking. The Council believes
that adequate resources must be made available within the United Nations
system for these actions. It notes the problem identified by the
Secretary-General in finding senior persons to act as his special
representative or special envoy and encourages Member States which have not
yet done so to provide the Secretary-General with the names of persons who
might be considered by him for such posts, together with other resources
both human and material which might be useful to such missions. It
encourages the Secretary-General to make full use of resources thus put at
his disposal.

95-05078 (E)

220295

/...

S/PRST/1995/9
English
Page 2

"The Security Council endorses the view expressed by the SecretaryGeneral concerning the crucial importance of economic and social
development as a secure basis for lasting peace. Social and economic
development can be as valuable in preventing conflicts as in healing the
wounds after conflicts have occurred. The Council urges States to support
the efforts of the United Nations system with regard to preventive and
post-conflict peace-building activities and, in this context, to provide
necessary assistance for the economic and social development of countries,
especially those which have suffered or are suffering from conflicts.
"The Security Council welcomes the Secretary-General’s analysis
regarding peace-keeping operations. It recalls the statement made by its
President on 3 May 1994 (S/PRST/1994/22) which, inter alia, listed factors
to be taken into account in establishing peace-keeping operations. It
notes that in resolving conflicts, primary emphasis should continue to be
placed on the use of peaceful means rather than force. Without prejudice
to its ability to respond to situations on a case-by-case basis, and
rapidly and flexibly as the circumstances require, it reiterates the
principles of consent of the parties, impartiality and the non-use of force
except in self-defence. It underlines the need to conduct peace-keeping
operations with a clearly defined mandate, command structure, time-frame
and secure financing, in support of efforts to achieve a peaceful solution
to a conflict: it stresses the importance of the consistent application of
these principles to the establishment and conduct of all peace-keeping
operations. It stresses the importance it attaches to the provision of the
fullest possible information to the Council to assist it in making
decisions regarding the mandate, duration and termination of current
operations. It also emphasizes the importance of providing troop
contributors with the fullest possible information.
"The Security Council shares the Secretary-General’s concern regarding
the availability of troops and equipment for peace-keeping operations. It
recalls earlier statements by the President of the Council on the subject
and reiterates the importance of improving the capacity of the United
Nations for rapid deployment and reinforcement of operations. To that end,
it encourages the Secretary-General to continue his study of options aimed
at improving the capacity for such rapid deployment and reinforcement. The
Council believes that the first priority in improving the capacity for
rapid deployment should be the further enhancement of the existing stand-by
arrangements, covering the full spectrum of resources, including
arrangements for lift and headquarters capabilities, required to mount and
execute peace-keeping operations. It strongly encourages the SecretaryGeneral to take further steps in this regard, including the establishment
of a comprehensive database to cover civilian as well as military
resources. In this context, it considers that particular attention should
be given to the greatest possible interoperability between elements
identified in such arrangements. The Council reiterates its call to Member
States not already doing so to participate in the stand-by arrangements.
While affirming the principle that contributing Governments should ensure
that their troops arrive with all the equipment needed to be fully
operational, the Council also encourages the Secretary-General and Member
States to continue to consider means, whether in the context of stand-by
/...

S/PRST/1995/9
English
Page 3

arrangements or more broadly, to address the requirements of contingents
which may need additional equipment or training.
"The Security Council strongly supports the Secretary-General’s
conclusion that peace-keeping operations need an effective information
capacity, and his intention to address this requirement in future
peace-keeping operations from the planning stage.
"The Security Council welcomes the Secretary-General’s ideas regarding
post-conflict peace-building. It agrees that an appropriately strong
overall United Nations contribution needs to be sustained after the
successful conclusion of a peace-keeping operation, and encourages the
Secretary-General to study ways and means of ensuring effective
coordination between the United Nations and other agencies involved in
post-conflict peace-building, and to take active steps to ensure that such
coordination takes place in the immediate aftermath of a peace-keeping
operation. The measures described by the Secretary-General may also be
required, with the consent of the State or States concerned, after
successful preventive action and in other cases where an actual
peace-keeping deployment does not take place.
"The Security Council shares the Secretary-General’s assessment of the
paramount importance of preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. Such proliferation is a threat to international peace and
security. Appropriate measures will be taken in this respect in particular
where international treaties provide for recourse to the Council when their
provisions are violated. The Council underlines the need for all States to
fulfil their obligations in respect of arms control and disarmament, in
particular in regard to weapons of mass destruction.
"The Security Council takes note of the assessment of the SecretaryGeneral of the importance of ’micro-disarmament’, as described in his
paper, in the solution of conflicts with which the United Nations is
currently dealing and of his view that small arms are probably responsible
for most of the deaths in these conflicts. It shares the concern of the
Secretary-General at the negative consequences for international peace and
security which often arise from the illicit traffic in conventional
weapons, including small arms, and takes note of his view that the search
for effective solutions to this problem should begin now. In this context
the Council stresses the vital importance of the strict implementation of
existing arms embargo regimes. It welcomes and supports efforts with
regard to international measures to curb the spread of anti-personnel landmines and to deal with the land-mines already laid, and in this regard
welcomes General Assembly resolutions 49/75 D of 15 December 1994 and
49/215 of 23 December 1994. It reaffirms its deep concern over the
tremendous humanitarian problems caused by the presence of mines and other
unexploded devices to the populations of mine-infested countries and
emphasizes the need for an increase in mine-clearing efforts by the
countries concerned and with the assistance of the international community.

/...

S/PRST/1995/9
English
Page 4

"The Security Council stresses the importance it attaches to the
effective implementation of all measures taken by it to maintain or restore
international peace and security including economic sanctions. It agrees
that the object of economic sanctions is not to punish but to modify the
behaviour of the country or party which represents a threat to
international peace and security. The steps demanded of that country or
party should be clearly defined in Council resolutions, and the sanctions
regime in question should be subject to periodic review and it should be
lifted when the objectives of the appropriate provisions of the relevant
Security Council resolutions are achieved. The Council remains concerned
that, within this framework, appropriate measures are taken to ensure that
humanitarian supplies reach affected populations and appropriate
consideration is given to submissions received from neighbouring or other
States affected by special economic problems as a result of the imposition
of sanctions. The Council urges the Secretary-General, when considering
the allocation of resources available to him within the Secretariat, to
take appropriate steps to reinforce those sections of the Secretariat
dealing directly with sanctions and their various aspects so as to ensure
that all these matters are addressed in as effective, consistent and timely
a manner as possible. It welcomes the Secretary-General’s efforts to study
ways and means of addressing the various aspects related to sanctions in
his report.
"The Security Council reaffirms the importance it attaches to the role
that regional organizations and arrangements can play in helping to
maintain international peace and security. It underlines the need for
effective coordination between their efforts and those of the United
Nations in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter. It recognizes that
the responsibilities and capacities of different regional organizations and
arrangements vary, as well as the readiness and competence of regional
organizations and arrangements, as reflected in their charters and other
relevant documents, to participate in efforts to maintain international
peace and security. It welcomes the Secretary-General’s willingness to
assist regional organizations and arrangements as appropriate in developing
a capacity for preventive action, peacemaking and, where appropriate,
peace-keeping. It draws particular attention in this regard to the needs
of Africa. It encourages the Secretary-General and Member States to
continue to consider ways and means of improving practical cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations and regional organizations and
arrangements in these areas. The Council encourages the Secretary-General
to continue the practice of meetings on cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and other organizations.
"The Security Council recognizes the crucial importance of the
availability of the necessary financial resources both for preventive
action and operations undertaken to sustain international peace and
security. It therefore urges Member States to honour their financial
obligations to the United Nations. At the same time, the Council
emphasizes the continuing necessity for careful control of peace-keeping
costs and for the most efficient possible use of peace-keeping funds and
other financial resources.

/...

S/PRST/1995/9
English
Page 5

"The Security Council will keep the Secretary-General’s paper under
consideration. The Council invites all interested Member States to present
further reflections on United Nations peace-keeping operations, and in
particular on ways and means to improve the capacity of the United Nations
for rapid deployment. It invites the Secretary-General to keep it closely
informed of the action he takes in follow-up to the paper and to the
present statement. It hopes that the General Assembly, as well as other
organizations and entities, will give consideration of the paper a high
degree of priority and will take decisions on those matters which fall
within their direct responsibility."

-----
