MEETING:

26 FEBRUARY

1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. . ,. . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,. . . . , . . . . . . .

1

#Adoption of the agenda . . . . , . . . . . . . , , . . , . . , , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
(a) Letter dated 15 February 1980 from the Permanent Representative of
Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13801);
(b) Letter dated 15 February 1980 from the Permanent Representative of
Morocco to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13802) . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . , , . . , . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2201)

SlPV.2201

Bi
NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records qf the Security Cor,~ncil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

Rf
pi
RI
N

I.
2,

2201st MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 26 February 1980, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Mr. Peter FLORIN
(German Democratic Republic).

ian People to take the place reserved for him at the
side of the Council chamber.

PQ~ent: The representatives of the following States:
BaWadesh,
China, France, German Democratic
R?Public,
Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philipp’nes, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
RePWics,
United Kingdom
of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Nuseibeh
(Jordan) took n place at the Council table; Mr. Bouzarbia (Algeria), Mr. Roa-Kouri (Cuba), Mr. Abdel
Meguid (Egypt}, Mr. Blum (Israel), Mr. Filali (Morocco), Mr. Naik (Pakistan), Mr. Mansouri (Syrian
Arab Republic), Mrs. Nguyen Ngoc Dung (Viet Nam)
and Mr. Komatina
(Yugoslavia)
fook the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chavber,
Mr. Terzi [Palestine
Liberation
Organization)
took
a place at the Council table and Mr. Kane (Acting
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People) took the
place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber.

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2201)

1.

Adoption

2~

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
(a) Letter dated 15 February 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13801);
(b) Letter dated 15 February 1980 from the Permanent Representative
of Morocco to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/13802)

of the agenda

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received a letter from the representative
of
Afghanistan in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite that representative to participate in the discussion without the right
to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of
procedure.

The meeting was called to order at 4.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was,adopted.
The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
(a) Letter dated 15 February 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13801);
(6) Letter dated 15 February 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Morocco to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13802)

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Sahak
(Afghanistan) took the place reserved for him at the
side of the Council chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Russian):
The first speaker is the representative of Viet Nam.
I invite her to take a place at the Council table and
to make her statement.
4. Mrs. NGUYEN
NGOC DUNG (Viet Nam) (interpretation from French); I should like first of all to
thank you sincerely, Mr. President, as well as the
members of the Council, for giving me this opportunity to express my Government’s
views on this
important question. I would like to take this opportunity to say how happy we are to see the Council
presided over this month by the representative of the
German Democratic Republic, a socialist country that
has deservedly won the esteem and respect of peoples
throughout the world by its policy of peace and its
outstanding
achievements
for the well-being of its
citizens, a country with which Viet Nam has long-

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Russian):
In accordance with the decisions taken at the 2199th
and 2200th meetings, I invite the representative of
Jordan to take a place at the Council table. I invite
the representatives of Algeria, Cuba, Egypt, Israel,
Morocco,
Pakistan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Viet
Nam and Yugoslavia to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber. I invite the
representative
of the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) to take a place at the Council table.
I invite the Acting Chairman of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestin1

of final annexation of the illegally occupied territories
and of expropriation of the PrOPerty
and lands of the
Palestinian population, all the while using every
means in their power to change the legal status,the
geographical character and the demographic composi.
tion of the territories they are occupying, That is
further evidence of the hypocrisy of the Israeli
authorities, who constantly preach their so-called
policy of peace and proclaim their goodwill in regard
to the achievement of a final solution to the Middle
East problem.

standing brotherly relations of co-operation and
friendship. We are convinced that with his well-known
diplomatic talents, his devotion and his wisdom, he
will make an important contribution to the search for
solutions to sensitive international problems as he discharges his difficult task in the Council.
5. The problem now before the Council is hardly
new. For more than 13 years it has been one of the
most important topics discussed by the Council, the
General Assembly and other bodies of the United
Nations. Regrettably, however, while the number of
relevant resolutions and declarations that have been
adopted continues to increase yearly, there has
been no change in “the situation in the occupied
Arab territories”. On the contrary, this situation is
now deteriorating, with the adoption by the Israeli
authorities of new measuresof colonization, as they
pursue their policy of settlementin occupied Palestinian towns, particularly Al-Khalil.

10. World public opinion is witnessing with concern
the tension now prevailing in Al-Khalil between the
Palestinian and Jewish communities; there is particular
concern about the possibility of acts of violence being
committed in response to provocative acts by Israel
in that region. This state of tension in Al-Khalil is
spreading at an alarming rate to all the other occupied
Arab territories. Moreover, there is information from
various sources that Israel intends to pursue between
now and 1983 a plan to settle 27,000 Jewish families,
for which a budget of 54 billion Israeli pounds will be
allocated. It has been emphasized in the many documents on the Middle East problem adopted by all the
bodies of United Nations, the Non-Aligned Movement
and other international forums that the Zionist occupation and usurpation of Palestine and the rights of its
people are the very core of the conflict in the Middle
East. Thus, these acts of defiance committed by
Israel, aided and abetted by the United States, are
serious obstacles to the establishment of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East.

6. I should like to take this opportunity to congratulate the members of the Security Council Commission
established under resolution 446 (1979)on the positive
role they have played, and in particular on their second
report they submitted to the Council in December 1979
[3/13679]. We thank them for their praiseworthy
efforts to compile the information that enables us to
follow the development of the situation, despite
enormous difficulties arising from the lack of cooperation by the Israeli party.
7. We listened with great attention to the important
statements made at the last two meetings by the representatives of Jordan and the Palestine Liberation
Organization, as well as the statements made by the
Chairman of the Islamic Group, the Acting Chairman
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People and the Chairman of
the Non-Aligned Group as well as those of the many
colleagues who have already spoken. We share their
deep concern at the serious deterioration of the situation in the occupied Arab territories caused by the
arrogant policy of the Israeli authorities, who stubbornly pursue their plan to tighten their grip on the
occupied Arab territories, in flagrant violation of
international law, world public opinion and the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and the
Security Council.

11. My Government joins many others in vigorously
condemning Israel’s absolute scorn for the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly, in particular Council resolutions 338
(1973) and 452 (1979) and General Assembly resolutions 3236 (XXIX), 33128and 34165, and we demand
that Israel put an end to this policy by immediately
removing the existing settlements.
12. In the Political Declaration adopted by the Sixth
Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries held in Havana,

8. This policy of colonization, consisting of systematically implanting tens of thousands of Israelis in
territories usurped from Palestinians,took a new turn
with the decision adopted on 10February by the Council of Ministers of Israel to permit Jews to settle in the
town of AI-Khalil. The Israeli Minister of Education,
moreover, has undertaken the construction of,
1,000 housing units in Kiryat Arba, on additional land
confiscated from the Palestinian population of that
region.

“The Conference invited the Security Council to
meet its responsibilities by imposing on Israel the
sanctionsprovided for in Chapter VII of the Charter,
The Heads of State or Government participating in
the Conference affirmed their commitment, in
concert with all peace-loving States and forces, to
the adoption of all measures, within the United
Nations and in particular in the Security Council!
to confront the continuing challenge by Israel. These
measuresshould include the application of all necep
sary sanctions against Israel . . . [and1 study [OfI
the measures to be taken against countries that
support the Zionist racist rbgime.“’

9. That decision by the Zionist authorities demon&rates once again their stubborn pursuit of the policy
2

13, When Israel

once again is shamelessly

chal-

lenging the international community and continuing to
impose its military occupation by terror and racist

oppression, flouting the principles of the United
Nations Charter and of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, threatening ever more seriously peace
and security in that region of the world, the Vietnamese delegation rearms
its unswerving and unreserved support for the cause of the Palestinian and
Arab peoples in their struggle for the liberation of their
occupied territories and for their inalienable national
rights of self-determination,
sovereignty and territorial integrity. We firmly support their legitimate
demands for the immediate and complete return by
Israel of the territories it has been occupying by force,
and we resolutely support the right of the Palestinian
people to return to the land of its birth to found a
Palestinian State on the territory of its homeland.
14. In particular, we appreciate the recommendation
submitted to the Council by the Commission that it
adopt effective and urgent measures to prevail on
Israel to cease the establishment of settlements in
the occupied territories and to dismantle the existing
ones.
15. My delegation hopes that the Council will
shoulder its responsibility to serve the cause of justice
and peace and adopt urgent measures in consonance
with the legitimate demands of the Arab peoples, in
particular those of Jordan and Palestine, whose representatives have made overwhelmingly
convincing
statements at these meetings.
16. Mr. AHSAN (Bangladesh): For the third time
in less than a year, we are meeting to consider the
grave provocations carried out by Israel in the occupied Arab territories in total disregard and defiance
of the Council’s resolutions and decisions. My delegation cannot but express its deepest concern at the
deteriorating situation and the grave dangers inherent
therein.
17. Recent ruthless and inhuman actions and the
unleashing of wanton terror and destruction on the
Peaceful unarmed population of the Palestinian city
of Al-Khalil (Hebron) by the Israeli authorities deserve
universal condemnation,
The Moslems around the
world cannot but view the desecration of the Great
Mosque, the Al-Haram Al-Ibrahimi,
as a deliberate
affront. Those are yet more examples of atrocities
being committed by the Israeli occupation forces on
the Palestinian people, We deplore Israel’s refusal to
allow the Mayor of Al-Khalil
(Hebron) to appear
before the Council at its invitation.
18. The Council has before it the latest report of the
Commission established under resolution 446 (1979)
and charged with examining the situation relating to
Settlements in the Arab territories occupied since
1967, including Jerusalem. The facts elaborated therein
constitute nothing less than an outright indictment of

Israel. The evidence has also been corrobcrated by
impartial outside sources and even by official statements and records of the highest authorities inside
Israel itself. I take this opportunity, on behalf of my
delegation, to express our appreciation to Ambassador
Mathias and the other members of the Commission for
the objectivity,
dedication and competence with
which they have discharged their responsibilities.
19. The facts are indeed appalling. They fall clearly
into a pattern of cumulative evidence documented
over more than a dozen years of illegal occupation
of those lands. They establish beyond all doubt that
Israel, by whatever means possible, is bent on changing
the legal and cultural status, as well as the demographic
and geographical character, of those lands. Thus
Israel continues its policy of expulsion, deportation,
displacement and transfer of local Arab inhabitants.
Confiscation and expropriation of Arab property and
other more covert property transactions continue
unabated. Mass arrests, curfews, administrative
detention, ill-treatment,
harassment, intimidation
and reprisals are regular occurrences. Long-term
plans to exploit the natural resources, particularly the
water table of the West Bank and other scarce resources, are now well under way and constitute an
even more dangerous element of deprivation,
20. The most blatant aspect of Israel’s policy is
deliberate encouragement of the establishment of
agricultural, industrial, archaeological and residential
settlements. The ultimate aim cannot but be the establishment of thousands of Israeli immigrants and the
permanent annexation of occupied Arab territories.
Proof positive of this policy is now acknowledged
by virtually all sources, including the closest allies of
Israel. The methods used by the occupation authorities
to seize lands needed for the construction or expansion
of settlements, directly or through subterfuge, have
been graphically spelt out in the reports of the Commission and more recently by news media in the United
States. The Council must proceed beyond the reiteration of general principles to the adoption of more
concrete action in the face of Israel’s non-compliance
with and rejection and continued defiance of its
decisions.
21, Bangladesh strongIy condemns the continuation
of Israel’s illegal military occupation and systematic
deprivation of the inalienable national and human rights
of the Arab people. We reject Israeli plans and actions
to annex those occupied territories by insidious accretion and direct colonization. The Council must adopt
effective measures to prevail upon Israel to abandon
the establishment of more Jewish settlements and to
dismantle those already existing or under construction, Effective measures must also be taken to ensure
the protection from Israeli exploitation and expropriation of the vital and scarce natural resources of the
territories under illegal occupation.

22, My delegation believes that, given the increasing
deterioration in the situation of the occupied Arab
territories and the direct threat to peace in the region,
as well as to international peace and security, the
Council must continue to keep this question under
constant review.

in the heart of the occupied West Bank, in the AlKhalil (Hebron) area and elsewhere, where the unarmed Palestinians continue to challenge the Israeli
military occupiers, who are armed to the teeth by
certain Powers represented in the Council.
29. History has shown that no amount of repression
can kill man’s determination to regain his cherished
freedom and the dignity of human rights. It is indeed
timely for all nations which uphold human rights to
support the cause of the Palestinian people, which
has been dispossessed for over three decades.

23. Bangladesh’s position on the question of the
Holy City of Jerusalem has been placed on record
time and again. The Council must demand that Israel
implement fully the resolutions it has adopted on this
question since 1967 and desist from taking any measures that would change the religious and historical
status of the Holy City.

30. Instead of heeding the voice of conciliation,
Israeli spokesmen remain defiant of the Council. Israel
is continuing to seize and confiscate more and more
Arab lands. Unsuspecting Jewish people from all over
the world are being lured, through open invitations,
to settle in a foreign land which belongs to Palestinians. In Zambia’s view, any policy founded on race
and ethnicity is doomed to failure, By the same token,
all policies of imperialism and expansionism have
negative consequences for their originators. We
implore the overzealous rulers of Israel to change,
their policy and master the lessons of history.

24. Bangladesh is committed to striving for a comprehensive, lasting and honourable peace in the
Middle East, a peace based on justice which demands
the undoing of acts contrary to international law, a
peace predicated on the norms and principles enshrined in the Charter and the full exercise of fundamental human rights. To that end, Bangladesh has
consistently supported a settlement that would ensure
the evacuation by Israel of all territories occupied
since 1967, the restoration of the inalienable national
rights of the Palestinian people, including their right
to self-determination and a State of their own in their
own homeland, and the restoration of the status of
the Holy City of Jerusalem under Arab sovereignty.

31. In my delegation’s view, the problem of illegal
Israeli settlements in occupied territories is intricately
interlinked with the overall Middle East crisis. This
problem is even further inflaming tensions in that
volatile region of the Middle East.

25. Mr. MUTUKWA (Zambia): Once again the
Security Council has been convened to consider yet
another threat to international peace and security
resulting from the Israeli policy of intensifying the
colonization of Arab territories by force of arms.

32. What the Israelis are doing in the occupied territories is to dispossess the Palestinian people of their
fundamental rights. In addition to planting Jewish
communities in Arab territories illegally, the colonists
are exploiting private property, land and natural resources and diverting vital water supplies of the area,

26. Serious developments are occurring in the Arab
lands which were occupied by Israel in the 1967
Middle East war. For over 13 years now, the occupying
Israeli forces have systematically and relentlessly
consolidated their illegal military occupation in the
West Bank, the Golan Heights of the Syrian Arab
Republic and Gaza. Even more ominous developments include the frantic attempts of the ruling circles
to legitimize their conquest by turning it into permanent annexation within the so-called Greater Israel.
Official Israeli spokes&en are at pains to stake fraudulent claims to the occupied areas on dubious religious
grounds. That propagandist attempt to change the
facts of history cannot and will not deceive the international community.

33. Since the issue of how to restore all the rights of
the Palestinian people is at the core of the Middle East
problem, there can be no peace in the area if the right
of the Palestinians to return and establish a homeland
is denied. What Israel is doing in the occupied territories is a total negation of the fundamental norms of
international law. All the members of the Council
should therefore unequivocally state to Israel that the
seizure of foreign lands by force of arms is totally
inadmissible. This is the time for all those States which
are represented in the Council to speak out in defence
of international law and the integrity of the Council,
for they are at stake in this case.

27. The reports of the Commission established under
resolution 446 (1979) are a living monument, as they
expose all the facts about Israeli practices in, and
master plans for, the occupied Arab territories,
including the Holy City of Jerusalem.

34. If Israel and its allies want peace, as they profess,
their colonization of Arab lands is not the road to
peace. Peace by duress is no peace; it is illusory peace.
35. The Israeli settlement policy in occupied territories is a euphemism for modern colonization in the
last third of the twentieth century. Stated simply,
Israel is consolidating the colonization of Arab territories. Zambia categorically rejects all forms of colo-

28. It is evident that the Palestinians, who are the
legitimate owners of the land, remain undaunted in
their resolve to regain their land. Recent instances
ofresistance to occupation, for example, have occurred
4

“i&m, old or modern, on any pretext. Colonialism
in all its forms must be liquidated. Exaggerated concerns about security are no justification for any country to commit acts of aggression against other States
or other peoples. Israel should not be allowed to
advance the dangerous notion that its boundaries are
elastic and shifting. In addition, as long as Israel continues to play the role of colonizer and ally of racist
South Africa, it should not expect anything less than
total condemnation from all freedom-loving
peoples
and States.
36. The Council should therefore take all effective
enforcement measures under the Charter to ensure
that Israel withdraws from the occupied territories
without any further delay. By withdrawal we mean the
removal of all the oppressive apparatus of Israeli
administration, including Israeli military and paramilitary machinery, and the demolition of all the settlements. My country cannot accept the establishment of
bantustans anywhere, including in the occupied Arab
territories.
37. Finally, I wish to thank the Council for having
elected Zambia to serve on the Commission. I wish
also to pay a particular tribute to the Chairman of
our Commission, my friend Ambassador Mathias of
Portugal, and Ambassador de Zavala of Bolivia, with
whom we have worked most cordially and harmoniously in the Commission in the cause of peace in
the Middle East. We continue to devote a great deal
of attention to the problem of the Middle East in the
hope of contributing to a solution of that problem.
Zambia pledges to do its part in the maintenance of
international peace and security in the world.
38. Mr.

HUSSON
(France) (interpretation
from
We are meeting once again to examine the
situation in the occupied Arab territories. By its
resolutions 446 (1979) and 452 (1979) the Council
entrusted a Commission composed of three of its
members with the task of examining the situation
resulting from the presence of Israeli settlements in
those territories. The second report drawn up by that
Commission, which was circulated to us in December,
has been carefully studied by the French authorities.
I should like to take this opportunity to convey to the
members of the Commission,
Mr. Mathias, Mr. de
Zavala and Mr. Mutukwa, the thanks of my delegation for the exemplary manner in which they discharged the functions entrusted to them. I should also
like to congratulate Mr. Mathias on the objectivity
and discernment which he displayed in presenting
the report [2199th meeting].

French):

39. However, we must note once again that the Commission, in spite of its efforts, was not successful
in obtaining the co-operation and assistance of the
Israeli authorities in the performance of its task. We
can only regret that it was in this way deprived of
information which could have been of the greatest
usefulness to all, The conclusions in the report are

such as to substantiate the grave concern which many
of US feel. The members of the Commission state in
the report that there has been:
“ a I I no evidence of any basic positive change in
Israel’s policy with regard to the construction and
planning of settlements in the Arab territories under
occupation, particularly in the West Bank of Jordan.
On the contrary, the Commission is of the view that
that policy has largely contributed to a deterioration of the situation in the occupied territories”.
[S//3679, para. 45.1

40. As we have repeatedly stressed, the attitude of
Israel towards those territories constitutes a violation
of the provisions of international conventions and, in
particular, of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of
12 August 1949.* The creation or enlargement of
settlements is contrary to the norms of international
law, whereby, I would remind members, the occupying
Power is obliged to preserve the demographic, economic and cultural nature of the occupied areas and
must refrain from any interference in the life of those
areas which goes beyond the normal needs of administration. The statements recently made by the Israeli
authorities in favour of the colonization in Hebron
are, in this regard, particularly alarming. Similarly,
the decision just taken by those authorities to prevent
the Mayor of Hebron from coming to New York for
the Council debate appears profoundly regrettable.
41. Acts of that kind can only give rise to tension
between the occupying Power and the inhabitants of
the occupied territories. In this context, we can only
urge that all parties display restraint and moderation,
because the maintenance of such a situation can only
jeopardize even further the chances of an overall
settlement of the Middle East conflict by peaceful
means, an overall settlement to which all the peoples
of the region and the whole international community
aspire.
42. Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (interpretahz
from
Chinese): The Security Council has on many occasions considered the question of the situation in the
Israeli-occupied Arab territories. In this regard, the
Council adopted resolutions 446 (1979) and 452 (1979),
condemning Israel for illegally establishing settlements
in its occupied Palestinian and other Arab territories
and demanding that Israel cease all its acts aimed at
changing the legal status, geographical nature and
demographic composition of the occupied Arab territories, including Jerusalem. However, defying the
unanimous condemnation of the international
community,
the Israeli authorities have consistently
refused to implement the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations. Recently, the Israeli authorities have
gone so far as to make another wanton decision to
establish settlements in the Arab city of Al-Khalil
(Hebron) on the West Bank of the Jordan, thus further
arousing the strong condemnation of Arab countries
and world public opinion.

43. The decision to establish settlements’in the city
of Al-Khalil is only one of a series of flagrant provocations by the Israeli authorities against the Palestinian
and other Arab peoples. During the past few months
the Israeli authorities have adopted decisions to confiscate large tracts of private Arab land in order to
expand settlements in the West Bank. They have also
adopted another decision to encourage Israeli citizens
to purchase land in the occupied West Bank and Gaza,
and have planned to build 46 new settlements in the
occupied Arab territories by the end of 1983. Furthermore, in defiance of the legitimate rights of the people
of the area, they have intensified their control and
monopoly over almost all the water resources of the
area. What is more, the Israeli occupation authorities
have constantly resorted to force against the Palestinians in the city of Al-Khalil and its vicinity on the West
Bank of the Jordan and have indulged in deliberate
provocations to prevent the local inhabitants from
carrying out their religious activities. Meanwhile, they
have repeatedly declared that they would not make
any concession on the question of Palestine and would
oppose any efforts to establish a State of Palestine.
By their recent statements and acts, the Israeli
authorities have made it abundantly clear that their
policy of aggression to perpetuate their occupation of
Arab territories has not changed at all and that they
are still most adamant in their position on the question
of Palestine.

return to their homeland%id establish their own
State. We sincerely hope that all parties in the Arab
world will strengthen their ‘unity against the common
enemy so as to strive for an early final victory.
46. In our view, the Council should uphold justice
and adopt a resolution strongly condemning Israel for
its crimes of aggression and expansion, adopting
practical and effective measures to stop the criminal
acts being committed by Israel in the occupied territories and supporting the Arab and Palestinian peoples
in their just struggle.
47. Mr. KHARLAMOV (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation
from Russian):
The delegation of the Soviet Union fully supports the request of
the delegation of Jordan and the Islamic Group of
States for the urgent convening of the Security Council to consider the question of the situation in the
occupied Arab territories. We share the view of those
States that, as a result of the brutal measuresthat the
Israeli occupying forces have been applying against
the unarmed inhabitants of those territories, an
extremely serious and dangerous situation has arisen,
and that danger is growing and worsening.
48. The report of the Commission established under
resolution 446 (1979) is, we believe, an objective one,
and we can only thank the members of the Commission-the representatives of Portugal, Zambia and
Bolivia-who prepared this report-for the impeccable
work they have done.

44. As everyone knows, the West Bank of the
Jordan, Gaza and some other areas are Arab territories forcibly occupied by Israel by means of wars of
aggression. Israel’s attempts to legalize and perpetuate
its occupation of these territories by establishing
settlements and purchasing land there will be of no
avail. This can only show that the Israeli authorities
are still dreaming of occupying Arab territories for
ever and preventing the Palestinian people from
regaining their homeland and their national rights.
However, the Arab people will eventually recover
their own territories and the Palestinian people regain
their own national rights. The criminal acts committed
by the Israeli authorities can only arouse further
indignation and will encourage the Arab people to
struggle, so that the day will come when the Arab
people regain their national rights and recover their
lost territories.

49. Like the delegations of Jordan and other Arab
and non-Arab States, the Soviet delegation believes
that the Council should take effective measures to
put an end to Israel’s occupation of the Arab territories, which has been going on for almost 13 years.
As has been stressed in the statements of representatives of Arab States, the policy and practices of
Israel in the occupied Arab territories represent a
constant threat to peace and stability in the explosive
Middle East region. And that is a fact that cannot he
refuted by anyone.
50. The question of the situation in the Arab territories occupied by Israel has been under consideration
by the Security Council, the General Assembly and,
other’.organs of the United Nations for many years
now. Last year alone it was discussed twice in the
Council. At that time the Council clearly and unambiguously confirmed the illegitimacy and illegality of
the establishment of Israeli settlements in the occupied
Arab territories and called upon Israel to comply
strictly with the provisions of the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.* In its resolution 446 (1979), the Council established a Commission to examine the situation
relating to the settlements in the Arab territories. That
Commission has submitted to the Council two very
useful and convincing reports.

45. The crux of the Israeli-Arab conflict lies in
Israel’s occupation of Arab territories and the question of Palestine. We have always held that the untold
sufferings of the Arab and Palestinian peoples in the
occupied territories are solely the result of the Israeli
policies of aggression and expansion and the rivalry
between the super-Powers in the region. Therefore, in
order to resolve the question of the Middle East, it
is imperative firmly to do away with super-Power
intervention and sabotage, firmly to oppose Israel’s
policies of aggression and expansion, to recover the
occupied Arab territories and realise the national
rights of the Palestinian people, including the right to

51. The facts and conclusions contained in those
reports have amply demonstrated that Israel is con6

tinuing unfailingly to disregard all appeals made to it by
the Council and all decisions taken on the question of
the situation in the occupied territories.
In the Commission’s second report it is pointed out,
inter alia, that:
“In complete disregard of United Nations resolutions and Security Council decisions, Israel is still
pursuing its systematic and relentless process of
colonization of the occupied territories.” [S/13679,
para. 46.1

The report most emphatically corroborates the view
that:

“Israel’s policy of settlement, relentlessly pursued
in spite of all Security Council decisions and appeals,
is incompatible with the pursuit of peace in the area
and that it is bound to lead to a further deterioration
of the situation in the occupied territories” [ibid.,
para, 511.

52. In this regard our! delegation would like to say
that not only is the policy of the Government of Israel
with regard to the occupied Arab territories incompatible with the desire to establish peace in that region,
but its purpose is precisely the opposite-namely to
perpetuate the results of the aggression of 1967. That
is why it has been carrying out the policy of the gradual
annexation of the occupied Arab lands and the expulsion from those lands of the indigenous Arab population; it is thus realizing its long-standing designs and
ambitions to create a “Greater Israel”. That policy,
as is clear to everyone here, can lead only to the
maintenance and further intensification of tension
both in the occupied territories themselves and in the
Middle East region as a whole. It once again serves
to expose the assertions of the Israeli leadership and
its dollar patrons about so-called peaceful intentions
on the part of Tel Aviv and its supposed sincere desire
to achieve a just settlement of the conflict with the
Arab States.
53. In light of the Commission’s conclusions and the
facts that have been adduced here by the representatives of Jordan, Syria and the PLO, as well as other
Arab States, concerning concrete actions of the
Government of Israel with regard to settlement and the
taking over of the occupied Arab territories, it has
become clearer than ever that the Camp David agreements and the separate Egyptian-Israeli treaty concluded with the active participation of the United
States serve only to camouflage the policy pursued by
Israel of expansion and aggression against the Palestinian people and the neighbouring Arab countries,
54. The talks being held by Israel, Egypt and the
United States with regard to so-called administrative
autonomy for the Palestinians are an open attempt
to prevent the exercise of the inalienable national
rights of the Arab people of Palestine, to consolidate

Israel’s occupation of the Arab territory it has seized,
including the Palestinian lands, and to annex the
eastern part of Jerusalem. The facts make it absolutely
clear that, since the conclusion of the separate
Egyptian-Israeli treaty and the beginning of talks
about so-called administrative autonomy, the creation
of Israeli settlements in the occupied territories, the.
expulsion of the indigenous population, the seizure
of water sources, the building of new roads, and the
violation of the elementary rights of the Arab population are all proceeding at an accelerated pace. In the
period from April to September 1979 alone, Israel
confiscated an additional 230,000 dunums of Arab
land, bringing the total to 1,730,OOOdunums-that
is, 31.4 per cent of the whole territory of the West
Bank. Furthermore, nine tenths of all the land seized
by the Israelis is private Arab land. Along with this,
the Israeli authorities are continuing to deprive the
indigenous population of water sources, without which
it is impossible not only to engage in agriculture and
gardening but even to survive in the occupied lands.
For example, it emerges from the Commission’s
report that Israel is pumping out of artesian wells on
the West Bank about 500 million cubic metres of the
West Bank water supply, which is 620 million cubic
metres annually.
55. The Israeli leaders have over and over again
frankly stated that they will never renounce their
policy of creating settlements and will not agree to
change the status of occupied Arab Jerusalem or
permit the creation of an Arab or Palestinian State. In
this regard I might remind the Council that on 16 September last year, the Israeli Cabinet took a decision
to permit Israelis to acquire land in the occupied
West Bank and in the Gaza region. On 28 September
last year, the Israeli Cabinet decided to move the
Elon Moreh settlement-Qadum-to
a new site, a
decision the Israeli Supreme Court ruled to be illegal.
56. So quite naturally a question arises here: what
would be the meaning, therefore, of the administrative
autonomy that the initiators of this design are trying
so actively to propagate and in the talks about which
they are doing everything they can to include certain
Arab countries? If we were to throw out all the verbal
baggage and just go to the substance of the matter, the
result is that “administrative autonomy” is designed
to deprive the Arab people of Palestine for ever of their
national and inalienable rights to self-determination
and to the creation of their own independent State.
Behind the smokescreen of talk and arguments about
“administrative autonomy”, we find concealed a
wholly defined intention on the part of the Israeli
authorities to perpetuate the occupation of the Arab
lands, to strive for the expulsion of the larger part of
the indigenous population and to convert the remaining
inhabitants into a landless, homeless source of cheap
labour for the Israeli economy in order to ensure the
achievement of the expansionist designs of the leaders
of Israel, I do not know if this policy can be called

60. A final solution of the problem can be achieved
only within the framework ofsajust and comprehensive
settlement in the Middle East and on the condition
that Israel withdraws from all the Arab territories
occupied since June 1967and guarantees the legitimate
rights of the Arab people of Palestine.

bantustanization, but frankly speaking, something very
like it is going on,
57. If Israel can maintain its hold over the Arab territories it seized in June 1967 and pursue its own policy
with regard to their population in contravention of
generally acknowledged norms of international law it
can do so only thanks to the broad and active support
extended to it by its protectors. It can continue to defy
and disregard the views of the international community
only because the Government of the United States-as
is clear to everyone-is not only arming Israel with the
most modern and most sophisticated types of weaponry which sow death and destruction among tens of
thousands of Palestinians, Lebanese, Syrians and
other Arabs, but is also constantly blocking action by
the Security Council to adopt decisions that would condemn the aggressive expansionist designs of the Israeli
leadership and confirm the decisions adopted by the
General Assembly with regard to the inalienable rights
of the Arab people of Palestine.

61. The Soviet Union has repeatedly stated and confirmed in deeds its solidarity with the struggle of the
Arab peoples for the elimination of the consequences
of Israeli aggression and for a just and lasting peace
in the Middle East. The General Secretary of the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of the
Soviet Union and President of the Presidium of the
Supreme Soviet, Mr. L. I. Brezhnev, pointed out in this
regard that
“Israel can count on a secure existence within
the frontiers of 1967only if it frees and gives up all
the Arab lands it has seized since that time and
ceases to hinder the exercise of the national rights
of the people of Palestine, including its right to
create its own independent State.”

58. In this regard, I should like to quote here what
was stated by the Foreign Minister of the Soviet
Union, Mr. Gromyko, on 18 February this year:

62. In so far as concerns the proposals of the representatives of Jordan and the PLO to the effect that the
Council should consider the possibility of applying
sanctions against Israel pursuant to Chapter VII of
the United Nations Charter, the Soviet delegation
considers these proposals entirely justified on the basis
of the fact that the policy and practices of Israel in
the occupied territories are creating a threat not only
to peace and security throughout the entire Middle
East but also to international peace as a whole.

“At the present time in Washington an abundance
of speeches are being made which contain assurances to the effect that the United States is the most
dedicated friend of Islam and Islamic States. But do
they seriously believe that in Islamic countries the
constant hostility that was displayed by the initiators
of United States foreign policy towards those countries for decades has been forgotten?
“Who to this very day is maintaining a sharply
anti-Arab position on the question of the Arab lands
occupied by Israel? Who is creating obstacles to a
just Middle East settlement? It is the United States.

63. Mr. YANG0 (Philippines): The Security Council
is once again engaged in a debate on the situation of
Israeli settlements in the occupied Arab territories.
The debates last year resulted in the establishment
of a three-member Commission under resolution 446
(1979). My delegation takes this opportunity to pay a
tribute to the members of that Commission, composed
of Bolivia, Portugal and Zambia, and to commend
their comprehensive and objective report, which
attests to the care and diligence the members devoted
to their important task. Special mention should be
made of the leadership provided by Mr. Mathias of
Portugal as Chairman of the Commission.

“Who is slighting the 4 million Arab inhabitants
of Palestine who have been driven out by Israel from
their lands and categorically objecting to the exercise of their legitimate right to create their own
independent State? It is Washington that is doing
this. ”
59. With regard to the Arab territories occupied by
Israel and Israel’s activities in those territories, the
position of the Soviet Unign is very well known and
has been repeatedly set forfh in the Council and in the
General Assembly. This position has always been
and remains that the Soviet Union categorically condemns the policy and practike of the Israeli occupying
authorities with regard to thb’ Palestinians and Syrians
of the West Bank, Gaza, th Golan Heights and East
Jerusalem. We are against t e mass repressions being
carried out by the Governm i nt of Israel, the suppression of freedom, the oppression
and the racial discrimination. We are deeply convinced that an end must
be put to these illegal actions, and the sooner the
better for peace and for the peaceful existence of
Israel itself.

64. It should be noted that, in resolution 446 (1979)+
the Council determined that the policy and practices
of Israel in establishing settlements in the occupied
territories “have no legal validity and constitute a
serious obstruction to achieving a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in the Middle East”. The Council therefore called on Israel
“to rescind its previous measures and to desist
from taking any action which would result in
changing the legal status and geographical nature
and materially affecting the demographic composition of the Arab territories occupied since 1967,
8

including Jerusalem, and, in particular, not to
transfer parts of its own civilian population into the
occupied Arab territories”,

“and further desist from taking any measures which
would change the status of Jerusalem, including the
pluralistic and religious dimensions of that Holy
City” [ibid., paru. 561.

65. The Commission was created to examine the
issue of settlements and was requested to submit a
report. The first report, contained in document S/13450
and Add.1, was submitted on 12 July 1979.On 20 July,
the Council adopted resolution 452 (1979), in which it
accepted the Commi&ion’s recommendations and
requested it to keep under close survey the implementation of that resolution.

70. It ,is regrettable that, as Ambassador Mathias
said last Friday, speaking as Chairman of the Commission, Israel has refused and continues to refuse to
co-operate with the Commission. My delegation agrees
with him that it is still not too late to resolve the conflict in the Middle East peacefully, and that it would
take, on the part of the peoples of the Middle East,

66. We should not fail to note in passing that both
resolution 446 (1979) and resolution 452 (1979) were
adopted with overwhelming support.

“a courageous political vision and a keen awareness
of the urgent need to bring about ajust and peaceful
solution of the great challenges which are before
them” [2199th meeting, para. 281.

67. A second report was submitted by the Commission on 4 December 1979. It was stated therein that
since the Commission had submitted its first report,
it unfortunately had

71. We have welcomed all positive moves to resolve
the long-festering issue of an enduring and just peace
in the Middle East, on the assumption that any constructive and favourable movement in the direction of
accommodation would constitute a breakthrough in
the continuing impasse and serve as the initial stage of
a truly comprehensive solution.

. I . detected no evidence of any basic positive
change in Israel’s policy with regard to the construction and planning of settlements in the Arab territories under occupation, particularly in the West
Bank of Jordan.” [S/13679, para. 45.1

72. At a time when momentous events elsewhere
threaten world peace and international security, it is
unfortunate that the Council is again seized of a hazardous situation in the Middle East, a situation that is
part of a problem that remains unresolved. What
concerns us specifically at this time is events taking
place in connection with Israeli settlements in the
Golan Heights, Gaza, the West Bank and the Jordan
Valley, including Jerusalem, territories that have been
occupied by Israeli forces since 1967.

The Commission also reported:
“Israel is still pursuing its systematic and relentless process of colonization of the occupied territories” [ibid., para. 461, in complete disregard of
United Nations resolutions and Security Council
decisions. It viewed with particular concern the
decision by the Israeli Cabinet to allow Israeli
citizens and organizations to purchase land in the
occupied West Bank and Gaza. It is noteworthy
that the Commission concluded that Israel’s policy
of settlement

73. In the view of my delegation, what is happening
in the occupied territories is only part of the problem;
the larger problem is the fact of the occupation itself.
But that, in turn, is again part of a still larger problem:
that of restoring a homeland to the Palestinian people
and guaranteeing to them their inalienable rights as a
people. That is the real problem, which has remained
unresolved since the founding of the United Nations.
Unless that problem is resolved fully and in a way
that is satisfactory to all parties concern+d, the United
Nations cannot be said to have succeeded in its original
mission; unless it is resolved, the world cannot expect
to have an enduring peace, Just as after the Second
World War the problem was to find and secure a homeland for the Jewish people, for which the Israeli State
was founded by the United Nations, the problem today
is to find and secure a homeland for the Palestinian
people, who have been bereft of their home by history.
An even-handed and just approach to the problem of
the Middle East requires that we remain seized of
the task of finding a permanent homeland for the Palestinian people without a corresponding threat to the
Israeli homeland.

“is incompatible with the pursuit of peace in the
area and that it is bound to lead to a further deterioration of the situation in the occupied territories”
Wd.,

paru. 511.

The Commission also pointed to the “disastrous consequences” which the settlement policy was bound to
have on any attempt to reach a peaceful solution in
the Middle East.
68. My delegation joins the Commission in calling
earnestly upon Israel to make a positive gesture of its
own and, before it is too late, to cease the establishment, construction, expansion and planning of settlements in the occupied territories.
69. With regard to Jerusalem, my delegation associates itself with the Commission’s recommendation
that the Council should urge Israel to implement fully
the Council resolutions adopted on that question
since 1967,

The position of my Government on the complex
problem of the Middle East is clear and unequivocal,

74.

9

founded. But as the number’df unfulfilled resolutions
and decisions attests, we skein to have reached an
impasse. This does not augur well for the peace and
the well-being of the peoples of the Middle East, a
region that at present faces other crises as well. This
does not augur well for the peace and the well-being
of the international community either.

We have from the ouqset regarded this problem as
one of decolonization and since the founding of the
United Nations we have supported every effort at
decolonization. We never expected decolonization to
be an easy process, especially in the Middle East
where new forces have arisen within the region that
have served to complicate the process of accommodating antagonist interests. But the difficulty should
not deter us from proceeding with the task. Unfortunately, at the present stage the process is incomplete,
for there are still peoples in that area which have not
had the opportunity of regaining their full identity and
their homeland. My Government has either supported
or subscribed to every resolution or decision adopted
to complete the process.

79. As we go about the present task, it is well to
remind all parties concerned that the issue is preeminently one of the rights of a people to exist as a
people, a right that all mankind has asserted to be
inalienable and one that we are all trying to uphold
everywhere in all parts of the world. Justice demands
that if we are to claim this right for ourselves, we
cannot in all conscience deny it to others.

75. In 1948 resolution 194 (III) of the General Assembly called for the return of the Palestinian refugees
or their just compensation, and established the United
Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine. After
the wars in 1967 and 1973 the Philippines gave its full
support to Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973), both of which called for Israeli withdrawal
from the occupied territories, the termination of all
states of belligerency and a settlement of the problem
of those who had left their homes as a result of the
hostilities. My delegation believes that those two
resolutions are basic to the solution of all aspects of
a comprehensive and lasting peace in the region.

80. Mr. MILLS (Jamaica): Nearly one year ago the
Council met to consider the situation in the occupied
Arab territories. The debate underlined the deep and
virtually universal concern at the developments in
those territories, and in particular the continuing
practice on the part of the Israeli authorities of establishing settlements in the area, to the great detriment
of the Palestinian peoples. Members of this Council,
and others who spoke in that debate, expressed in
varying ways their deep concern at, and strong objection to, the actions of the Israeli authorities in this
matter. The Council decided by way of its resolution 446 (1979) to establish a commission to examine
the situation relating to the settlements in the Arab
territories, including Jerusalem.

76. The Philippines, in an effort to contribute to the
just and peaceful solution of the question of the Middle
East, at the core of which is the Palestinian question,
has supported the General Assembly resolutions on
these questions, in particular resolutions 3236 (XXIX),
3375 (XXX) 31120, 32140 A, 33128, 34129, 34152 and
34165A, C and D.

81. In July last year the Council again met, to consider the first report of the Commission [S/13450artd
Add.11. That report, its conclusions and recommendations, and the manner in which the members of the
Commission carried out their task were all the subject
of commendation and endorsement by the Council,

77. On 29 November 1979, on the occasion of the
International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People, the Philippine Ministry of Foreign Affairs
sponsored a Palestinian exhibit at the Philippine International Convention Centre in Manila and also showed
on Philippine television the United Nations film,
“Palestinians Do Have Rights,” On the same occasion, my President, Mr. Ferdinand E. Marcos, sent a
message to the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, Mr. Medoune Fall, affirming my Government’s support for the just cause of the Palestinian
people.

82. My delegation has carefully examined the second
report of the Commission [S/13679].
83. We find it appropriate that the Council should
again give due consideration to this vital issue. Such
consideration aptly reflects the lasting and deep concern of the international community in respect of a
situation which undoubtedly poses a direct and continuing threat to the peace, security and stability of
the Middle East.

78, To my delegation and to my Government the
burden of all these resolutions and decisions is clear.
It is to complete a process that was begun by the
dissolution of empires after the Second World War,
when previously colonized peoples began to assert
their identities and to assume their lawful place under
the sun. History has left us an unsolved problem in this
respect in the Middle East, which we must continually
seek to rectify. Not to do so would be a betrayal of
the principles upon which the United Nations is

84. Once again the Commission approached its task
with seriousness and pbjectivity, and as a consequence
was able to produce a report which, in our view, is
factual, comprehensive and forthright. My delegation
expresses its sincere appreciation to the Chairman of
the Commission, Ambassador Mathias of Port&,
and his colleagues of Bolivia and Zambia, for the
commendable manner in which they accomplished
their difficult task and for the invaluable reports they
have produced.
10

85, lt is regrettable, however, to. npte that the persistent
efforts made by, the Commlsslon to solicit the
cpoperationand assistance of all Governments and
concemed
parties, in accordance with its mandate,
Once
more met with a negative response from the
Government
of Israel. This defiant attitude, coming in
Ihewakeof a sincere plea by the Commission to the
Governmentof Israel to reconsider its position
towards
the Commission, must be deplored. Despite
thisconstraint,the Commission proceeded with its
work,in an effort to achieve a factual and balanced
picture.
$6, The current report testified to the grave and
potentiallyexplosive situation prevailing in the
occupied territories as a direct consequence of the
continuing
practice by the occupying Power of promotingand accelerating Jewish settlements in the
areas
concerned.The evidence presented by the Commissionsubstantiatesthese charges, which are corroboratedby various press reports relating to a processaptly described by some as a form of creeping
annexation.
The report states in paragraph 41 (a):
“It hascome to light that in the last few months
additional private Arab land totalling over
40,000dunums , . . has been confiscated by Israeli
occupationauthorities for the purpose of expanding
settlements
in the West Bank, mostly the Nablus,
Bethlehem,Beit Shahour and Jerusalem areas.”
87. The Commission took note of the decisions by
theIsraeli Cabinet on 16 September and 14 October
lastyearto permit Israeli citizens to purchase lands in
theoccupied
West Bank and Gaza, and to expand seven
existingsettlementsin the occupied West Bank.
88, Perhaps,however, the most serious information
providedby the Commission on the magnitude of
Israel’s settlement policy is contained in paragraph41(e):
“According to information received from various
sources,Israel is in the process of implementing
a Plan prepared by the World Zionist Organization
whichcalls for the building of 46 new settlements
in the years 1979-1983.The Commission is calling
attentionto this project inasmuch as some of the
settlementsappearing in the plan are already under
COnstruction.”
Referenceto this plan appeared in a recent New York
Time8article, which further stated that it has as its
objectivethe construction of 20 new settlements in
the next Year, and over the next five years would
eventuallyinvolve a projected figure of 58,000families,
amountingto a total of 200,000 people.
8g* Particularly disquieting have been the current
newsaccountsof the resolution by the Israeli Cabinet
earlierthis month supporting in principle the right of
JewSto settle in the city of Al-Khalil (Hebron). The

Secretary-Generalin commenting on this matter has
stated that such a decision was likely to exacerbate
an already tense situation and to hamper efforts to
achieve a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
90. My delegationregretsthat the request that appropriate arrangements be made to enable the Mayor
of Al-Khalil to attend these meetings of the Council
has not been granted by the Israeli authorities.
91. The Commission’sreport takes due account of
the action being taken in respect of water resources
in the occupiedterritories and of the long-term adverse
implications for the Palestinian inhabitants. Citing a
study made available to it, the Commission states in
paragraph 42 of its report:
“

Israel pumps away some 500 million cubic
metres of the West Bank’s total annual supply of
620 million cubic metres by means of artesian wells
drilled within its 1948borders, The traditional water
sources, such as wells and springs, are also being
depleted through the use of modern drilling equipment to drain off water for the Israeli settlements
in the occupied areas. As the water level continues
to drop because of excessive Israeli consumption,
the Israeli authorities have resorted to restrictive
measures on the use of water by the Arab inhabitants.”
.

.

,

92. My delegation also takes note of the report’s
strong recommendation that the Council urge the
Government of Israel to implement fully the Council’s
resolutions on the question of Jerusalemadopted from
1967, and, further, desist from taking any measures
which would changethe statusof Jerusalem,including
the pluralistic and religious dimensions of that Holy
City.
93. The findings of the Commissionandthe evidence
that it has presented make it clear that a continued
policy which encouragessettlementsin the occupied
territories is most provocative, seriously aggravates
the problem of the Middle East, is counter-productive
and detrimental to the attainment of a just, comprehensive andlasting peacein the area. In fully endorsing
the Commission’s recommendations, my delegation
urges the Government of Israel to ceasethe establishment, construction, expansion and planning of settlements in the occupied territories. On this issue the
Council and the international community have agreed
that the establishmentof these settlementsis contrary
to international law and to the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.It poses a grave threat to the prospects
for peace and stability in the Middle East. Above all,
it represents a grossinjustice to the Palestinianpeople,
whose inalienable rights, including their right to establish an independent homeland, have been recognized
and endorsed by the overwhelming majority of Member States.
94. The achievement of the just aims of the Palestinian people, the establishment of lasting peace in

Y

on the occupying Power and expressly prohibits any
unilateral modification of the demographic and
physical nature of the territories in question, We continue to oppose any such unilateral modifications,
including those to the status of Jerusalem and the
Holy Places.

the Middle East and the ensuring of the right of all
States in the area to live in peace within secure and
recognized boundaries-all of these demand the immediate cessation of the policy and practice relating to
the establishment of settlements.
95. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom): The
second report of the Commission set up under resolution 446 (1979) is in many ways similar to its predecessor. The similarities include its reflection of the
continued Israeli refusal either to co-operate with the
Commission or to allow it into the occupied territories.
In the view of my Government, every Member State,
having subscribed to the Charter, ought to facilitate
the operations of a body established by a Security
Council resolution. We also deeply regret that the
Israeli authorities have prevented the Mayor of
Hebron from coming to New York to participate in
this debate.

100. In conclusion, I acknowledge with respect the
endeavours of the members of the Commission and
congratulate them on the tenor and contents of their
report. Its balance reflects their creditable efforts to be
as objective and uncontentious as possible in commenting on a highly complicated and emotive subject,
101. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russinn): The next speaker is the representative of Alge-

ria. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
102. Mr.

BOUZARBIA (Algeria) (interpretation
Mr. President, on behalf of the Algerian
delegation, I should like to congratulate you most
warmly on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council. You represent a country which has always
vigorously supported just causesthroughout the world.
Hence we are gratified that it is under your guidance
that the Council is once more considering a problem
of which our Organization has been seizedpractically
from its inception. My satisfaction and that of my
delegation stem first and foremost from our conviction
that the skills you have already demonstrated on
numerous occasions will ensure that the debate in the
Council will be imbued with wisdom and equity.

96. My Government is once again broadly content
with the conclusions and recommendations of the
Commission’s report. Despite the dificulties that the
members of the Commission have encountered in
obtaining firsthand information, the result of their
researches tallies largely with the results of our own.

from French):

97. It seems to my delegation that there are two
separate, though interrelated, aspects of Israeli policy
in the occupied territories, both of which give rise to
serious concern. The first is the illegality of their
settlement policy. There is no doubt of this. As the
voting patterns of this Organization clearly show, the
Israeli Government is in a minority of one in believing
that its settlement policy on occupied Arab territory
is not in direct contravention of international law. We
deplore its decision last year to allow Israeli citizens
to buy land in the occupied territories. Moreover,
we consider the Israeli claim to ultimate sovereignty
over those territories to be incompatible with resolution 242 (1967) and the principle of the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory by force. It follows,
therefore, that we view recent Israeli decisions concerning the City of Hebron to be both provocative and
ill-conceived.

103. I wish also to take this opportunity to convey
the congratulations of the Algerian delegation to your
predecessor, Mr. Leprette, the representative of
France who during the month of January guided the
work of the Council with a tact and ability which
won him the respect of all, a respect which was particularly well deserved because the undoubtedly
complex international situation called for as much
skill as cool-headedness.
104. In a month, to the very day, the Washington
agreement will be one year old. The hope of restoring
peace, reconciliation and harmony with which they
were pleased to deck it out has not stood the test of
time or of facts. It could not be otherwise. Becauseof
their fundamental components, the Camp David agreements, as well as the Washington agreement, which
set the seal of legal approval on them, never faced
the fact that the Palestinian situation was the essence
of the crisis and that, hence, any comprehensive settlement of the Middle East problem was contingent on
that problem’s being settled first.

98. The second aspect of concern is the effect of these
Israeli policies on the search for a comprehensive
peace in the area, a concept to which the whole international community, including Israel, is committed.
We are at a loss to understand how settlement policies, measures such as those endorsed for Hebron
and claims of sovereignty over the occupied territories, can possibly be compatible with Israel’s
declared desire for an overall peace. On the contrary,
these policies constitute serious and unacceptable
obstacles to the pursuit of that goal.

105. Within this context, I should like to emphasize
the serious concern and deep misgivings of my country
with regard to the situation prevailing in the territories occupied by Israel. The recent establishment
of Israeli settlements in the centre of the Arab city of

99. Earlier speakers have mentioned other problems
arising from the Israeli administration of the occupied
territories. I repeat that, in our view, the fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949 confers speci& responsibilities
12

Al-Khalil and the reprisals, of evil memory, have
once again brought a train of humiliation, plunder and
distress for the Palestinian people. It is timely to
recall that the constant repression of which the Arab
Population is victim is coupled with an extremely
grave danger, that of the progressive, concerted and
Planned liquidation of the Palestinian people. Resort
to methods of widespread reprisal at the smallest
sign of resistance to the occupier is becoming ever
more frequent, as has been demonstrated by the acts of
bnltality committed last year against the population
of Halhoul, which was literally suffocated and starved,
and that of Nablus, whose misfortune was to have
Protested against the establishment of new settlements on its ancestral lands.

of this carefully-thought-out process of increasing
settlements which has taken on a new dimension and
increased at an unparalleled rate since the conclusion
of the Camp David and Washington agreements.
Neither are the events in Al-Khalil fortuitous and,
therefore, they shed new light on the plots that have
been hatched at the regional level by the parties to
these agreements and on the alliances and newly
establishedgeopolitical balances. Lastly, the lukewarm
reactions of these parties and their faint protests
which, for the heeds of the cause, are accompanied
by a thin veneer of indignation, demonstrate, if there
were still need, that these facts are well founded.
110. Secondly, for my Government, the process of
intensifying the settlement of the occupied Arab territories is neither a violation of the Camp David and
Washington agreements, as some would have us
believe, nor a unilateral distortion of their clauses;
rather, it flows logically from them. It is scarcely
necessary to recall here that one of the basic assumptions, one of the fundamental hypotheses, underlying
these agreements point in the direction, if not of
radically liquidating the Palestinian situation, at least
of stripping it of its national dimension and concealing
the claims inherent in it to a dual right of selfdetermination and independence. It is from the very
source of their intellectual approach and the methodology used to construct these assumptions and
hypotheses that the latter draw their sustenance.

106. Israel’s behaviour in the occupied Arab territories is the result of its undertaking to make usurpation and aggression systematically profitable. It is
therefore clear that the final objective pursued by
Israel throughout all these exactions, as it attempts to
tear the Arabs from their homes once and for all, is
the seizure of their property in order to establish
new settlements.
107. However scattered and fragmented, the following statistics amply demonstrate the nature of that
behaviour and that undertaking, against which my
delegation protests bitterly and with indignation.
I must remind the international community here of the
fragmentary nature of these statistics, which is due
basically to the obstructionist attitude adopted by
Israel vkhis
all the commissions of inquiry of the
United Nations: first, since June 1967 hundreds of
thousands of settlers have been installed by force in
the occupied Arab territories on the pretext of the need
to guarantee so-called secure borders; secondly, more
than 120 existing settlements have been expanded;
thirdly, it is common knowledge that sizable sums
have been allocated to finance the establishment of
new settlements; fourthly, the Zionist leaders no
longer conceal their intentions, having already
announced that the number of settlements should
double over the next five years; fifthly, one need only
read the report of the Commission entrusted with
examining the situation relating to these settlements
to learn that 27 per cent of the occupied West Bank of
Jordan has been purely and simply confiscated by
Israel in order to take in 90,000 new settlers; sixthly,
recently the Zionist leaders decided that it is now legal
to acquire the property of Arabs, which, in our eyes,
constitutes an invitation to continue plundering that
cannot be clearer.

111, Thirdly, all these facts support my Government
in its traditional position. My delegation remains convinced that the question of Palestine is at the core of
the Middle East crisis and that no solution of this
problem is possible that does not take into consideration the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.
These rights entail: first, the restoration to the Palestinian people of all its national rights; secondly,
the realization of the right of self-determination and
the right of return, as well as the right of the Palestinian people to a national existence in its homeland;
thirdly, the participation of the Palestine Liberation
Organization, the sole legitimate representative of the
Palestinian people, on an equal footing with all other
parties; and fourthly, the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force as well as the complete and
speedy evacuation of all territories occupied by Israel.
112. The events in Al-Khalil, when placed within the
overall geopolitical context of the region, require
that the community of nations consider-and indeed
draw the necessary conclusions from-the obvious
failure of the sort of partial settlement provided for
by the Camp David and Washington agreements. It
is therefore high time for the Council once again to
consider the question of Palestine, raking ail its aspects
into account and placing it within its natural context,
namely, the Middle East, where it occupies a decisive
place since the security and stability of that region
depend on it.

108. The chain of events in the Middle East and the
consequent heightening of tension in the area have
led my Government to the following three conclusions.
109. First, the events in Al-Khalil are neither
spontaneous nor fortuitous, and they are not isolated
either. The events in Al-Khalil are not spontaneous
because, first and foremost, they are part and parcel
13

113. The PRESIDENT (irrterpretation from Russian): The next speaker is the representative of
Pakistan, I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
114. Mr. NAIK (Pakistan): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you and the other members of the Council for
giving my delegation an opportunity to express its
views before the Council, which is considering the
deteriorating situation in the occupied Arab territories. I also wish to extend to you and to your country our congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of February
and to wish you every success in your endeavours.
115. My delegation would also like to express its
deep appreciation to your predecessor, Mr. Leprette
of France, for the wise and skilful manner in which
he guided the important work of the Council during
the month of January.
116. The Council has before it the report of the Commission established under resolution 446 (1979), which
was given the mandate “to examine the situation
relating to settlements in the Arab territories occupied
since 1967, including Jerusalem”. My delegation
wishes to pay a sincere tribute to the members of the
Commission, who have investigated in great detail
the facts of the situation in the occupied Arab lands.
It is deplorable that the Commission was not allowed
by the Israeli authorities to visit the occupied Arab
territories for further verification of its findings. The
Israeli authorities have also turned down the Council’s
invitation to the Mayor of Al-Khalil to address it.
Those refusals are yet further affronts to the Council
on the part of Israel and they once again underline
the utter disregard which the Israeli aggressors have
repeatedly shown for the decisions of the international
community.

Israeli authorities, in pursuit .,of their ambition, are
now diverting the scarce‘water resources available
in the West Bank to sustain and consolidate those
settlements. This policy is a calculated scheme to
uproot the remnants of the Palestinian people from
their homeland and to change the demographic pattern
of the ancient land of Palestine.
119. I need hardly reiterate the position of the
Government of Pakistan, which has on many occasions
declared its firm condemnation of the Israeli policy of
expansionism and Israel’s sacrilegious acts in the
occupied Arab territories. Palestine belongs to the
Palestinians. They have inhabited that sacred land
since time immemorial and have developed there a
unique and distinctive culture enriching human civilization. The Israeli attempts to change the character
of that land is, therefore, in our opinion, a crime
against history and mankind. It is a matter of grave
concern that Israel is stubbornly pursuing its policy of
usurpation of the occupied Arab lands in the face of
the universal condemnation by the international community, which recognizes the inalienable right of the
Palestinian people to establish its sovereign independent State in its homeland.
120. Israel’s decision to violate the Arab character
of the ancient city of Al-Khalil and its continuing
efforts to confiscate Arab property and land in the
occupied Arab territories have evoked criticism even
among those that have long purported to side with
Israel. They have been compelled to describe it as
“creeping annexation”. They have admitted that those
Jewish settlements are regarded everywhere, and
above all by the settlers themselves, as Israel’s way
of trying to establish its permanent control leading to
outright annexation of the occupied territories.
121, What has been described as creeping annexation
reveals the ugly features of Israeli aggression and
makes a mockery of Israel’s professed commitment
to peace and to the so-called “full autonomy” for the
Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza promised in
the Camp David agreements. This policy of creeping
annexation, advanced on one or another pretext, the
collective punishments imposed on the Palestinian
‘people in the occupied territories and the insidious
schemes to deprive them of a vital resource for their
livelihood jeopardize the very survival of the Palestinian people, The international community can no longer
remain a passive witness to this continuing tragedy,

117. The Commission’s report fully exposes the
Israeli policy of expansion and Israel’s intention of
making its aggression against Palestine permanent.
The Israeli Cabinet’s decision to create settlements
in the heart of the occupied city of Al-Khalil is the
latest manifestation of this ruthless policy, which
until recently was confined to establishing Jewish
settlements on Arab lands outside the occupied Arab
cities.
118. The Commission’s report and the statement
by the representatives of Jordan and Syria and the
observer of the Palestine Liberation Organization
12199th and 2200th meetings] have given details of the
extent of the colonization already carried out by Israel
in the occupied West Bank, Gaza and the Golan
Heights. We have been informed that Israel has confiscated almost 31.4 per cent of the total area of the West
Bank and is stepping up its planting of alien populations in that area. The Israeli authorities have already,
set up 87 illegal settlements on the West Bank, of which
18 are in or around the Holy City of Jerusalem. The

122. It is recognized that Israel’s policy of settling
alien populations in the heart of Palestine-which is a
flagrant violation of the Charter, the decisionsof the
Security Council and the General Assembly, the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
relevant Geneva Conventions-has led to increased
tension and conflict in the occupied Arab territories.
It will inevitably lead to more conflict and morebloodshed. It is a dangerous situation and a threat to the
peace and security of the entire region and the whole
world.
14

123. The Security Council, which is responsible for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
must therefore unequivocally respond to this danger
and commit its full authority and prestige to checking
Israel’s relentless pursuit of its expansionist designs.
It must reiterate its strong condemnation of the Israeli
policy of establishing settlements in the occupied
Arab territories, especially its latest decision to implant
alien population in the Arab city of Al-Khalil. The
Council must once again condemn Zionist disregard
for the sanctity of holy shrines and Zionist interference with religious freedom and practices. The
Council must declare null and void all the steps taken
by the Israeli authorities to annex the occupied Arab
territories by changing their demographic pattern or
their institutional structure or status. The Council
must also resolutely condemn the confiscation and
expropriation of private and public Arab property by
Israel and the illegal exploitation of natural resources
in the occupied Arab territories. It must declare its
complete solidarity with the people of Palestine, which
has been the victim of relentless persecution for more
than a generation.

the same group or bloc fighting with one another and
jockeying for position. Today we have been witness
to another familiar spectacle that regrettably has the
effect of further downgrading the level of the Council’s
debate.
128. Yesterday, Cuba, the Soviet proxy in the
western hemisphere, echoed its master’s voice. Today,
Viet Nam, one of the Soviet proxies in the eastern
hemisphere, popped up to complete the double act
with Cuba. Aside from appearing here in the interest
of the Soviet Union, the Vietnamese representative is
also attempting to divert attention from the continued
activities of her country in Cambodia. Indeed, for the
Vietnamese representative to speak of “occupied
territory” in any form at the present time is the
height of hypocrisy.
129. Both Viet Nam’s documented use of chemical
weapons and its systematic starvation of Cambodia
have ravaged that country in a way that can only be
defined as genocide. The invasion of Cambodia and
its overwhelming condemnation by the General Assembly surely make Viet Nam an honoured and
respected participant here. I am certain that the sponsors of this debate take much pride in Viet Nam’s
support of their position.

124. Past experience has shown that condemnation
alone has failed to dissuade the Israeli authorities from
the pursuit of their ambitions. The Council should
therefore proceed to do everything within its means
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter in order to compel Israel to reverse the course
of its expansionist policy and to enforce its compliance
with the decisions contained in the resolutions of the
Council and the General Assembly, especially resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), which mandate an
Israeli withdrawal from all occupied territories and
categorically reject the acquisition of territory by

130. Algeria’s participation in this debate reveals
another facet of the childishly competitive nature of
the Council’s debates. For within the Arab Group,
Algeria’s relations with Morocco are well known and
need no elaboration, Morocco has spoken in this
debate, and hence it follows automatically that Algeria must speak in this debate also.
131. Algeria is also in the throes of other rivalries
in North Africa. Recent reports document the “Algerian connection”
in the attack made by Libya on
27 January against the Tunisian city of Gafsa. Jeune
Afrique of 20 February describes how that attack, in
which 40 were killed, was staged from Algeria. For
Algeria to preach to the Council on ways to bring
peace to our region is nothing short of farcical.

force,

125. In conclusion, let me say that a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East cannot be realized unless
Israel withdraws from the occupied Arab territories,
including the Holy City of Jerusalem, and unless the
inalienable national rights of the Palestinian people,
including its right to establish a sovereign independent
State in its homeland, are fully restored. The Council must make every endeavour to attain these objectives. Failure to do so will irrevocably erode the
authority of the Council and the faith of the peaceloving peoples in its capacity to ensure a world order
based on the Charter,

132. We have also been lectured by the representative of Bangladesh. It is fortunate that we do not
model our relations with Arabs in Judaea and Samaria
on the example set by that State, for perhaps no country represented on the Council today has a more
abysmal record than Bangladesh. I will not dwell on
that record here, but would refer representatives to a
devastating report by the Minority Rights Group of
London entitled The Biharis in Bangladesh,
which
details the plight of the remnants of that community,
twice the victims of the most brutal slaughter and
massacre.

126, The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The representative of Israel has asked to speak
in exercise of his right of reply, I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
127. Mr. BLUM (Israel): Yesterday afternoon, I had
occasion to draw attention to a spectacle that has
manifested itself on numerous occasions in the past
and has reduced debates such as this one to the level
of a Punch and Judy show. That phenomenon was,
of course, the competition between countries within

133. For those who remain unconvinced, Amnesty
International has evidence in one of its recent reports
of the “inhuman conditions” in which between
10,000 and 15,000 political prisoners are still held,
15

the majority without trial. It also reports on hundreds
of executions which took place in October 1977 either
without trial or after summary military trials without
any possibility of appeal. According to Amnesty
International, “trials before military tribunals in Bangladesh fall far short of internationally accepted
standards”.

been overtly designed to torpedo the current peace
efforts and to destabilize the region as a whole. The
Soviet Union, which has played a key role in every
outbreak of violence in the Middle East in the last
quarter of a century, continues to supply the “rejectionist front” with huge quantities of the most sophisticated Soviet weapons.

134. But since Bangladesh spoke here, naturally
Pakistan had to speak. One of the more interesting
phenomena one encounters at the United Nations
is the behaviour of representatives whose Governments have just abolished the last vestiges of democracy in their own country, where presidents and other
leading politicians are shot and hanged, where elections are just not held, where rule by military diktat
and military tribunals has been imposed without the
right of appeal to civil courts, where freedom of
speech, freedom of the press and every other personal
freedom and human right are suppressed. Those representatives invariably take it upon themselves to preach
unto others. One such country is Pakistan.

139. For almost 30 years, Israel has drawn attention,
both in the Security Council and in the General Assembly , to Soviet methods of subversion in the Middle
East. For almost three decades, the Soviet Union has
been fuelling the flames of conflict in the region. It
has pumped arms into the area and continues to do
so. Despite protestations to the contrary, the Soviet
Union has no interest in peace in the Middle East, for
it sees its interests best served by the perpetuation of
instability in our region. As a result, the Soviet Union
is now making every effort to torpedo the ongoing
peace process in the Middle East and to prevent the
achievement of a durable settlement of at least one of
the many conflicts in the volatile region in which
Israel is located.

135. One would have thought that, given recent
developments in the Middle East, a country like
Pakistan would have concluded that discretion was
the better part of valour. After all, Pakistan has only
recently woken up to what the real threat to international peace and security is in the region and whence it
comes. In response to this recent and very real threat
to its sovereignty, one would think that Pakistan would
concentrate its efforts on its own defence. However,
even now it is aiding the aggressive designs of others.

140. At long last many States in the Middle East are
coming to recognize the sinister role that the Soviet
Union is playing in our region. This realization has
come about only gradually because of an earlier Soviet
preference for operating through puppets and proxies,
Those puppets have in some cases been Arab rkgimes
linked to the Soviet Union ideologically or by so-called
“treaties of friendship” and equipped by the infiltration of massive quantities of Soviet arms and materiel
sometimes under the benign supervision of Soviet
advisers and instructors. The proxies have been the
ones used by the Soviet Union in other parts of the
world, most conspicuously the Cubans. In the Middle
East as elsewhere, Cuba has been ever ready to act on
behalf of the Soviet Union.

136. For years, Pakistan has been giving vocal and
other support to the Arab rejectionist States. Moreover, this month it came to light that Pakistan is
training PLO terrorists to fly, On 5 February, Reuters
in Damascus conveyed a press report to this effect
from the press agency run by the PLO in Lebanon.
The report quoted a statement made last summer by
Ahmed Jibril, one of Yasser Arafat’s henchmen, to
the effect that the PLO was training terrorists who
were prepared to crash their aircraft on suicide missions against civilian centres in Israel, Pakistan is the
country training those pilots, and thus stands condemned for aiding and abetting the PLO and the
rejectionist Arab States in their belligerent campaign.

141. Just as in 1939 the Soviet Union collaborated
with the Nazis, who vainly sought to destroy the
Jewish people, so today it uses as its proxy the terrorist PLO, which is bent on destroying the Jewish
State of Israel. The Soviet Union is giving the PLO
terrorists its fullest backing, both militarily and
politically. The evidence is overwhelming. Let me
just give the Council a few examples. On 17 September 1979, the New York Post revealed the following:

137. Ever since the appointment of the Commission
established under resolution 446 (1979), we have maintained that its biased mandate was such that its conclusions were predetermined. Everybody who listened
here today to the intemperate, even wild, statement
of the representative of Zambia, a member of that
Commission and a self-appointed historian, cannot
but have the most serious reservations about the work
of a Commission which counts the representative of
Zambia among its members.

“As many as 1,000 Palestinians have undergone
indoctrination and training in either Russian military
or KGB camps . . . The Russians supply the money,
weapons, training, communications and propaganda
to the best and brightest of the Palestinian army’s
officers and officials. And what they learn is passed
on to the troops and quickly applied to the Palestinians’ war against the Israelis”.
In a documentary film entitled “The Russian Connection”, screened recently on American and Canadian television, a PLO defector stated that “The PLO

138. I was not surprised at the statement of the
Soviet representative, since his country’s role has long
16

Council and the General Assembly. Time and again
we have stated, inter alia, that our forces in Lebanon
are part of the Arab deterrent forces agreed upon by
the Council of the League of Arab States. The forces
are at the disposal of the Lebanese Government.

is no longer a revolutionary organization, but a terrorist group manipulated by the Russians for their
own purposes”. But that, of course, is the statement
of a traitor, and Mr. Kharlamov will dismiss it as such.
142, The Soviet Union’s support for the PLO is
quickly translated into outrageous facts. It is Sovietmade Kalashnikov sub-machine guns that are used
by PLO terrorists in their murder raids and incursions
against Israeli civilians, including women and children. It is Soviet-made Katyusha rockets in PLO use
that hit peaceful Israeli villages in the northern part of
my country and threaten the lives of our civilians. We
have just, in the course of this month, come across
irrefutable evidence that the Soviet Union and other
Warsaw Pact countries, in a conscious attempt to
exacerbate the gravity of the situation in the Middle
East, have begun on the unprecedented and extremely
reckless path of supplying T-34 tanks directly to PLO
terrorists in the Sidon region in southern Lebanon.
We also have evidence that those terrorists are
receiving training in tank warfare in Syria and in
Soviet-bloc countries. s

148. The Zionist representative has time and again
tried to fish in troubled waters. He always quotes
those irresponsible persons who defect from their
Governments for personal reasons. I need not elaborate upon his quotation, as that quotation does not in
any way reflect the reality of the situation in Syria.
However, I should like to state that the same person
whom the Israeli representative quoted, stated the
following on the question of the occupied territories:
“The Zionists have skilfully fabricated many
other lame excuses to justify their implanting of
settlements in Arab territory. They have claimed for
themselves a right to a ‘homeland’, forgetting that
their ‘homeland’ was created at the cost of making
another people stateless; they have cried for the
right to protect this ‘homeland’ and to ‘secure its
borders’ by implanting settlements which could
function as ‘security outposts’ against their ‘unfriendly’ Arab neighbours. That is a shameless
distortion of facts.” [212&h meeting, para. 63.1

143. Let me put my point in the simplest possible
terms, The time has come for the Soviet Union to
stop lecturing others about principles concerning the
non-use of force in international relations and nonintervention in the internal affairs of other States-not
to mention principles concerning fundamental human
rights and freedoms, Instead, the time has surely
come for the Soviet Union to admit its own blatant
acts of aggression, in Afghanistan and elsewhere; to
face up to its own gross violations of all the principles
it claims to stand for; and to set its own house in order.

That same person also stated:
“the Zionists have reason to despair. Their ideology,
which rests on the twin pillars of racism and colonial
expansion, is anachronistic in a world in which and
at a time when these beliefs are considered abhorrent
and unacceptable. Yet they shut their eyes to this
inevitability. They wish to turn back the clock and to
drive humankind back to the time when invasions,
plunder and the looting of other peoples’ lands was
the name of the game.” [Ibid., para. 76.1

144. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Russian): The representative of the Syrian Arab Republic

has asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

149. The subject under consideration in the Council
at this moment is the situation in the occupied territories and that is what the Israeli representative should
talk about and try to defend if he has any legal point
to defend or justify. Up to now, he has not been able
to convince the General Assembly, the Security Council, the Commission on Human Rights or any others.
All have time and again condemned the policy of
occupation, expansion, and annexation of the Israeli
authorities. The latest condemnation was made by the
Commission on Human Rights, which adopted a
resolution3 in which it stated that the flagrant violations
by Israel of the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949
were war crimes and an insult to mankind.

145. Mr. MANSOURI (Syrian Arab Republic):
I thank you, Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to speak once again. I feel that I have to make
some points for the sake of clarifying and correcting
the record with regard to the false and distorted
information which was put before this Council during
the debate yesterday and today by the Zionist representative of Israel.
146. There is no doubt that the Council members
have become accustomedto the tactics and procedures
of the Zionist representative. During every debate
in the Council he tries to divert the attention of the
members from the main item under discussion, and he
talks about different and secondary matters which
have nothing at all to do with the discussion.

150. We feei that it is essential that the Council not
be drawn into the discussion of subsidiary matters and
not engage in unrelated subjects.

14’7. I need not reply to whatever he said about my
country’s position with regard to Lebanon. We have
made that position clear many times in the Security

151. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Russian): The representative of the Palestine Liberation
17

I.

--

Organization has asked to make a statement in reply.
I now call on him.
152. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
I am grateful to the representative of the United Kingdom, and I hope he will not mind if I quote a passage
from his statement. He said:

our children. They are, taught,.the use of arms in a
human and just cause; they,.are$.taughthow to defend
their cause so that they can’regain their rights. We do
not send our children to South Africa for the joint
development of nuclear warheads and thejoint carrying
out of nuclear explosions to threaten humanity.
157. With regard to T-34s-and I have read somewhere that the PLO has denied that it is getting
T-34s-someone told me, as a joke, that it would be
much better to send them to a museum. The T-34
became so famous during the war that it is now something of great value.

“As the voting patterns of this Organization clearly
show, the Israeli Government is in a minority of
one in believing that its settlement policy on occupied Arab territory is not in direct contravention
of international law.” [Pam. 97 above.]
I think the British representative has made the question very clear and everybody agrees with him that
Israel stands as a minority of one. Israel wants us
to believe that the rest of the world is wrong. Of course,
I think that it took the world a little while to realize
that supporting the Zionist racist movement was wrong
from the start,

158. We are fighting to restore our rights. But at the
same time we are teaching our children how to be
human, how to coexist and live together with
their neighbours. We are not teaching them how to
“spirit across” an indigenous population, as was suggested by Herzl, the founder of Zionism. We are not
teaching them how to “thin out” a population, as was
suggested by Koenig, the Commissioner of Galilee
-indeed, the same kind of suggestion was made by
Eichmann: he proposed the “thinning out” of the
Jewish population of Vienna. I think that the linkage
between the ideologies is very, very clear. Nor are
we suggesting that anyone should be treated with
“positive segregation”. That kind of suggestion was
made by a certain Mr. Sharon, who was the adviser
on Arab affairs to Prime Minister Begin. No, we are
bringing up a generation with human feelings, a generation that can live together with its neighbours, in
peace.

153. Something was said about the relations of the
Palestine Liberation Organization. In as much as
Israel stands in a minority of one, we gladly note that
the resolution supporting the rights of the Palestinian
people and the representation of the PLO received
117positive votes. We cannot therefore really say that
the rest of the world is wrong here.
154. Of course, the PLO does have relations with the
world. Chairman Arafat visited Portugal and was
received by President Eanes. He visited Spain. He was
in Austria and he has been in almost all the countries
that have relations with us. We are proud of those
relations.

159. We are now dealing with the question of Hebron,
The Council has been told at its last two meetingsthat
there was a massacre in Hebron in 1929. Let me go
to the records and show exactly what happened in
Palestine that led to the 1929massacre.

155. Since we have children who are denied the right
to live in their homes, who are denied the right to go to
school in their own country, who are denied the right
to play in the playground next to their home, we are
proud to have relations with people who open their
universities to us. The Soviet Union, the socialist
countries in Europe, China and many other countries
have been really humane, taking the position that the
Palestinian child should have the opportunity to be
educated. As a result, we have the highest standard
of education in the Middle East. As a matter of fact,
we Palestinians believe that our greatest capital investment is from the shoulders up, that is, what we have in
our heads. That is why we educate our children
because we should like to have an educated and
cultured people, so that when they return to their
homes they can be very, very constructive in the
positive development of their country.

160. In 1920 there were riots, and in 1937 the Palestine Royal Commission-we were then under the
British Mandate-reported on the underlying causes
of those riots. I shall read the following excerpt from
that report:
“It appeared on investigation that the causesof the
trouble had been “(1) The Arabs’ disappointment at
the non-fulfilment of the promises of independence
which they believed to have been given them in
the war; (2) The Arab’s belief that the Balfour
Declaration implied a denial of the right of selfdetermination, and their fear that the establishment
of the National Home would mean a great increase
of Jewish immigration and would lead to their
economic and political subjection to the Jews.“4

156. We have young people studying medicine,
others studying engineering, and still others studying
the humanities. But since we are involved in a war
of national liberation, we have boys going to military
academies-and not only in the Soviet Union, but in
many other countries. Military academies are open to

Thus, it will be seen that our struggle, as long ago
as 1920, was motivated-as admitted by the Royal
Commission-by our desire for self-determination+
18

161, In May 1921 theret,were other riots. The Chief
Justice of Palestine, Sir Thonias Haycraft, who headed
the inquiry commission, ‘found that:
:! ,’
“The fundamental cause of the Jaffa riots and
the subsequent acts of violence was a feeling among
the Arabs of discontent with, and hostility to, the
Jews, due to political and economic causes, and
connected with Jewish immigration, and with their
conception of Zionist policy as derived from Jewish
exponents.“S
162. This led to a further revolt-and this time it was
referred to as a “revolt”, not a “riot”. In 1929 the
Churchill Memorandum was issued. It reaffirmed the
“national home” policy-in other words, the Balfour
Declaration. Palestinian resentment again broke out
into violence in August 1929; it was sparked by a
dispute over the Wailing Wall in Jerusalem, as my
colleague from Jordan explained yesterday. A commission headed by Sir Walter Shaw, a retired Chief
Justice, investigated that outbreak. In its findings on
the causes of the violence, the Shaw Commission
noted that if there was in Palestine in August last
a widespread feeling of resentment amongst the
Arabs at the failure of His Majesty’s Government
to grant them some measure of self-government, it is
at leastprobable that this resentment would show itself
against the Jews, whose presence in Palestine would
be regarded by the Arabs as the obstacle to the fulfilment of their aspirations. The Commission also made
the following observation:
“In less than 10 years”-that is, between 19dO
and 1929--’ ’ three serious attacks have been made
by Arabs on Jews. For 80 years before the first of
these attacks there is no recorded instance of any
similar incidents. It is obvious then that the relations
between the two races during the past decade must
have differed in some material respects from those
which previously obtained. Of this we found ample
evidence. The reports of the Military Court and of
the local Commission which, in 1920 and in 1921
respectively, inquired into the disturbances of those
years, drew attention to the change in the attitude
of the Arab population towards the Jews in Palestine, This was borne out by the evidence tendered
during our inquiry when representatives of all
Parties told us that before the War”-that is, before
1914-“the Jews and Arabs lived side by side if not
in amity, at least with tolerance, a quality which
today is almost unknown in Palestine.“6
163. The passagesI have quoted from the reports of
those Commissions show clearly that there is no
inherent hatred in the heart of the Arab for his Semitic
brother, the Jew. The conflict started when the Zionist
movement clearly showed that its aims and aspirations
were the conquest of the country.
164. On another issue I would say this: I carry with
me as a souvenir a British passport issued to me when

I was still young. It says,“British Passport, Palestine”.
Of course, it contains the words “His Majesty’s High
Commissioner for Palestine”, and so forth. But what
I want to set forth here is that that passport shows
that I was a Palestinian citizen when it was issued
to me. I secured this passport for a good reason.
I wanted to visit Amman and Amman was in Transjordan. I had to go to the Immigration Department,
have a passport issued which reads: “Countries for
which this passport is valid: Syria, Lebanon, Egypt,
Iraq and Transjordan.” I believe somebody knows
exactly what I am driving at. But it was not easy to
take my passport and go to Transjordan. I needed a
visa. Page 7 of my passport reads: “Visa for Transjordan,” So, if anybody wants to ask about Transjordan having its individual identity and Palestine
having its individual identity, I think this passport
-which is an internationally recognized documentwill answer that question.
165. I am sorry to have taken up time, but I thought
those points of clarification of history were important.
166. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from RusThe representative of Jordan has asked to speak
in exercise of his right of reply. I invite him to make
his statement.

sian):

167. Mr, NUSEIBEH (Jordan): While the Council
has been assiduously deliberating on the uncontrollably escalating pace of Israeli colonization of the
occupied territories, the Israeli security forces of
oppression have been equally diligently and ruthlessly
exercising their notorious sadism and brutality against
the Palestinian people, who correctly see their
existence receding into the twilight with every passing
day and are determined to struggle to abort Israel’s
ill-disguised deals and plans.
168. Messages from the West Bank confirm that the
Al-Khalil (Hebron) 1l-day curfew has been imposed
in varying degrees upon other towns and villages
throughout the length and breadth of the whole of the
West Bank and the Gaza Strip. The reports disclose,
for example, that the village of Tammoun Tobas, north
of Nablus, whose lands have been confiscated, has
been subjected to a curfew for a whole week. A
similar curfew was imposed on the Jalazon refugee
camp, at Dhaisha, and other towns and villages.
169. I have listened very carefully to the learned,
objective and succinct statements of the members of
the Council, and there is very little left for me to add.
With such a convergence and almost an identity of
views among the members of the Council, I feel that
any additional pleading on my part would be an inexcusable redundance, the Israeli diversionary and
irrelevant statement notwithstanding.
170. The crux of the problem therefore is primarily,
if not solely, the solemn responsibility and obligation
of the Council to take whatever practical and effective

176. For three days now we have been considering
the question of the extremely dangerous situation in
the occupied Arab territories of Palestine. Did he
answer a single question put in the course of discussion? No, he just adduced all the old “facts”.
I shall give an example. He dragged out the tired old
of+-repeated thesis about the conduct of the Soviet
Union on the eve of the Second World War, I repeat:
I do not know what books he has been reading or
where he was at the time of the war. The peoples of
the Soviet Union saw the war. I saw the war myself;
I know what it was. I know how our people prepared
itself for Ihe Fascist threat-and, furthermore, before
anything actually happened with regard to Germany
our Government appealed to certain Western States
to conclude a military-political alliance. But what was
the attitude of those to whom we appealed? They sent
a mission in a cargo boat for talks with our leaders-a
mission which had no authority to conclude any kind
of agreement. That went on for two weeks, although
there was a grave threat to our country. We would
either fight shoulder to shoulder with other nations to
resist fascism or if we could not find any allies, we
would neutralize the threat of a fascist invasion of our
country by other means. The Soviet Government
acted wisely and as a result we found allies in the
West which could have been our allies earlier on:
Britain, the United States and France, and by our
joint efforts, in the end we smashed fascism, we
removed the threat of Fascist enslavement of the
whole of Europe and the threat of the physical
annihilation of the Jews. But to speak of the war
victims, the 20 million who lost their lives in the
struggle against fascism, as the representative of Israel
has just done is to profane their memory. Those
victims included Jews, who took part in the war against
fascism in our country. He played the old tune, told
the old horror stories of anti-Soviet propaganda. But
perhaps he is alive today precisely becausewe won a
victory over Fascist Germany.

measures are available to it under the Charter as the
guardian of international peace and security, the rejection of illegitimacy and the blatant violation of international law, the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and
the right of all peoples to exist and determine their
future for themselves.
171. We have heard with profound appreciation
and equally deep respect the unanimity, the convergence and even the identity of views of a formidable
array of Member States representing all regions of the
world. What else can one say? Hardly anythingexcept to restate the colossal question which our
people in their captivity and outside are asking.
172. This question is: if the Council is so unequivocally in agreement about the grave danger that is
facing it, what is or should be the cure? It is the moral
and legal duty of the Council to throw its weight
behind international justice, international legality and
international peace by positive action.
173. The PRESIDENT (interpretation frortz RusThe representative of the Soviet Union has
asked to exercise his right of reply. I give him the
floor.

sian):

174. Mr. KHARLAMOV (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation
from Russian): Everyone
participating in the Council’s work, of course, reflects
on the purpose of the representative of Israel with
regard to the question under discussion.
175. I am not sure which statesman of the last century
said: “A real diplomat is not someone who increases
the number of his country’s enemies, but someone
who increases the number of his country’s friends”.
In this regard, I do not want to give an appraisal of
the statement made by the representative of Israel;
he repeats what his predecessor repeated. From all
the verbal baggage he extracts old worn-out ideas and
“facts”, but he has certainly not increased the number
of his country’s friends, I do not know where he went
to school, I do not know what books he has read, but
I have no doubt whatsoever that his head is full of all
kinds of verbal rubbish. Today’s example convinced
me of this. Everybody here in the Council is guilty
and even the very discussion of this item is a kind of
show, in his view, as he was not afraid to say. Representatives of States have met here empowered to take
a serious approach to this question and to assist in
the political settlement of a very difficult and very
urgent matter-the situation in the occupied Arab
territories of Palestine. He did not have a good word
for anyone. He spared only my neighbour from the
United Kingdom-but,
no doubt, there are some
circumstances that I cannot explain. But everyone else
is bad; everybody else is partial, prejudiced and has
some ulterior motive. The only just and innocent party
here is the representative of Israel. No one will believe
that. He really should have thought the matter over,

177. Then the representative of Israel went on to say
that the Soviet Union did not have any interest in
peace in the Middle East. Well, I do not want to offend
him. I should really like to have businesslike relations
with him, just as I do with any representative of a
Member State, but when this monstrous kind of illogical statement is made, I really cannot remain silent,
Which country if not the Soviet Union has the very
deepest interest in seeing peace in the Middle East-a
durable and stable peace? After all, the Middle East
is an area next door to us, We have links to other countries through that region. And which country is still
doing everything possible to see that peace is consolidated here? We in the Soviet Union have spared
no effort to see that a comprehensive peaceful settlement of the quarrels between Israel and the Arabs is
achieved. We proposed holding a conference. If those
proposals do not suit Israel, let its representative
say so frankly. This is no time for shilly-shallyin&
Perhaps the Soviet proposals are unacceptable to
Israel, then he should explain why. Together with the
20

United States we agreed to make efforts to bring
about a peaceful settlement in the Middle East. It is
not our fault that the United States was busy with other
matters and did not go along with us. There are reasons
for that. But the representative of Israel is silent about
it, and he knows why he remains silent. Separate
agreements do not lead to peace and we cannot support them.

181. I apologize for speaking in such a rambling way,
I had not prepared my statement. I just wanted to
reply to the questions which were raised here. The
representative of Israel accused us of avoiding the
questions which were relevant and of interest to this
discussion. But it is he and those who support him
that have avoided the questions and closed their ears
to the valuable statements we have heard, aimed at
finding a just and peaceful settlement of the question
now before the Council.

178. The representative of Israel accusesus of helping
the Arab peoples. Yes, we help those who want it,
we do not impose our help on anyone. We are helping
the Arab peoples, This is noble assistance, because it
is not designed to help some State to occupy land but
to prevent a new attack by Israel on neighbouring
Arab States. Let him refute that fact! Everything
he and his predecessors have said here was all taken
out of the gutter press, But the fact still remains that
we are giving assistance only for defensive purposes,
to defend the other countries against the aggression
on the part of his country and its supporters. The question arises: his country is being given arms valued at
billions of dollars, Are they for offensive of for defensive purposes? They are not for defensive purposes
but for offensive purposes, We have even seen that
in the American press. I repeat, we are helping the
Arab peoples but we are not imposing our assistance
on anyone. We are helping those peoples who want to
defend themselves and consolidate their defences
-and that is all. Our assistance was mentioned here
by the representative of the PLO.

182. I think that had the representative of Israel
made a positive contribution of some kind, he would
have been taking a step forward towards what we all
want-a just solution. But if he does not want to do
that, the Council must itself find a solution which
would force Israel to comply with its decisions and
those of the General Assembly.
183. The PRESIDENT (I’nterpretarion from Russian); The representative of Bangladesh wishes to
speak in exercise of his right of reply. I give him the
floor.
184. Mr, R. RAHMAN (Bangladesh): I have hesitated to speak in exercise of the right of reply because
this is the obvious and much used vehicle by which
Israel seeks to divert attention from the issue at hand.
185. Israel’s distorted and false allegations against
my country, dredged up periodically from its outdated
dossiers, do not deserve a reply. This is not the
subject under consideration, as has been repeated?y
pointed out. The question at issue is the situation m
the occupied Arab territories. There is no more obvious
proof of Israel’s guilt than its attempts wilfully to
obscure this issue and divert attention from it. This is
the matter to which Israel must address itself, instead
of indulging in indiscriminate and wild attacks against
virtually every member of the international community .

179. It would be better if the representative of Israel
saidsomething about the substanceof the matter. What
does Israel want? He does not say. Israel is gradually
increasing the number of colonial settlements in Palestine and in the Arab countries. A little today; more
tomorrow; and some day there will be no Arabs there.
The word “bantustanization” was used. Well, that is a
very correct term. But the matter evidently goes
further they want to exterminate the Arabs, they want
them to move to neighbouring countries so they can
declare the whole territory Israeli.

186. The PRESIDENT

(interpretation

from

Rus-

sian): The representative

of Zambia wishes to speak
in exercise of his right of reply. I give him the floor.

180. Who is threatening whom? Are the Israelis
threatening the Arabs or are the Arabs threatening
the Israelis? Are the Israelis threatening the Palestinians or are the Palestinians threatening the Israelis?
The Israelis have dispersed millions of people throughout the world by pursuing an inhumane policy against
them in the occupied Arab territories. If the representative of Israel is going to rely on the Bible as a
source for justifying the rights of the Israelis, he is
going rather far, Centuries ago, a very wise man said:
“‘When Adam delved, and Eve span, where were then
those gentlemen who like to govern countries?” He
does not have to go back so far. We could quote a
passagefrom the Bible which slows how the people to
whom he refers as “forefathers” acted in regard to
conquered cities and peoples, I think the Israelis have
inherited their present policy from their “forefathers”.

187. Mr. MUTUKWA (Zambia): As those who
preceded me in exercising the right of reply have
stated, it is a great pity that we have been drawn into
a situation in which the Israelis wanted us to be.
188. I shall make only a few points. We consider it
to be an astonishing and shameless act on the part of
the representative of Israel to abuse the privilege of
his country’s being a Member of the United Nations
by delivering a barrage of irrelevant statements whose
aim is to divert the Council from its main business.
This form of undisguised contempt by the Israeli representative is a manifestation of his country’s defiance
of and lack of respect for the very institution of the
United Nations.
21

196. The PRESIDENT
(intarprefafion
from Russ&):
I give the floor to the representative of the
Soviet Union to speak in exercise of his right of reply,

189. I want to inform the representative
of Israel
that no amount of insult and abuse will ever deter
Zambia and its spokesmen from speaking out when
principles are at stake. The Israeli coionization
of the
occupied Arab territories is a form of colonialism.
It
is domination,
it is oppression and it is racism. All
these things we categorically reject and condemn.

197. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation
from Russian): I have not
asked to speak to exchange courtesies. Once again,
I must say that the approach to this very important
question of the history leading up to the Second World
War as expressed by the representative of Israel is
entirely fallacious. But I do not want to go into this
question any further. If he so wishes, I would be ready
at another time to talk to him about it and even to give
him some reference books to read in addition to those
that he has apparently already read.

190. Let me, reiterate that Israel would be well
advised, together with its representatives,
to desist
from fighting against history. Israel is indeed swimming
against a current. It is attempting to fight the modern
tide of freedom and independence.
191. We are aware in southern Africa that Israel has
been collaborating
for a long time with the racist
regime of Pretoria. It is that kind of collaboration
with
the racist regime of Pretoria that has led to the killing
of a number of people in our countries.

198.

The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from RusThe representative
of Pakistan has asked to
speak in exercise of his right of reply. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

sian):

192. I shall not engage in the debate about the competence of the Israeli representative
to evaluate and
assess the contributions
of representatives
at the
United Nations. At least, I shall appeal to him to be
decent enough to see that he is not competent to do
that. If he continues to engage in abuse, my delegation
will look for methods of ensuring that that abuse is
put to an end.

199. Mr. R. KHAN (Pakistan): I do not wish to take
up the precious time of the Council and will only
address myself briefly to certain unwarranted comments of the Israeli representative.
200. The way the Israeli representative tried to
slander almost every country whose representative
has spoken in the Council leads one to believe that he
considers that Zionist Israel is the only exponent of
human values and international morality. Proceeding
from the assumption of that belief, which regrettably
appears to be correct, it becomes understandable why
the Israeli representative
does not, feel obliged to
answer the important questions about which the Council is so deeply concerned. For instance, he does not
feel obliged to explain why the Israeli authorities
are continuing
to expel the Palestinians from their
homeland, inhabited by them since time immemorial,
and why the Palestinians who’are living under occupation are being subjected to unrelenting persecution and
are being deprived of their basic human rights. He
also does not feel obliged to explain why Israel, as a
matter of official policy, subjects the Palestinian camps
in Lebanon to indiscriminate
and brutal attacks, murdering innocent men, women and children. He also
does not feel obliged to explain the wanton Israeli
acts of sacrilege in the occupied territories.

193. The PRESIDENT
(interprefafion
J%TI Russ&): The representative of Israel has asked to speak
in exercise of his right of reply. I invite him to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
194. Mr. BLUM
(Israel): I shall be very brief. As
I already stated yesterday, I shall not compete with
the logic and originality
of Mr. Kharlamov,
the wellknown biblical
scholar, or with his standards of
courtesy. I shall not stoop to the low level of his style.
If he so wishes, however, we can exchange our respective curricula vitae. Mr. Kharlamov is no doubt
an excellent diplomat. He has significantly increased
the number of the friends of his country here.
195. Mr. Kharlamov has no need to remind the Jewish
people of the events of the Second World War, let
alone to try to misrepresent them, into the bargain.
As everyone knows, the Jewish people was the
primary target of the Nazi hordes before and during
the Second World War. Six million Jews, more than
one third of my people, perished during the Second
World War, the war that broke out in the wake of the
treaty that Mr. Kharlamov’s
country concluded with
Nazi Germany.
Among those 6 million Jews were
1.5 million children. Moreover, 1.5 million Jews fought
in the Allied ranks against the Nazi enemy and thus
helped to bring this Organization
into being. In case
he has forgotten it, let me remind the representative
of the Soviet Union that hundreds of thousands of
those Jewish soldiers fought in the ranks of the Red
Army.

201. The representative
of what has just been described as’s minority of one should seriously ponder
on these questions if he cares to understand why Israel
stands universally
condemned by the international
community
for its policies, which are colonialist and
expansionist in essence.
202. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from R~rsSian): I call on the representative of the Palestine
Liberation
Organization,
who has asked to make a
statement in reply.
22

that 40 prominent Egyptians, including two former
Vice-Presidents
and two former Prime Ministers,
have signed a petition calling for a boycott against
Israel. The petition was read at a press conference.
It said: “We are calling on our fellow citizens to
impose a total boycott at all levels in legitimate selfdefence”. The signatories also included a former
Deputy Prime Minister, six former Ministers and a
deputy editor-in-chief
of the semi-official newspaper

203. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
It is very, very low and mean for the racist Zionist
to claim to be the representative of the victims of war.
There were millions of people who were victims of the
holocaust. I could understand it if one of the leaders
of the Warsaw ghetto uprising came here and spoke
in the name of those heroes who fought the Nazis.
But I cannot understand in any way that someone
who is financed partly by the Israeli Bank Leumi,
which made its capital from the blood money of the
Jews in Europe, should sit here and claim that he
speaks on behalf of those victims of nazism. I cannot
understand that someone who is dropping bombs and
killing Palestinian children should claim to be speaking
on behalf of the victims of nazism. I cannot understand that one who belongs to a party that has perpetrated and participated in the crime of Deir Yassin,
killing 250 unarmed men, women and children, should
come here and claim that he is speaking on behalf of
those victims. Enough of that, Sir. The Zionists do
not represent the Jews. Let us go further. Someone
who signs a treaty, a treaty that is blessed by the United
States, that denies almost 4 million Palestinians the
right to be a nation and condemns 2 million Palestinians
to perpetual exile, cannot really speak as a Jew should
speak. He is a Zionist; he is not a Jew,

Al-Ahram.

206. For the Palestinians this is an infamous day.
There are 2 million Palestinians living or existing oulside Palestinian territory, and by virtue of the treaty
that was put into effect today they are condemned
to perpetual exile and, what is worse, to perpetual
bombardment
and shelling by the Zionists. And yet
we are here appealed to or talked to and our consciences are aroused about the victims of the holocaust. But what are we facing here? We are facing a
holocaust, a planned holocaust, with 4 million Palestinians as the victims.
The meeting rose at 7.15 p.m.

204. This is an infamous day, a day on which, in
Jerusalem, the representative of Sadat has been to
deliver his credentials. In Jerusalem, a place that even
the United Nations does not recognize as part of the
Zionist State, the representative
of Sadat goes to
deliver his credentials.

Su~&wwr~t

205. There are odd things happening. But we are glad
that thousands of Egyptians marched in the streets of
Cairo today, carrying hundreds of thousands of Palestinian flags in protest. And Reuters has reported

August, 1929, Cmd. 3530, London, H.M. Stationery Offke, 1930,
chap. XIII.

NOTES

1 A/34/542, annex, sect. 1, para. 130.
2 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, p. 287.
3 Official Records

md Social Council, 1979,
sect. A, resolution 1 A (XXXV).
4 Palestine
Roynl
Commission,
Report,
Cmd. 5479, London,
H.M. Stationery Office, 1937, part I, chap. III, para, 17.
s Ibid., para.-18.
6 Report

23

of the Ecor~omic

No. 6, chap. XXIV,

qf the

Commission

on the Palestim

Disfurbnnces

of

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore
or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATlONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sent en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. lnformez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
B : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes. New York ou Genke.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estln en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes de1 mundo, Cons&e a su librero o dirijase a: Nacioncs Unidas, Section de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

00400

83-61462-August

19863.W
