S/2015/902

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 November 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan
(covering the period from 20 August to 9 November 2015)

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2241
(2015), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) until 15 December 2015 and requested me to report on the
implementation of the mandate within 45 days. The present report provides an update
to my previous report dated 21 August 2015 (S/2015/655) and covers developments
from 20 August to 9 November.

II. Political developments
South Sudan peace process
2.
Following the signing in Addis Ababa on 17 August of the Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan by the leaders of the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition (SPLM/A in Opposition) and the
former detainees, international and regional partners intensified efforts to persuade the
President, Salva Kiir, to sign the peace agreement within the 15-day period granted
for additional consultations. During a ceremony on 26 August in Juba, the President
signed the agreement in the presence of regional leaders and other representatives of
the international community. The Government distributed detailed reservations
concerning 16 provisions of the agreement.
3.
Subsequently, within the 72-hour deadline, the President and the former VicePresident, Riek Machar, each decreed a permanent ceasefire, instructing their forces to
cease all military operations, to remain in their current positions and to return fire only
in self-defence. The ceasefire came into effect on 29 August at midnight. The
agreement was unanimously ratified by the National Legislative Assembly and adopted
by the National Liberation Council of SPLM/A in Opposition on 10 September.
4.
Although delayed by a week, a workshop on the permanent ceasefire and
transitional security arrangements, mandated by the peace agreement, was held in
Addis Ababa from 13 to 18 September. The parties, among other things, reached
consensus on the withdrawal of allied State security actors, the establishment of a
national architecture for the unification of forces and the introduction of monitoring

15-20214 (E)

271115

*1520214*

S/2015/902

mechanisms, including a joint technical committee and a ceasefire tra nsition security
arrangements monitoring mechanism. The workshop ended, however, without the
endorsement by SPLM/A in Opposition of security arrangements for Juba or of a
concept for the joint integrated police. To facilitate further consultations on the l atter,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) mediation team convened a
follow-up meeting, from 21 October to 3 November, during which SPLM/A in
Opposition signed the minutes of the workshop and the parties agreed on the
composition of the transitional security arrangements for Juba.
5.
On 26 September, the African Union Peace and Security Council issued a
communiqué in which it expressed its commitment to supporting the implementation
of the peace agreement, together with IGAD, the United Nations and other
international stakeholders. It also requested the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission to release the report of the African Union Commission of Inquiry on
South Sudan and the separate opinion, for public information, and to proceed with the
establishment of an African-owned and African-led hybrid court. The Council also
endorsed transitional justice processes and mechanisms, encompassing truth -telling on
human rights violations, reparations, national consultations and traditional jus tice and
conflict resolution mechanisms in accordance with formal accountability processes.
The report was released on 27 October.
6.
On 29 September, on the margins of the seventieth session of the General
Assembly, I hosted a high-level event on South Sudan to galvanize international
support for the implementation of the peace agreement. The meeting was co -chaired by
the Deputy Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Erastus Mwencha, and the
Chair of IGAD and Prime Minister of Ethiopia, Hailemariam Dessalegn. The President
of South Sudan addressed the event from Juba via video link. The Vice-President,
James Wani Igga, Riek Machar and the SPLM Secretary-General, Pagan Amum, the
last-mentioned representing the former detainees, attended the event. In the final
communiqué, the participants called upon the signatories to the agreement to proceed
with its full implementation and urged the international community to address the
humanitarian funding gap, which now stands at $687 million, among other
recommendations.
Other political developments
7.
On 8 September, the National Legislative Assembly adopted the national budget
for fiscal year 2015/16, with an approximate ceiling of 10.3 billion South Sudanese
pounds ($3.2 billion at the official exchange rate of 3.16 South Sudanese pounds to
the dollar). While an amount of 6.8 billion South Sudanese pounds is expected to
come from national oil and non-oil revenue, some 3.8 billion South Sudanese pounds
will be required in the form of grants and loans from e xternal sources.
8.
On 2 October, the Political Parties Council issued a press statement in which it
announced a political party registration process from 15 October 2015 to 15 January
2016. It, among other things, noted that, in accordance with the Politi cal Parties Act of
2012, the requirements for registering political parties included membership of no
fewer than 500 members in at least 8 of 10 states.
9.
On the same day, in an address to the nation, the President announced the
issuance of an establishment order (No. 36/2015) that would create 28 states. He said
that his decision was aimed at devolving power and bringing resources closer to the
people, reducing government expenditure and promoting development. While the

2/18

15-20214

S/2015/902

order was well received by some communities, the reactions from SPLM/A in
Opposition, the former detainees, a national alliance of opposition political parties and
several other political and civil society groups reflected concerns over the order ’s
constitutionality, its timing and its potential impact on the implementation of the
peace agreement.
10. The IGAD Special Envoys, the Troika and the European Union criticized the
decision and urged the President to defer its implementation until the Transitional
Government of National Unity had been formed. On 16 October, the national alliance
of opposition political parties petitioned the Supreme Court to stay the execution of
and invalidate the order. On 20 October, the Council of Ministers introduced a
constitutional amendment seeking parliamentary consent for the creation of additional
states.
11. On 16 October, the President, in his capacity as Chair of SPLM, convened an
extraordinary meeting of the party’s National Liberation Council. The Council
decided to dissolve the SPLM general secretariat and announced that an extraordinary
national convention would be convened a month later to endorse the party’s
constitution and manifesto.

III. Security situation
12. The declaration by both government and opposition military leaders of a
permanent ceasefire notwithstanding, clashes in the greater Upper Nile region
continued during the reporting period. On 17 August, a splinter group of former
SPLM/A in Opposition members calling itself the Federal Democratic Party and its
military wing the South Sudan Armed Forces issued a statement in which it warned
that it would not respect any peace agreement negotiated without it.
Unity State
13. The tense security situation in Unity State was characterized by numerous
ceasefire violations, with fighting between government forces (the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army) and opposition forces primarily taking place in Rubkona, Koch and
Leer counties. In Rubkona County, government forces regained control of Nhialdiu on
25 August after opposition forces had temporarily gained control of the area on
23 August. In late August, opposition forces told UNMISS that government soldiers
from Thar Jath had attacked the town of Koch and surrounding villages, causing them
to withdraw to nearby swampland. On 13 September, tensions rose when fighting
between government and opposition forces broke out in the town of Guit, killing at
least 5 government soldiers and wounding 20. On 2 October, opposition forces
launched coordinated offensives on the towns of Leer and Koch, reportedly managing
to hold Leer for a few hours. Small-scale clashes between government and opposition
forces were also reported in the village of Jazeera, Rubkona County, and government
forces reportedly occupied the opposition-controlled area of Buaw, Koch County, for
a few days. Reports of mass rape and abduction of women and girls accompanied
those offensives and counter-offensives. On 10 October, government forces aligned
with the South Sudan Liberation Army and armed young people attacked opposition
forces in Jazeera, Ding Ding, Ngop and Kaljak, Rubkona County. On 25 October,
government forces, supported by armed Koch Jagiey Nuer young people, carried out
what was reported to be a particularly brutal offensive in Pilling, Adok, Tutnyang,

15-20214

3/18

S/2015/902

Lual and Gando, capturing and killing 53 young people. Civilians continued to be
targeted, with rape, killings, looting and burning of tukuls reportedly widespread.
Upper Nile State
14. In Upper Nile State, the security situation remained volatile, with government
and opposition forces remaining in close proximity to each other on the west bank of
the River Nile near Malakal. Clashes occurred on 31 August when three government
barges carrying troops travelling north on the river clashed with opposition forces in
Fangak County, Jonglei State, and Papojo near Tonga, Panyikang County. The
opposition forces claimed to have destroyed one barge and captured another, while the
third reportedly retreated. They also claimed to have captured 115 soldiers. On
2 September in Malakal, two government helicopters were observed firing rockets
towards the west bank of the river and explosions were heard from the direction of the
villages of Lelo, Detang and Warjok. Government forces reportedly crossed the river,
and the following day, firing was observed from their positions towards the west bank
as a government cargo aircraft landed at the airstrip. On 7 September, opposition
forces launched a counter-attack using barges to retake the lost villages. An UNMISS
delegation travelled to Tonga on 17 September to meet an opposition general, Johnson
Olony. It confirmed the presence of the captured soldiers and observed a sunken
barge. Early in October, government forces in Malakal were observed firing towards
the west bank and additional troops later crossed the river into the areas of Lelo and
Warjok. Olony later claimed that his forces had repulsed that attack.
15. In Maban County, skirmishes have twice occurred since 25 September between
government and opposition forces in Liang, 15 km south of Bunj. Furthermore,
fighting was reported in Tor Gwang, Wadekona and Gabat, located north of Kaka,
Manyo County, between government forces and a Shilluk militia affiliated with them.
The clashes reportedly broke out after Shilluk militiamen were asked to hand over all
heavy weaponry in their possession to the government forces. The Shilluk general,
Yoanes Okij, published a press statement in which he established a new group, the
“Tiger Faction New Forces”, following growing mistrust between the two forces. The
tensions were exacerbated by Establishment Order No. 36/2015, in which the division
of ancestral Shilluk lands was proposed.
Western Equatoria State
16. Tensions remained high in Yambio County following clashes involving
government forces, the national police, a local self-defence group called the Arrow
Boys and local young people early in August. In October, shootings were reported in
the town of Yambio amid rumours of the recruitment of hundreds of young people by
an unknown armed group. The removal of the former state governor in mid-August
exacerbated tensions in several areas. In Mundri West, clashes between government
forces broke out in Khor Gullu in mid-September, causing civilian displacement.
Three civilians and six soldiers were reportedly killed in a related ambush. Early in
October, fighting again broke out in Mundri West between government forces and an
unknown armed group, continuing throughout the month. Heavy machine guns, rifles
and rocket-propelled grenades were used by both sides. In response to those clashes,
the Government sent reinforcements from Mvolo. While most civilians fled, more
than 700 internally displaced persons gathered outside an UNMISS temporary
operating base seeking protection. In Maridi, shooting incidents by unknown gunmen
resulting in five civilian casualties were reported in September. Early in November, in

4/18

15-20214

S/2015/902

Source Yubu, Tambura County, clashes also erupted between government forces and
local young people following an alleged assault on a civilian by sold iers at the local
market.
Central Equatoria State
17. During the reporting period, tensions increased in Lainya and Juba counties.
UNMISS received reports of an attack on a police station in the town of Lainya on
24 August and that an attack on government trucks in a nearby village had left at least
one soldier dead. On 11 September, following reports of clashes in Wonduruba Payam
between government troops from Lainya and opposition elements, government forces
are alleged to have burned homes, looted shops and targeted civilians whom they
suspected of harbouring opposition elements. Reports suggest that 11,000 civilians
fled their homes towards Lainya County or into the bush in September. Government
forces deployed in the area fall outside the regular command and control structure,
making it difficult for the state authorities to solve the crisis. The antagonism between
the local community and government forces increased, with displaced persons in
Lainya and in the bush fearful of heavy-handed government operations.
Intercommunal conflict
18. UNMISS continued to receive reports of intercommunal violence in Lakes and
Warrap States. Early in September in Lakes State, six people were reportedly killed
when young people from the Jiek section of the Dinka Agar from Yirol East County
raided a cattle camp in Akot Payam, Rumbek East County. On 10 October in Warrap
State, 94 people were reportedly killed and 144 injured during fighting between the
Akok community of Nabagok Payam and the Luac Jang community fro m Makuac
Payam, both in Tonj East County, reportedly sparked by the appointment of a new
county commissioner. Tensions have also been reported at the borders between
Warrap and Unity States. On 29 August, three people were reportedly killed when
armed men from Unity State attacked Tonj North Payam in Gogrial East County. The
situation in Jonglei State remained relatively calm, but tensions persisted between the
Lou Nuer and Murle communities. In a bid to placate local communities, the Greater
Pibor Administrative Area Chief Administrator, David Yau Yau, emphasized that the
community had no intention of attacking its neighbours. Nevertheless, in late
September, a Murle group from Likuangole killed an opposition lieutenant colonel
while raiding Bumath Payam, Akobo County.

IV. Humanitarian situation
19. More than 2.3 million persons are currently displaced by the conflict,
comprising 1.66 million who are internally displaced, 178,906 of whom are residing
in six UNMISS sites for the protection of civilians, and 642,199 who have sought
refuge in neighbouring countries. In addition, South Sudan continues to host 265,700
refugees. In Unity State, the fighting south of Bentiu on 2 October caused civilians to
seek refuge to the north in the UNMISS site, to the south in Nyal and Ganyiel and
near Old Fangak in Jonglei State. In Upper Nile State, internally displaced persons
from the west bank of the River Nile continued to arrive in Malakal, although in
smaller numbers than in August. In the Equatorias, civilians were displaced by
fighting in and around Katigiri and Wonduruba, Central Equatoria State, and Mundri,

15-20214

5/18

S/2015/902

Western Equatoria State. The national caseload of separated, unaccompanied or
missing children now exceeds 10,000.
20. Food security in South Sudan continues to deteriorate, with Unity, Jonglei and
Upper Nile States being the worst affected. It is noted in the most recent Integrated
Food Security Phase Classification report that an estimated 3.9 million people, or
34 per cent of the population, are severely food and nutrition insecure (3.1 million in
phase 3 (crisis) and 800,000 in phase 4 (emergency)) and were unable to meet their
food needs in September, an increase of 80 per cent compared with the same period in
2014. Of particular concern are an estimated 30,000 people in Unity State, classified
as in phase 5 (catastrophe), with deterioration into famine considered likely if
humanitarian actors are not given immediate access. In September and early October,
preventable diseases continued to spread, causing illness and death. Malaria was the
main cause of death reported among internally displaced persons, and at least
30 counties have exceeded the epidemic threshold. A measles outbreak was declared
at an UNMISS protection site in Juba on 1 October after three cases were confirmed.
Cholera cases rose to 1,818, including 47 deaths, with a case fatality rate of 2.58 per
cent, in Juba, Kajo Kaji and Bor. Fewer cases and deaths have been reported to date in
2015 compared with 2014, however.
21. Humanitarian partners worked to expand the response at the UNMISS pr otection
sites in Malakal and Bentiu, with specific efforts being made to tackle child mortality
at the latter. The United Nations Children’s Fund and Médecins sans frontières
undertook an intensive anti-malaria campaign, treating 16,000 children. At the site in
Malakal, health partners completed the second round of a cholera immunization
campaign, reaching more than 42,300 internally displaced persons. Partners have now
provided nearly 44,200 people with food, including 15,500 new arrivals, while 8,300
children under 5 years of age have received nutrition supplements. An integrated
polio, measles and vitamin A campaign began on 7 October, targeting 7,350 children.
As at October, more than 3.4 million of a targeted 4.6 million persons had received
humanitarian assistance in 2015.
22. Insecurity and active hostility towards and harassment of aid workers, in addition
to the looting of supplies and misuse of humanitarian assets, have characterized the
operating environment. During the resumption of fighting in Unity State early in
October, humanitarian compounds were looted and aid workers threatened, forcing
humanitarian partners to relocate their staff. At least one aid worker was killed during
the fighting. In Juba, a rise in crime has had a major impact on humanitarian operations
owing to the loss of assets and threats against staff. There have been at least
32 intrusions into non-governmental organization compounds since 20 August, in
addition to those at the International Organization for Migration and Uni ted Nations
Children’s Fund compounds. Incidents in Juba have reached alarming levels, especially
in July when multiple attempted break-ins became a daily occurrence. In September, a
humanitarian aid worker was killed by intruders, bringing the number of aid workers
killed since December 2013 to at least 41. Moreover, female aid workers have also
reported increasing incidents and threats of sexual violence.
23. As previously reported, the humanitarian community revised the humanitarian
response plan for 2015 in June, taking into account the deepening vulnerabilities and
new humanitarian requirements. The revised plan requires $1.63 billion to assist
4.8 million people with life-saving aid in 2015. Funding constraints remain a key
challenge, however. As at 6 November, only some $945 million (58 per cent) had been

6/18

15-20214

S/2015/902

pledged against the total requirements of $1.6 billion, leaving a funding gap of
$687 million.

V. Implementation of the Mission’s reprioritized mandated tasks
A.

Protection of civilians
24. The signing of the peace agreement and the declaration of a permanent ceasefire
notwithstanding, the need to protect civilians remains high and in some areas
continues to increase. In line with its mandate, UNMISS continued efforts to ensure
that civilians were protected from the threat of physical violence, to deter or respond
to such violence, to maintain public safety and security within the sites for the
protection of civilians and to coordinate with police and civil society actors on
protection-focused activities. Implementation follows a three-tiered approach.
25. Under tier one, protection through dialogue and engagement, UNMISS
continued to work closely with stakeholders to assist local conflict resolution efforts.
During the reporting period, UNMISS civil affairs teams held 413 meetings with local
authorities, community leaders, young people and women throughout the country to
identify threats and mitigating measures. UNMISS also led 23 conflict management,
mitigation and resolution workshops for community, traditional and faith leaders,
women, young people, cattle keepers and internally displaced persons both inside and
outside protection sites and undertook additional community engagement in gathering
early warning information on political changes such as the establishment order on the
creation of 28 states. UNMISS also supported dialogue activities led by the
Government, community leaders and non-governmental organizations, including by
partnering on four workshops aimed at addressing the root causes of conflict with a
cross-section of community leaders and members, including women.
26. The Mission continued to engage with community leaders at protection sites on
intercommunal issues in Unity and Upper Nile States. Activities included a conflict
management workshop in Malakal for women leaders, training sessions for new
community watch group recruits and the promotion of dialogue between community
leaders and state authorities in Bentiu.
27. In Rumbek, Lakes State, and Tonj North County, Warrap State, UNMISS
assisted communities in identifying causes of intercommunal conflict and remedies
while emphasizing the role of women in resolving and preventing conflict and in
peacebuilding. In Jur River County, Western Bahr el-Ghazal State, workshops
addressed land disputes and pastoral migration. In Western Equatoria State, UNMISS
worked with faith leaders to mediate tensions between local authorities, government
forces and armed young people in Mundri West County and facilitated discussions on
land issues in Ibba County. It continued to nurture relations between the Greater Pibor
Administrative Area and neighbouring communities. With the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei, it facilitated dialogue between Sudanese pastoralists
(Misseriya and Rizeigat) and South Sudanese and Abyei stakeholders (Dinka Malual,
Dinka Twic and Dinka Ngok) with regard to the migration of Sudanese pastoralists
into South Sudan through Abyei and Northern Bahr el-Ghazal State.
28. Under tier two, provision of physical protection, UNMISS was providing
protection to some 180,000 internally displaced persons at six protection sites,

15-20214

7/18

S/2015/902

including some 100,000 in Bentiu, more than 47,000 in Malakal and 28,000 in Juba,
as at 9 November. The number of civilians seeking safety at the sites reached nearly
202,000 in late August. While a number of displaced persons have since voluntarily
left, persisting insecurity and food shortages have led to an influx in Malakal, where
an additional 12,000 persons have been registered since late Aug ust, including 2,500
new arrivals from Wau Shilluk.
29. During the reporting period, 273 security incidents were reported at the sites,
including armed robbery, domestic violence, rape, armed incursions, ethnic tensions
and threats against humanitarian and UNMISS staff. Six UNMISS police personnel
were injured during efforts to maintain public safety and security at the sites in Bentiu
and Juba.
30. To mitigate the concerns, UNMISS adjusted security measures by undertaking
preventive patrolling and community policing activities, actively involving
community watch groups and referring events to community-led informal mitigation
and dispute resolution mechanisms. The Mission also streamlined referral pathways
and case management with protection partners to improve emergency response
services and effectively address protection concerns. It continued to mitigate external
security threats to site residents through targeted hotspot patrolling, which provides a
degree of safety and freedom of movement around the sites.
31. UNMISS continued to operate four holding facilities at the sites in Juba, Bentiu,
Malakal and Bor for perpetrators of incidents affecting public security at the sites. As
at 8 November, 45 suspects, including a woman, were being held. According to the
framework agreed to by the Government and UNMISS for the transfer of suspects
from the sites to the national authorities, UNMISS handed over four suspects to the
national police on 7 October. The individuals were, however, released by the
Government shortly thereafter. The issue was raised with the Prosecutor General, who
acknowledged that due process should have been followed after the handover, terming
the release an error on the part of the police officer in charge of the investigation.
Instructions have been issued to rearrest the individuals so that due process can be
followed.
32. UNMISS has intensified its outreach into areas affected by conflict and those
with high concentrations of internally displaced persons. During the reporting period,
it conducted 5,666 short-duration, 214 long-duration, 52 dynamic air and
407 integrated patrols. It launched Operation Unity 2, carrying out road and air patrols
into the central and southern counties of Unity State, in particular south of Koch
County and north of Panyijar County. The Mission is working towards the short -term
establishment of a force presence in Leer, southern Unity State, to be followed by the
establishment of a temporary operating base in the medium term. UNMISS also
established a temporary operating base near Mundri, Western Equatoria State, where
recent violence resulted in the displacement of the local community, with some
700 people seeking shelter near the base. Following the outbreak of violence in
Wonduruba Payam in Juba County, Central Equatoria State, UNMISS engaged in an
integrated field mission to the area between 17 and 19 September and found it
deserted but for government commandos. Although a second UNMISS patrol on
7 October was denied access by government forces, other patrols are being planned.
Furthermore, the UNMISS early warning system successfully assisted in patrol
planning to pre-empt and reduce the scale of potential conflict.

8/18

15-20214

S/2015/902

33. In support of UNMISS and humanitarian partners, the United Nations Mine
Action Service conducted a route survey and explosive ordnance clearance for an
UNMISS patrol to Dhorbor, south of Bentiu, Unity State. It also investigated an
unexploded ordnance accident that killed a child and injured three others in Bentiu
and an anti-tank landmine accident in Torit, Eastern Equatoria State. From 20 August
to 9 November, the Service cleared 1,126,108 m 2 of land and destroyed
187 landmines, 7,212 explosive remnants of war and 160,671 rounds of small arms
ammunition. It provided risk education to 51,405 civilians (18,658 boys, 14,658 girls,
9,650 men and 8,439 women). It also assisted in providing improvised explosive
device training for 600 staff of an UNMISS-contracted security company securing the
Mission’s premises in Juba.
34. Under tier three, UNMISS and protection partners continued to support the
creation of a protective environment. In support of the confidence and trust-building
policing strategy of the national police, UNMISS began a review of the police
integrated awareness-raising programme to train officers in community policing
techniques for deployment in areas of potential voluntary return. The review is aimed
at accommodating the additional officers to be deployed as part of the joint integrated
police in Juba.
35. Consistent with Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), UNMISS monitored
the participation of women in IGAD-led peace processes and, more broadly, their
representation in appointed offices, given their limited level of participation in peace
processes, representation in local government and involvement in public decision making. It continued to engage in advocacy and capacity-building to promote the
participation of women in conflict prevention and resolution and peacebuilding
activities.
36. In support of transitional solutions for displaced persons currently residing in
protection sites and following the signing of the peace agreement, engagement is
continuing with the displaced and their host communities on their perceptions of
peace and potential return and reintegration.

B.

Monitoring and investigating human rights
37. UNMISS continued to investigate reports of violations of international human
rights and humanitarian law, as well as human rights abuses, in connection with the
conflict. Interviews with internally displaced persons arriving at the protection site in
Bentiu from central and southern Unity State indicate that the hostilities in those areas
have resulted in serious human rights violations by government and opposition forces,
as well as armed groups. Reported violations included killings, sexual violence,
looting, cattle raiding, the burning of homes and forced recruitment, including of
children, with several abuses being perpetrated after the ceasefire came into effect on
29 August. Reports of human rights abuses gathered during joint patrols to several
affected counties, including Koch, Mayom and Panyijar, corroborated the reports. On
23 October, the protection cluster released a detailed report on incidents in southern
and central Unity State, in which it highlighted reports of violence in more than
20 locations since the signing of the peace agreement. As a result of the insecurity, all
static humanitarian operations were suspended in Leer and Koch counties, leaving an
estimated 250,000 people without assistance. Between 4 and 22 October, at least
80 civilians were reportedly killed in Leer County. Among them were at least

15-20214

9/18

S/2015/902

57 children, 29 of whom drowned while fleeing attacks. Widespread sexual violence
was also noted, with sources on the ground reporting more than 50 cases of rape.
38. In Upper Nile State, UNMISS continued to follow up on cases of alleged human
rights violations, including inside and around the protection site in Malakal. Frequent
reports of forced displacement, extrajudicial killings and abductions immediately
outside the gates were investigated. On several occasions, government soldiers
prevented displaced men from Wau Shilluk from entering the site owing to suspicions
that Shilluk forces were regrouping there with the intention of attacking government
positions. Inside the site, a climate of ethnic tension and violence p ersists. UNMISS
and protection partners conducted focus-group discussions with displaced Nuer who
reported facing oral and physical harassment from displaced Dinka. In late August,
there were clashes inside the site, including an attack by a mob of interna lly displaced
persons from Wau Shilluk on two plainclothes soldiers, leaving at least one person
dead.
39. While the conflict is most intense in the greater Upper Nile region, there is
evidence of violence and insecurity having an impact on individuals’ rights elsewhere.
Incidents of ethnically motivated violence continued to be reported at the protection
sites in Juba. Between 22 and 25 August, UNMISS investigated three shooting
incidents by unidentified armed men in which two internally displaced persons and
two foreigners were injured. In Western Equatoria State, reported abuses in and
around Yambio in September left at least four people, including a 3 -year-old child,
dead and several injured. The county commissioner also acknowledged a number of
killings by an unidentified armed group.
40. UNMISS continues to receive reports of serious violations by government
soldiers in Wonduruba Payam, Juba County, including killings, forced disappearances,
looting and burning of homes following a clash between government forces and
opposition affiliates in September. The government forces now maintain a regular
presence in the area. Attacks and intimidation have resulted in the displacement of an
estimated 16,000 people.
41. Threats against and harassment of the media continued during the reporting
period, raising serious concerns about the deteriorating state of freedom of the press.
In August, the National Security Service shut down two newspapers, The Citizen and
Al Rai, as well as a media capacity-building organization, Free Voice South Sudan. All
remained closed throughout the reporting period. The Service also targeted the Juba
Monitor, demanding the retraction of an article published on 17 September blaming
government forces for alleged atrocities in Wonduruba, Ce ntral Equatoria State. The
newspaper retracted the story on 22 September. Meanwhile, the Nation Mirror
reopened in October, eight months after its closure by the Service.
42. Continued challenges to the administration of justice in accordance with
international human rights standards were noted. At the Tambura prison in Western
Equatoria State, UNMISS found 15 detainees who had been held on remand for more
than five years, reportedly owing to the absence of a statutory court. In Upper Nile
State, the lack of statutory courts in Maban County left many inmates subject to trials
in customary courts that failed to follow due process. UNMISS found that not all
detainees had been properly registered, some were shackled, some had been awaiting
trial for years and food was in short supply. In Warrap State, dire sanitary and health
conditions were observed at the Kuajok prison, prompting UNMISS to urge the state
prison director to intervene.

10/18

15-20214

S/2015/902

43. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights bega n
the deployment of a 10-member assessment team to South Sudan in the final week of
October, pursuant to resolution 29/13 of the Human Rights Council, in which the
Council requested the Office urgently to undertake a mission to engage with the
Government, to monitor and report on the situation of human rights and to undertake a
comprehensive assessment of allegations of violations and abuses of human rights
with a view to ensuring accountability and complementarity with the African Union
Commission of Inquiry. The assessment report will be submitted to the Council in
March 2016 and include recommendations for appropriate follow-up action.
44. During the reporting period, 103 incidents, including casualties, sexual assault,
recruitment and use of children in military operations, attacks on and military
occupation of schools and abductions, affecting 3,836 children (1,928 boys, 1,780
girls and 128 children of unknown sex) were reported to have occurred. The country
task force on monitoring and reporting verified 73 incidents affecting 1,367 children
(735 boys and 632 girls). However, the numbers may still increase as reports from
remote locations are registered.
45. Allegations of sexual violence, including rape, gang rape, sexual slavery and
abductions of women and children, continued to be of concern. Civilians reaching the
protection site in Bentiu continued to report serious violations of international human
rights law, including sexual violence, by government forces, SPLM/A in Opposition
and other armed groups. Between 20 August and 9 November, at least 75 women and
girls fell victim to conflict-related sexual violence, reportedly perpetrated by
government forces, SPLM/A in Opposition and armed militias affiliated to both sides
in southern Unity State. Crimes such as rape (26 victims), gang rape (24 victims) and
abduction (25 victims, including at least 4 minors) were documented. In one instance,
a mother of four children said that she had been ambushed by a group of soldiers and
armed civilians; five of them had raped her on the roadside as her children watched,
whereupon two other soldiers had dragged her into the bush and raped her there. Upon
her return to the roadside, her children had disappeared, their whereabouts unknown.
Many more cases remain unreported and unaddressed, owing to a lack of services for
survivors and movement restrictions in conflict areas.
46. On 18 December 2014, Riek Machar signed a communiqué on preventing
conflict-related sexual violence in South Sudan. The Office of my Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict, in coordination with UNMISS,
supported the development in September of a one-year implementation plan to
promote the prevention of and accountability for conflict-related sexual violence.
Notwithstanding the commitments made by the Government and the opposition, and
the establishment of implementation mechanisms, no perpetrators have yet been held
accountable.

C.

Creating the conditions for delivery of humanitarian assistance
47. As armed conflict and a subsequent lack of freedom of movement for UNMISS,
humanitarian personnel and internally displaced persons continue in the greater Upper
Nile region, UNMISS and humanitarian personnel continuously assess logistics to
mitigate the challenges of maintaining their presence to deter violence and to deliver
humanitarian assistance.

15-20214

11/18

S/2015/902

48. UNMISS continued to invest substantial resources in the improvement of living
and security conditions inside and outside protection sites, in coordination with
humanitarian partners and the donor community. Its work included extensions of the
sites in Bentiu and Malakal, upgraded drainage systems for the sites in Juba and Bor
and the creation and protection of a humanitarian hub within the UNMISS premises i n
Bentiu.
49. Through close collaboration with the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs in Juba and local humanitarian partners and representatives in
the sectors, UNMISS undertook 4,226 force protection tasks to provide security to
food drops, road convoys, barge movements and other humanitarian activities. On
several occasions in September and October, it provided safe passage to internally
displaced persons travelling from the west bank of the River Nile to the protection site
in Malakal, as well as to those voluntarily returning to their villages on the west bank.
50. To facilitate the delivery of humanitarian aid, the United Nations Mine Action
Service deployed 14 technical teams to conduct survey and clearance operations
throughout South Sudan. To ensure access in areas of greatest need, it regularly
verified the safety of the airstrip in Malakal and surveyed areas in advance of World
Food Programme food drops in Bentiu.

D.

Supporting the implementation of the Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism/Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism
51. UNMISS continued to support the IGAD Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism through the IGAD Joint Technical Committee, including through the
provision of force protection and air assets, when required and if available, and
planning support. It directly supported IGAD monitoring teams in and projecting from
Malakal, Bentiu and Bor with seven force protection and joint mission patrols. In
addition, it offered logistical and administrative support to the teams co-located at
UNMISS bases, including in terms of accommodation, transport, water, food, fuel,
electrical power and medical cover. UNMISS also conducted a mission analysis to
ascertain how best to support the Mechanism in the transition to the Ceasefire and
Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism, while maintaining its
ability to meet its primary responsibilities relating to the protection of civilians.

E.

Supporting the implementation of the peace agreement
52. Following the adoption by the Security Council of resolution 2241 (2015),
UNMISS realigned its activities with the additional task of supporting the
implementation of the peace agreement, while continuing to implement the four
mandated tasks outlined above. In a letter dated 16 October, the Chair of IGAD
informed the former President of Botswana, Festus Mogae, of his appointment by the
IGAD Heads of State and Government to chair the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission. The Commission is responsible for monitoring and overseeing the
implementation of the peace agreement and the mandate and tasks of the Transitional
Government of National Unity. UNMISS, as a formal member of the Commission, is
currently consulting the Chair to determine what form the Mission’s support will take.

12/18

15-20214

S/2015/902

53. Meanwhile, the agreement struck by the parties notwithstanding, there has been
no progress towards the establishment of national architecture for the implementation
of the permanent ceasefire and the unification of forces. Although an agreement was
reached on 3 November on transitional security arrangements for Juba, its
implementation has not yet begun, nor has the development of strategies to address
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and security sector reform activities.
54. In support of the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism, UNMISS, in coordination with IGAD, began to plan for the deployment
of an additional four monitoring and verification teams. The monitoring and
verification of the separation, assembly and cantonment of forces is a principal task
for the Mechanism, including activities relating to the registration and screening of
personnel. UNMISS is developing a road map to support its operations. In a letter
dated 30 October, the Ministry of Defence of Ethiopia informed the IGAD Special
Envoys for South Sudan that it had appointed Major General (Rtd.) Molla
Hailemariam to chair the Mechanism.
55. Pursuant to resolution 2241 (2015), on 12 October the Ugandan army began to
withdraw from South Sudan, with the exception of Western Equatoria State, where
forces responding to the threat of attacks from the Lord’s Resistance Army continue to
be stationed, pursuant to the agreement. UNMISS has confirmed the army’s
withdrawal from Bor and mostly from Juba, and other than its presence in Western
Equatoria State, only some equipment remains. At the workshop on the permanent
ceasefire and transitional security arrangements held in September, the parties agree d
that the disarmament, demobilization and repatriation of non-State security actors
would be pursued after the establishment of national architecture for the
implementation of the permanent ceasefire and the unification of forces, and the
development of a plan for the identification of non-State forces.
56. Similarly, a national constitutional amendment committee is yet to be
established. UNMISS stands ready to support the work of that body, which is
mandated, among other things, to draft a constitutional amendment bill that will
incorporate the terms of the peace agreement into the Transitional Constitution, u pon
the request of the parties.

VI. Mission staffing and status of deployment of surge capacity
57. As at 4 November, the actual strength of the UNMISS civilian personnel stood
at 2,460, comprising 808 international staff members, 1,240 national staff members
and 412 United Nations volunteers. As at 8 November, the force strength stood at
11,612, consisting of 11,059 troops from contributing countries, with 358 staff
officers and 195 military liaison officers. Some 280 Kenyan troops and 400 Ghanaian
troops are expected to be deployed to UNMISS at the beginning of 2016 as part of the
surge forces.
58. As at 8 November, the UNMISS police strength stood at 1,230 of the authorized
1,323 officers, comprising 516 individual police officers, 56 corrections officers and
658 personnel in formed police units. The deployment of four new units has been
finalized, with two Nepalese units deployed in Juba and Bor and Ghanaian and
Rwandan units deployed in Bentiu and Malakal, respectively. Those arrivals allowed
the completion of the repatriation process for two Bangladeshi units.

15-20214

13/18

S/2015/902

59. To implement initiatives relating to my report on special measures for protectio n
from sexual exploitation and abuse (A/69/779), UNMISS has established a dedicated
task force and is continuing to raise awareness among personnel of the zero -tolerance
policy. In addition, it is approving and disseminating revised camp rules and
regulations that all persons, including United Nations and contracted personnel
residing within UNMISS premises, must subscribe to and abide by. It is also
conducting risk assessment exercises in line with the zero-tolerance policy.
60. UNMISS continued to implement enhanced measures for the safety of mission
air operations, following a flight safety assurance conference held in June. It
continued to comply with the requirements of the Department of Field Support
aviation risk management programme, to undertake aviation safety risk analysis and
to apply mitigating measures for flights operating in high-threat areas. It maintained
coordination with the relevant parties to the conflict to obtain the required flight safety
assurances. The Mission has also reconfigured its fleet of aircraft, replacing some
civilian helicopters with military assets provided by troop-contributing countries.

VII. Violations of the status-of-forces agreement, international
humanitarian law and security of United Nations staff
61. During the reporting period, UNMISS recorded 60 violations of the status -offorces agreement involving UNMISS members, associated personnel, premises and
equipment. Of those, 28 were restrictions on movement, affecting land, air and water
operations. Other violations included unlawful interference with the Mission ’s
mandate or operations, threats against UNMISS personnel, premises and air assets,
threats against persons seeking shelter in protection sites, confiscation of UNMISS
property, including impoundment of vehicles, and assault, harassment and
intimidation of personnel. Of the reported violations, troublingly, 50 were perpetrated
by government soldiers, 4 by the National Security Service, 3 by the national police,
2 by local county authorities, 1 by airport immigration officials and 3 by armed
groups opposed to the Government.
62. On three occasions, government soldiers insisted that internally displaced
persons travelling from the west bank of the River Nile to the protection site in
Malakal should first be interrogated. While the groups were twice allowed t o proceed
under UNMISS escort, in one of the incidents the soldiers allowed only women and
children to proceed, with the men in the group forced to return to the west bank.
63. There has also been a marked increase in movement restrictions imposed by
government personnel, in particular soldiers, on UNMISS patrols. The restrictions,
including instances in which demands inconsistent with agreed procedures have been
made of UNMISS personnel or patrols and convoys, involved harassment, assault and
confiscation of Mission property and personal effects. Army personnel at the
Division IV headquarters based in Bentiu, in particular, have been placing unwarranted
restrictions on the freedom of movement of UNMISS patrols, which has adversely
affected the Mission’s tasks. Often, the actions are inconsistent with national or statelevel government directives, including Ministerial Order No. 2/2015, issued by the
Minister of Defence in May, in which soldiers were reminded that they were to comply
with international humanitarian law and to grant access to the United Nations and other
humanitarian actors working in South Sudan.

14/18

15-20214

S/2015/902

64. In a particularly alarming incident, SPLM/A in Opposition forces intercepted
18 UNMISS military personnel and 13 South Sudanese United Nations contractors
transporting fuel to an UNMISS base in Upper Nile State on 26 October. They
claimed, the prior notification notwithstanding, not to have been informed about the
movement and further alleged that five of the barge’s crew members belonged to the
government forces. The UNMISS personnel were taken hostage and the barge, its
cargo and communications equipment and the weapons of the UNMISS personnel
were seized. Following high-level negotiations with SPLM/A in Opposition in Addis
Ababa, the 18 UNMISS personnel were released on 29 October. However, the
SPLM/A in Opposition commander in Kaka refused to release the barge ’s crew, the
barge convoy equipment, its cargo, the weapons and the communications equipment.
On 1 November, the remaining 13 United Nations contractors and all three vessels of
the barge convoy were released. The cargo and other items, including seven UNMISS
weapons, were not returned, however.
65. Regular perimeter breaches, including the smuggling of weapons into UNMISS
protection sites and violence among internally displaced persons, constitute a direct
threat to UNMISS and humanitarian personnel and assets within the sites, as does the
high prevalence of alcohol and illicit drug use. Cases include serious assaults, civil
unrest, mob violence, robbery, death threats and harassment.
66. As at 7 November, three UNMISS national staff members arrested in August and
October 2014 remained in detention at the National Security Service headquarters in
Juba. Another national staff member was arrested in July 2015 and remains in the
custody of the national police. Monthly visits to check on their welfare continue.
67. UNMISS has regularly and formally notified the Government of the violations
through notes verbales and meetings with senior government officials. The monthly
matrix of incidents is also shared with the Government.

VIII. Observations and recommendations
68. The signing of the peace agreement and the subsequent declaration of a
permanent ceasefire by the warring parties are important milestones towards ending
the 20-month-long conflict that has subjected South Sudan and its citizens to
unspeakable devastation. I welcome the parties’ endorsement of the technical details
for the implementation of the permanent ceasefire and transitional security
arrangements, in accordance with chapter II of the agreement. I take note of the
President’s recent address to the nation in which he reaffirmed his readiness to
implement the peace agreement in letter and in spirit.
69. I wish to commend the IGAD mediation team for its tireless efforts to bring
about the signing of a comprehensive peace agreement. I am heartened by the unity of
purpose that regional leaders have displayed in seeking an end to this tragic conflict.
Their sustained positive engagement remains essential to restoring peace and security
for the aggrieved people of South Sudan.
70. I am deeply disappointed, however, that violence has nonetheless continued, in
violation of the permanent ceasefire declared by both parties. The p arties must cease
all military operations with immediate effect and urgently proceed with the
implementation of the permanent ceasefire and transitional security arrangements.

15-20214

15/18

S/2015/902

71. In this regard, I welcome the appointments of Festus Mogae to chair the Joi nt
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission and Major General (Rtd.) Molla Hailemariam
to chair the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism.
I call upon all signatories to the agreement to establish all the institutions stipulated in
the agreement as a matter of priority, in particular the Transitional Government of
National Unity, the Commission and the Mechanism.
72. The continued fighting has resulted in further displacement of civilians,
worsening the already dire humanitarian situation. At the same time, the humanitarian
response plan remains critically underfunded. I call upon the Government, which
bears the primary responsibility for protecting its people and facilitating the eventual
safe and voluntary return of internally displaced persons and refugees, and upon donor
countries, to address the gap in humanitarian funding of $687 million that must be
reduced in order to assist the victims of the conflict.
73. The President’s order, issued on 2 October, on the establishment of 18 additional
states has resulted in uncertainty about these new states’ borders. This has already led
to intercommunal tension. Similarly, the decision to dissolve the SPLM general
secretariat is perceived as a violation of the Arusha Agreement. I there fore urge the
President to defer action on those issues until the Transitional Government of National
Unity has been formed, a national constitutional dialogue has been held, in line with
the peace agreement, and all SPLM leaders have returned to Juba.
74. Peacekeeping and humanitarian personnel have continued to face unacceptable
access restrictions, as well as physical assault, harassment, threats and detention. I
condemn in the strongest terms the seizure on 26 October of United Nations personnel
and equipment by SPLM/A in Opposition forces in Kaka, Upper Nile State, and call
upon Riek Machar to secure the immediate release of the equipment and cargo
remaining in the possession of the forces under his command. I also call upon all
parties to guarantee the safety, security and unrestricted freedom of movement of all
United Nations and associated personnel, throughout South Sudan, in addition to the
full, safe and unhindered access of relief personnel, equipment and supplies to all
those in need of urgent assistance.
75. In fulfilment of its mandate to protect civilians, UNMISS has intensified its
presence and active patrolling in areas at risk of conflict and with high concentrations
of displaced persons in an effort to protect civilians from physical viole nce. In this
regard, I renew earlier calls for troop- and police-contributing countries to hasten the
deployment of remaining police and military capabilities, including personnel,
equipment and other enablers, which are critical to the Mission ’s ability to carry out
its mandated tasks effectively.
76. The conflict has shattered the social fabric of South Sudan. To mend it, the
provisions in the peace agreement relating to justice, accountability and reconciliation
must be implemented in full. In this regard, I welcome the release of the report of the
African Union Commission of Inquiry. I am encouraged by the decision of the African
Union Peace and Security Council to ensure that the findings and recommendations
contained therein and the separate opinion submitted by a member of the Commission
inform the engagement of the African Union in South Sudan, in particular its support
for the establishment of accountability mechanisms, including a hybrid court for
South Sudan, and measures to foster reconciliation and healing.

16/18

15-20214

S/2015/902

77. South Sudan today stands at a crossroads. It is now the responsibility of leaders
on all sides to ensure that the peace agreement brings an end to the violence, dire
humanitarian conditions and grave human rights violations witnessed throughout the
conflict. They must remember that the international community is watching them
closely and that a return to conflict must not be countenanced. Recognizing that the
road ahead will be difficult, the United Nations stands ready to support all parti es and
stakeholders in the implementation of the agreement, in close cooperation with IGAD,
the African Union and international partners.
78. Lastly, I wish to express my sincere appreciation for the tireless efforts of
UNMISS personnel, who, under the able leadership of my Special Representative,
Ellen Margrethe Løj, continue to protect tens of thousands of civilians under threat of
physical violence, while working to stabilize the security situation. In particular, I
thank the troop- and police-contributing countries that have provided much needed
uniformed personnel and assets to the Mission. I also commend the United Nations
country team and non-governmental organization partners for their courage and
sacrifice in providing vital humanitarian assistance to the population, in often arduous
and dangerous conditions.

15-20214

17/18

S/2015/902

18/18

15-20214
