A /71/PV.92

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

92nd plenary meeting

Wednesday, 19 July 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 51 (continued)
Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/71/495/Add.1)
The President: If there is no proposal under rule
66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the
General Assembly decides not to discuss the report of
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) that is before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be limited
to explanations of position. The positions of delegations
regarding the recommendations of the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
have been made clear in the Committee and are
ref lected in the relevant official records. I would like
to remind members that, under paragraph 7 of decision
34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, that is, either in the Committee or
in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in
the Committee.”

I would like to remind delegations that, also in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations of position or vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendation contained in the report of the special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee), I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Committee, unless notified
otherwise in advance.
The Assembly will now consider the report
(A/71/495/Add.1) of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) on
agenda item 51, entitled “Comprehensive review of
the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all
their aspects”.
The General Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) in
paragraph 6 of that report.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
71/314).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-22021 (E)

*1722021*

A/71/PV.92

19/07/2019

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 51.
Agenda item 62 (continued)
New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and international
support
(b) Causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in
Africa

The President: May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to adopt draft resolution A/71/L.67/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/71/L.67/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 71/315).

Draft resolution (A/71/L.67/Rev.1)
The President: I now give the f loor to the
representative of Ecuador to introduce draft resolution
A/71/L.67/Rev.1.
Mr. Zambrano Ortíz (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
On behalf of the Group of 77 and China, I have the
honour to introduce draft resolution A/71/L.67/Rev.1,
entitled “Implementation of the recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General on the
causes of conf lict and the promotion of durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa”.
This new draft resolution recognizes that there
has been notable progress in achieving durable and
sustainable peace in Africa. However, in order to
achieve a conf lict-free African continent, the draft
resolution calls for enhancing national and regional
efforts and initiatives with international support to
respond to conf licts in a peaceful and effective manner.
On behalf of our Group, I would like to thank
our coordinators from Mauritania and Egypt, and
the facilitator from Morocco, for their work during
the negotiations, as well as all of the parties who
constructively participated during the negotiation of the
text, thereby making it possible to achieve consensus
on this important draft resolution.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/71/L.67/Rev. 1, entitled
“Implementation of the recommendations contained
in the report of the Secretary-General on the causes
of conf lict and the promotion of durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa”. The draft
resolution is now closed for e-sponsorship.
I give the
the Secretariat.
2/14

floor

to

the

representative

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution,
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/71/L.67/Rev.1, the following countries have also
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Austria,
Belgium, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Greece, Ireland,
Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain and Turkey.

of

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 62?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 122 (continued)
Question of equitable representation on and
increase in the membership of the Security Council
and other matters related to the Security Council
The President: Members will recall that, pursuant
to General Assembly decision 70/559, of 27 July
2016, the Assembly has continued intergovernmental
negotiations on Security Council reform in informal
plenary meetings during the current session.
In a letter date 11 July, I circulated, for consideration
by Member States, language for a draft oral decision on
this issue.
May I take it that the General Assembly decides
to, first, reaffirm the central role of the General
Assembly concerning the question of equitable
representation on and increase in the membership of
the Security Council and other matters related to the
Security Council; secondly, to immediately continue
intergovernmental negotiations on Security Council
reform in informal plenary of the General Assembly at
its seventy-second session, as mandated by Assembly
decisions 62/557, of 15 September 2008, 63/565 B, of
14 September 2009, 64/568, of 13 September 2010,
65/554, of 12 September 2011, 66/566, of 13 September
2012, 67/561, of 29 August 2013, 68/557, of 8 September
2014, 69/560, of 14 September 2015, and 70/559, of
27 July 2016, building on the informal meetings held
during its seventy-first session, as well as the positions
17-22021

19/07/2019

of, and proposals made by, Member States, ref lected
in the text and its annex circulated on 31 July 2015,
and using the elements of convergence circulated on
12 July 2016 and the elements of commonality and
issues for further consideration circulated on 27 June
2017 to help inform its future work, while welcoming
the active engagement, initiatives and intensive efforts
of the President of the General Assembly and noting
with appreciation the active role and concrete efforts
of the co-Chairs undertaken in a consultative manner
with a view to an early comprehensive reform of
the Security Council; thirdly, to convene the Openended Working Group on the Question of Equitable
Representation on and Increase in the Membership of
the Security Council and other Matters related to the
Security Council during the seventy-second session of
the General Assembly, if Member States so decide; and,
fourthly, to include in the agenda of the seventy-second
session of the General Assembly the item entitled
“Question of equitable representation on and increase
in the membership of the Security Council and other
matters related to the Security Council”?
The draft oral decision was adopted (decision
71/553).
The President: Before giving the f loor to speakers
in explanation of position, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the Group of Arab States.
At the outset, allow me to express my deep
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for guiding the
work of the General Assembly and for the attention you
have paid to one of the most important issues on the
agenda, “Question of equitable representation on and
increase in the membership of the Security Council
and other matters related to the Security Council”.
I would also like to commend the efforts of the
co-Chairs of the intergovernmental negotiations — the
Permanent Representative of Tunisia, Mr. Mohamed
Khaled Khiari, and the Permanent Representative of
Romania, Ambassador Ion Jinga — who sought to
reach an understanding between the points of view of
the various groups.
The Arab Group welcomes the consensus adoption
of decision 71/553. I would like to assure the Assembly
that the Group is keen to ensure that any attempts
at intergovernmental negotiations enjoy unanimous

A/71/PV.92

acceptance, which reaffirms the position of the Arab
Group. The Group calls for unity within the Group
and rejects any attempts at negotiations that are not
accepted by all States Members of the United Nations.
The Arab Group looks forward to continuing the
debate within the intergovernmental negotiations during
the seventy-second session of the General Assembly,
based on what has been achieved during previous
sessions, in order to implement a comprehensive reform
of the Security Council that ref lects the positions of
Member States, and in particular that of the Arab
Group. The Group calls for a permanent seat with all
the privileges that permanent membership brings. The
Arab Group reaffirms its determination to continue
positive negotiations during the upcoming General
Assembly session in order to reach an agreed solution
to the reform of the Security Council.
Mr. Sumah (Sierra Leone): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the member States of the African
Union and to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
excellent leadership of the General Assembly at its
seventy-first session. I would like to express our sincere
appreciation to you for your unwavering commitment
and dedication to reform of the Security Council.
The Group of African States remains steadfastly
committed to comprehensive and meaningful reform
of the Security Council. We also appreciate the efforts
of the co-Chairs of the intergovernmental negotiations
during this session, Ambassadors Ion Jinga of Romania
and Mohamed Khaled Khiari of Tunisia. I would also
like to take this opportunity to thank all States Members
of the United Nations for the eloquent discussions that
have led to our adoption by consensus just now of rollover decision 71/533. I believe that decision is in the
spirit of our efforts to preserve unity and mutual trust
among the membership in moving forward the reform
process of the Security Council, so that it can better
serve humankind and conform with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
With regard to our letter of 10 July, responding
to your letter, Mr. President, of 27 June, in which you
circulated elements of commonality and issues for
further consideration and discussion of the equitable
representation on and increase in the membership of
the Security Council and other matters related to the
Council, we conveyed to you our view that it was
regrettable that the element paper as presented by the
co-Chairs did not adequately ref lect the letter and

17-220213/14

A/71/PV.92

spirit of the common African position on Security
Council reform. We note with appreciation that the
paper specifically mentions Africa’s representation
on a reformed Council. However, that understanding
does not precisely ref lect the accurate reports of the
intergovernmental-negotiation meetings.
While the paper does attempt to ref lect the tenor
of the discussions specifically referring to Africa
and the common African position, the African Group
had expected the co-Chairs to ref lect the fact that the
common African position had garnered wide political
acceptance during the current intergovernmental
negotiations. In that regard, support for the allocation
to Africa of seats in both categories of Council
membership should have been highlighted. To that
end, and as the process moves forward, the Africa
Group would appreciate it if it were made very clear
in any future intergovernmental negotiations outcome
document that Africa should be represented in both
the permanent and non-permanent categories on a
reformed Council.
The African Group is pleased that the position of
the proposals made by the Member States, as ref lected
in the framework document and its annex circulated
by the President of the General Assembly at its sixtyninth session, will be rolled over to the seventy-second
session. Africa will continue to engage constructively
with all Member States in a spirit of mutual trust
and respect, with a view to achieving comprehensive
reform of the Security Council so as to enhance the
legitimacy of its decisions. It is only through such
reform that we can talk of a Security Council that
is more representative, democratic, accountable,
transparent, effective and efficient in carrying out its
mandate under the Charter of the United Nations.
We look forward to a more constructive and forwardlooking intergovernmental-negotiation process during
the seventy-second session of the General Assembly
and urge all Member States to work together to reach
the widest possible political acceptance, in a manner
that will promote our unity of purpose in maintaining
the values and ideals of the founding fathers of the
United Nations, a United Nations fit-for-purpose, with
its continuing utility as the centre of global governance.
Mr. Braun (Germany): This being my last
statement as Permanent Representative of Germany in
the General Assembly, I have the honour and pleasure
to speak today on behalf of the Group of Four — Brazil,
4/14

19/07/2019

India, Japan and my own country. I would like to make
three points.
First of all, we thank you, Mr. President, for your
leadership on the process of Security Council reform
within the General Assembly at its seventy-first session.
You guided us skilfully through the sometimes stormy
waters of the intergovernmental-negotiation ocean and
stayed the course, despite strong winds blowing from
several directions at a time. You brought us one step
further and ensured that we do not have to give up
hope that we will eventually reach the shores of reform.
We also thank the co-Chairs of the intergovernmental
negotiations, Ambassadors Ion Jinga and Mohamed
Khaled Khiari, for their efforts in steering the ship.
They made us work hard; they made us question our
positions and those of others; and in that way they
made us carve out broadly supported commonalities
and identify issues for further consideration. Their
work is greatly appreciated.
Secondly, we support roll-over decision 71/553,
which you presented, Mr. President, and the paper it
contains entitled “Elements of commonality and issues
for further consideration”. Both the decision and the
paper will help to direct the oars on our ship’s course
towards Council reform. The decision also highlights
where we have come from, including the milestones
achieved by the sixty-ninth and seventieth sessions, the
framework document and the elements paper. Together
with this year’s document, they form the map for our
course ahead.
Speaking of our course ahead, let me share a
saying that fits our situation in the intergovernmental
negotiations: “He who goes nowhere will never get
anywhere, either”. For us, its meaning is clear. We must
move on from turning in circles. We must move on from
our repetitions. We must move on from talking about
negotiations to beginning real negotiations, based on a
negotiating text.
That saying is from Romania and is highly relevant.
It leads to my third and final point. To all of the welldeserved praise for the work of all present and of the
intergovernmental-negotiation co-Chairs, I would
like to add an appeal or, as some would say, to dilute
the wine with some water. We cannot be completely
satisfied with the outcome of the intergovernmental
negotiations at the seventy-first session — not only
because the General Assembly has not yet adopted a
draft resolution reforming the Security Council, but
17-22021

19/07/2019

also because we have not even set our sails on the
course of text-based negotiations. It is the beginning of
this standard operating procedure for all other United
Nations negotiations that is missing.
The ship of the intergovernmental negotiations
seems to have its oars in the water on only one side.
And so while all of us are rowing as hard as we can,
we are moving in circles. Text-based negotiations will
mean oars in the water on both sides of the ship and
full speed ahead to the shores of actual reform. There
is no need for the next captain of the intergovernmental
negotiations to worry about taking that course. Almost
all of the ship’s crew — at least 164 out of 193 — have
signed up for it and are ready to row.
The President: If this is indeed the last time that
the representative of Germany will address the General
Assembly, as President I would like to thank him, as
one of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly,
for his sterling service to the Assembly at its seventyfirst session.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the L.69 group,
a diverse group of countries made up largely of small
States from Africa, Latin America, the Caribbean,
Asia and the Pacific that are united by the common
cause of achieving lasting and comprehensive reform
of the Security Council.
We would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
your leadership and stewardship of this process and for
your guidance to the co-Chairs in the work undertaken
on this crucial issue. We would also like to thank and
congratulate the co-Chairs, Ambassadors Ion Jinga of
Romania and Mohamed Khaled Khiari of Tunisia, for
providing Member States with ample opportunities
for substantive and interactive discussions during
this session, which took place in a frank and cordial
atmosphere. The document we have adopted today
(decision 71/553) is an important contribution by the
co-Chairs to this process and has the full support of
our Group and, in our view, of the entire membership.
The General Assembly’s consideration of this
item began 25 years ago. We have adopted several
documents in the past quarter of a century on the issue
and the paper on elements of commonality and issues
for further consideration ref lects one more important
addition to this montage of papers and documents.
While we are glad that today we are marking the
culmination of a year’s work on this process by the

A/71/PV.92

Assembly on an important issue, in the broader
scheme of things we have yet to begin our real work
of negotiations and political give-and-take. And that,
in our view, is not for want or will or substance but
because of the obduracy of a minority unwilling to
respect the larger sentiments of the General Assembly.
In no other purportedly democratic space have we
seen the wish of 85 per cent of the membership of an
organization not lead to action.
Just as the Security Council is, in theory,
accountable to the entire membership for its action
or inaction, the General Assembly is accountable to
the people of the United Nations for its action or lack
thereof. At the end of 25 years of our consideration of
this issue, we must take stock and honestly assess our
progress. We must assess why, after all these years,
we are carrying on with a fundamentally abnormal
process. The principles of democracy and transparency
could well suggest that we should hold our meetings in
open format so that the international community and
our young people can better ascertain what might be
holding us back from acting on the wish of a majority
of Member States.
The L.69 group, in its letter of 6 March, clearly
demonstrated that more than 160 countries believe that
the process at this stage has all the conditions needed
to build on the work of previous sessions and advance
to text-based negotiations. We are ready and eager to
negotiate, discuss, resolve issues and move forward
on this crucial and important issue. We hope that our
next step will be to normalize this process and begin
text-based negotiations, so that a compromise solution
that enjoys the widest possible political acceptance can
emerge through the process. In that regard, we hope
that at the next session we will begin from where we
left off at this session, and not attempt yet again to
reinvent the wheel.
I would like to end with a wise quote from an
important tradition of the East:
“Let not the fruit of action be your motive to action.
Your business is with action alone, not the fruit of
action.”
I wish for all of us to be guided in doing the right thing.
That alone will determine the fruits of our action. That
alone will alleviate our fears and hesitation. We hope
that together we will rise to the call of our collective
wisdom and reform the Security Council sooner rather
than later.

17-220215/14

A/71/PV.92

Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): On behalf of the Uniting
for Consensus (UfC) group, I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for your leadership during the
seventy-first session of the General Assembly. I
would also like to commend the intergovernmental
negotiations co-Chairs, Ambassadors Khiari and
Jinga, for the transparent and inclusive manner in
which they discharged their duties. Their stewardship
fostered a constructive atmosphere during this
session of the intergovernmental negotiations that
enabled all delegations to engage in frank and
substantive discussions.
Today we have agreed to continue intergovernmental
negotiations on Security Council reform, building on
the work undertaken by Member States throughout
the intergovernmental-negotiation process. In fact, all
sessions of the intergovernmental negotiations have
made important contributions to the reform process,
with a view to reaching a solution that can garner the
widest possible consensus among Member States.
During this session of the intergovernmental
negotiations, discussions among Member States allowed
the co-Chairs to identify commonalities and issues for
further consideration, as ref lected in the document
they authored. The document has not been endorsed
or adopted by Member States, but we acknowledge
its contribution to a consensus solution. Like others,
the UfC group shared its views on the elements of the
document, including on the commonalities that clearly
need further deliberation. In that regard, we wish to
stress that, regardless of its placement in the document,
the expansion in other categories of membership is an
issue that requires further consideration. Nonetheless,
just as you, Mr. President, underlined in your letter
dated 27 June, we also believe that the document
of the co-Chairs can be considered as a step in the
right direction.
At the beginning of this negotiating session, we
urged the membership to work on a common definition
of the principles that should inspire Security Council
reform. As this session comes to a close, we are more
convinced than ever that, once consensus on those
principles has been reached, the next stages of the
reform process will be more f luid. In that regard, we
are glad to acknowledge the repeated references in the
co-Chairs’ document to the principles underpinning
Security Council reform. However, we were surprised
at the opposition shown by some delegations to the
inclusion of the two cardinal principles of democracy
6/14

19/07/2019

and representation as commonalities. Confronted with
that opposition to the fundamental principles promoted
by the United Nations, the co-Chairs were forced to
keep them as issues that need further consideration with
a view to achieving the objective of a more democratic
Security Council. The UfC group firmly believes
that a serious discussion on those two key principles
for Security Council reform cannot be postponed any
further. Therefore, it is our expectation that Member
States will finally be given such an opportunity during
the seventy-second session of the General Assembly.
Last November, during the debate on Security
Council reform (see A/71/PV.42 and A/71/PV.43), we
recall that no Member State disagreed with the idea
of adding new non-permanent seats on the Council
and favouring the underrepresented regions, and that
a significant and growing number of Member States
opposed an expansion of the veto. Today we acknowledge
the conclusion of the co-Chairs that the expansion in
the number of non-permanent members is accepted by
all Member States as part of a comprehensive reform
of all five clusters indicated by decision 62/557. We
also agree that the question of the veto is a key element
of Security Council reform. If there continues to be
a sharp and enduring disagreement among Member
States on this issue, it is because of the demand for
additional permanent seats.
Today, as we were in last November, we are
persuaded that there is common ground that can
help us find the solution to finally unlock the reform
process. Flexibility and a spirit of compromise can lead
the General Assembly to the consensus on sustainable
reform of the Security Council that we have been
striving for. Building on those bases, the UfC group
looks forward to engaging in future negotiations in
the sincere conviction that Security Council reform is
possible and within reach.
Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): Hungary commends you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting, and we
welcome the adoption of decision 71/553, which allows
for continued efforts to reform the Security Council.
We would like to thank the co-Chairs, Ambassadors
Khiari and Jinga, for guiding us through this cycle,
and to acknowledge their hard work on the food-forthought paper until the very last minute. We believe
that the paper is a good complement to the documents
prepared by the previous facilitators of the process, and
17-22021

19/07/2019

A/71/PV.92

we would like to see efforts in that regard continue in
the coming cycle.

meet its current challenges and fulfil the purposes of
the Charter.

The seventy-second session of the General
Assembly will mark the twenty-fifth year since the
adoption of landmark resolution 47/62, on the need
for Security Council reform, as well as the tenth
anniversary of the launch of the intergovernmental
negotiations process. Our strong preference would be
to honour the next important session by building on
the momentum gained this year, and by clarifying
commonalities and questions for further consideration
so that we can finally start negotiations that are based
on a consolidated text.

Today’s decision will enable us to continue
our work in the context of the intergovernmental
negotiations during the next session of the General
Assembly. We must consider the guiding principles
laid out in decision 62/557, which launched the
intergovernmental-negotiation process. The first of
them is that the intergovernmental negotiations are
a Member State-led and -owned process and that the
various positions of the different groups form the basis
for the negotiations.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that
Hungary takes a positive view of this year’s outcome
and stands ready to contribute actively to the next
intergovernmental-negotiation process so as to enable
it to go even further.
Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, the delegation of Egypt aligns itself with the
statements delivered previously by the Permanent
Representatives of Kuwait and Sierra Leone on behalf
of the Group of Arab States and the Group of African
States, respectively. I would also like to make the
following comments in my national capacity.
Egypt expresses its deep appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for your efforts and commitment
throughout your presidency of the General Assembly
at its seventy-first session, as well as for your efforts to
push forward the Security Council reform agenda, an
issue of particular interest to all Member States. I would
also like to express our gratitude to the two co-Chairs
of the intergovernmental negotiations, Ambassadors
Ion Jinga, Permanent Representative of Romania, and
Mohamed Khaled Khiari, Permanent Representative
of Tunisia, for their commitment to achieving true
progress in the intergovernmental-negotiation process
and for their efforts to bring the positions of various
countries and groups together.
We appreciate the consensus achieved on decision
71/553, which ref lects the collective commitment to
intergovernmental negotiations as the sole mechanism
for achieving just, comprehensive Security Council
reform. The consensus also ref lects the desire of all
members to work together to build a broader political
space that will ultimately lead to Security Council
reform, as a cornerstone of United Nations reform
as a whole, in order to enable the Organization to

That said, if any document resulting from the
various meetings and rounds of negotiations is to
enjoy consensus, it must fully ref lect the Common
African Position, in line with the Sirte Declaration,
and Africa’s request for adequate representation in the
various categories of Security Council membership,
including two permanent seats, in order to rectify the
historical injustice that Africa has suffered and allow
it to participate effectively in the maintenance of
international peace and security. The document should
also fully ref lect the position of the Group of Arab
States, which requests a permanent seat in any future
expansion of permanent Council seats.
Furthermore, the decision also confirms the
importance of arriving at a solution that will preserve
the links and connections between the five groups
involved in the negotiations in order to achieve the
broadest possible agreement among Member States.
Egypt welcomes the documents that have shed further
light on the positions and commonalities of Member
States and has also identified controversial issues,
which remain quite numerous. Egypt looks forward to
the continuation of those efforts during the next round
of intergovernmental negotiations.
The discussions that have taken place at this
meeting highlight the importance of in-depth talks
on the principles and norms that form the basis of the
intergovernmental negotiations, as has been reiterated
on many occasions by several groups, including
the Arab and African Groups, in order to make the
direction that the intergovernmental process will take
going forward as clear as possible and for Member
States to agree as much as possible on Security Council
reform issues.
In conclusion, Egypt is ready to continue working
constructively with all countries and groups during

17-220217/14

A/71/PV.92

the seventy-second session of the General Assembly in
order to strengthen unity among Member States and
take further steps towards the reform we all seek.
Mrs. Bannis-Roberts (Dominica): I have the
honour to deliver my brief remarks on behalf of the
14 States members of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM).
CARICOM welcomes the adoption by consensus of
decision 71/553, aimed at reaffirming the central role
of the General Assembly on the question of equitable
representation on and increase in the membership
of the Security Council and related matters, as
well as immediately continuing intergovernmental
negotiations on Security Council reform during the
seventy-second session of the Assembly. We view this
as a demonstration that Member States have an interest
in sustaining the debate on reform of the Council,
despite differences in their positions.
CARICOM looks forward to building on the
informal meetings held during the seventy-first session
of the Assembly and on the positions and proposals
of Member States using the elements of convergence,
circulated on 12 July 2016, and the elements of
commonality and issues for further consideration,
circulated on 27 June, to help inform the Assembly’s
future work.
We take this opportunity to commend the
co-Chairs of the intergovernmental negotiations,
Ambassadors Ion Jinga and Mohamed Khaled Khiari,
for their able stewardship of the negotiations during the
seventy-first session and to thank you, Mr. President,
for your commitment to the process of reform of the
Security Council.
CARICOM reiterates its commitment to Security
Council reform and will remain engaged in the work
that lies ahead.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
General Assembly has just adopted oral decision
71/553, on a technical rollover of the intergovernmental
negotiations on Security Council reform to the next
session of the General Assembly.
Since the beginning of the year, the General
Assembly has held five intergovernmental-negotiation
meetings. Member States have discussed five clusters
of issues and their inherent relationship in an overall
positive atmosphere.Although differences remain,
patient negotiation is itself constructive and conducive
8/14

19/07/2019

to gradually creating the conditions for achieving
the broadest consensus possible. China thanks the
President of the General Assembly and the co-Chairs
of the intergovernmental negotiations for the role they
have played in that regard.
The paper, which contained food for thought
on elements of convergence and issues for further
consideration and was issued by the co-Chairs,
ref lects the co-Chairs’ understanding of Member
States’ positions on Security Council reform. There
is no consensus on the elements paper and no official
status for the intergovernmental negotiations because
of the differences of opinion among the parties. The
intergovernmental-negotiation process is the core
platform for advancing Security Council reform, and
the membership-driven principle is the bedrock for its
healthy development. China expresses its appreciation
to the co-Chairs for abiding by that principle.
Since 2009, the membership has actively participated
in the negotiations and put forward positions, proposals
and suggestions in a constructive effort to advance the
process of Security Council reform. These proposals
and suggestions are a means for all Member States to
meet halfway and seek consensus. Security Council
reform has a bearing on the real interests of all Member
States and cannot be accomplished overnight. Only
many years of effort and continued patient work in the
context of the intergovernmental-negotiation platform
will enable us to gradually narrow our differences until
we have reached the broadest possible consensus.
China hopes that at the next session of the General
Assembly the intergovernmental-negotiation group
will continue to abide by the mandate assigned by
resolution 62/557, the membership-driven principle
and the package solution idea, thus making fresh
efforts to enable Member States to reach the broadest
possible consensus on Security Council reform. China
will continue to work jointly with all Member States
to take Security Council reform forward in a direction
that accords with the common interests of all members
and the long-term interests of the United Nations.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Mr. President, I would like to thank you for
convening today’s meeting and for your responsible
leadership of the General Assembly at its seventy-first
session. We are grateful to you for decision 71/553, on
the rollover of the consideration of Security Council
reform to the seventy-second session. This issue is one
17-22021

19/07/2019

of the most important on the Organization’s agenda, as
the Council is the body that under the Charter of the
United Nations has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
At the same time, as discussions during the current
session have shown, the positions of Member States on
certain aspects remain fundamentally different, indeed
opposed. It is evident that given the major political
significance of the issue of Security Council reform,
we must continue to seek a solution that would enjoy
much broader support from Member States than the
formally required two-thirds vote. Ideally it should be
a consensus-based decision, and the discussions should
in any case be carried out constructively, transparently
and openly, without any artificially imposed timelines.
We would like to recall that developing countries
in Asia and Africa should be first in line to receive
additional seats on the Security Council. We believe
that they have the potential to make a significant
contribution to the maintenance of international peace
and security. Most importantly, this will ensure that
future decisions of the Council are balanced.
We firmly believe that all five aspects of Security
Council reform should be discussed in their entirety.
Any attempt to isolate specific issues risks eroding the
package approach that lies at the basis of negotiations
and has been agreed to by all. We also want to emphasize
that the process should not be moved forward through
the imposition of facilitators’ texts, negotiation
documents or other initiatives that do not enjoy
consensus. Previous sessions of the General Assembly
have shown the futility and danger of attempts to arrive
at a solution without taking into account the full scope
of positions.
In conclusion, I would like to thank our co-Chairs,
Ion Jinga of Romania and Mohamed Khaled Khiari of
Tunisia, who put significant effort into their role during
the seventy-first session.
Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): Mr. President, I would
like first of all to thank you for the priority you have
given to the issue of Security Council reform and
for your leadership and engagement in the reform
process. We would also like to place on record our
appreciation to Ambassadors Ion Jinga of Romania and
Mohamed Khaled Khiari of Tunisia for their hard work
and leadership of the work of the intergovernmental
negotiations on Security Council reform in an
inclusive, transparent and efficient manner. Their

A/71/PV.92

able stewardship of the process culminated with the
co-Chairs’ paper, entitled “Elements of commonality
and issues for further consideration”.
We regard the co-Chairs’ paper as an important
outcome this year, as it identifies in one consolidated
document the key elements of commonality on all five
clusters of issues mandated under General Assembly
resolution 62/557. The co-Chairs’ paper also lists some
other issues that merit further ref lection and discussion.
We are happy that it builds on the work done by the
intergovernmental negotiations over the past two
years and, together with the framework document and
the elements of convergence paper, will form a good
reference point from which to start discussion at the
next session of the intergovernmental negotiations.
We note that the paper omitted any reference to an
important issue of interest to Singapore, the need to
pay due attention to the representation of small island
developing States on a reformed Security Council.
However, we acknowledge that the paper ref lects a
fine balance of the interests of Member States and
the positions they hold. Accordingly, we have joined
the consensus on the adoption of decision 71/553. We
will, however, continue to f lag this important issue as
well as other issues of interest to small States, notably
the working methods of the Security Council, when
the intergovernmental negotiations resumes work
next year.
While the paper represents another milestone
in the work of the process of intergovernmental
negotiations, we should not rest on our laurels. The
challenge now is to build on the co-Chairs’ paper and
sustain the momentum for progress. In our view, the
imperative for Security Council reform remains more
real and urgent than ever before. We must accelerate
the pace of our work in order to achieve speedy and
meaningful reforms.
My delegation remains committed to working with
all other delegations to advance the progress made,
realize meaningful and early reforms, and make the
Security Council more open, accountable, effective
and inclusive.
Mr. Jinga (Romania): I wish to say a few words
on behalf of both co-Chairs. I want to convey our deep
gratitude to you, Mr. President, and to all those who
have expressed their support for the work done by the
two co-Chairs.

17-220219/14

A/71/PV.92

Sir, in your statement of 6 February at the opening
of the intergovernmental negotiations, you encouraged
Member States to find ways to move beyond the
impasse of long-standing differences on the nature
of Security Council reform. You also mentioned the
need for a renewed spirit of openness, compromise
and commitment to finding common ground so as to
overcome the challenges relating to the sensitive and
complex issues involved in this reform.
The intergovernmental negotiations are a highly
complex political process, which means that reform of
the Security Council requires a political solution. That
solution certainly exists. The zero-sum game is not an
option, and I believe that where there is a will, there
is a way. As co-Chairs, we endeavoured both to be
creative and to maintain momentum while respecting
the aspirations of all Member States. Based on the
principle that nothing is agreed on until everything is
agreed on, and using interactive discussions, we tried
to identify interlinkages among the five clusters, with
the goal of determining elements of commonality and
issues for further consideration. We always acted as
honest brokers, in good faith and with full impartiality,
aware of the essential role that Member States have in
this process.
Our common objective is to make the best of the
Security Council’s capacity to meet new demands as
the United Nations faces a growing array of challenges,
including terrorism, humanitarian crises, human rights
violations, armed conf licts and important health and
environmental concerns. Those challenges can only be
addressed in a coordinated manner, because whatever
happens now in one corner of the world has echoes tens
of thousands of miles away. The co-Chairs therefore
pursued a way forward that will continue to build on
increasing mutual trust among Member States in order
to further explore what we have in common and to see
how we can reduce the gap between different positions,
keeping in mind that we cannot start from scratch
every time.
Because
Security
Council
reform
may
have geopolitical consequences, the process of
intergovernmental negotiations cannot simply be
a collection of data. Its purpose is not to identify
majorities and minorities of countries but to find a
solution acceptable to all. Its role is to create bridges
and trust, not to separate Member States into different
camps. At the same time, aspirations have to match
10/14

19/07/2019

reality. As co-Chairs, we tried to take all these aspects
into consideration.
The United Nations is the only universal
international organization we have. Despite its
diversity of voices, it has not remained static since
1945. Our Organization has been in a continuing
process of evolution, including through the expansion
of the Security Council in 1965 and the establishment
of a range of United Nations specialized agencies,
including the International Atomic Energy Agency,
the International Criminal Court, the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Human Rights Council and UNWomen. These are only a few examples of how
institutions positively evolve if conditions are met.
We have all agreed to maintain the momentum
for reform of the Security Council. The Chinese
proverb says that a journey of a thousand miles begins
with a single step. We are all aware that a long road
lies ahead of us. The road may sometimes seem too
narrow and we may think that it is not wide enough
for everyone to walk it. But if we want to reach the
same destination, we need mutual trust and a general
desire to compromise. Because the intergovernmental
negotiations are a Member State-driven process, the
elements of commonality and the issues for further
consideration that the co-Chairs have identified are
entirely based on the contributions of Member States.
It is not a consensus document because it includes
different opinions on how to reform the Security
Council, but, as the statements we have heard today
confirm, neither is it controversial, because it ref lects,
as accurately as possible, how Member States see
Security Council reform.
At the end of the day, this session of
intergovernmental negotiations was more than an
intellectual exercise in which we have had interactive
debates and exchanges of arguments. As co-Chairs, we
did our best to raise the expectations of Member States.
We hope that our work will be added to the achievements
of previous sessions and thereby contribute to the
continuation of this process during the seventy-second
session. As co-Chairs, we are grateful for the support
and encouragement we have received during the past
nine months from so many of our colleagues present
here, and we are deeply honoured by the trust you,
Mr. President, have placed in us. It was a privilege to
be at the service of all the States Members of the United
Nations during this seventy-first session.
17-22021

19/07/2019

The

A/71/PV.92

President:

Before

concluding

our

deliberations, I shall make a few brief remarks on the
question of equitable representation and the increase in
membership of the Security Council.
I would like to add my sincere thanks to the
co-Chairs,

Ambassador

Representative

of

Ion

Romania,

Jinga,

Permanent

and

Ambassador

Mohamed Khaled Khiari, Permanent Representative of
Tunisia, for diligently guiding the intergovernmental
negotiations throughout the seventy-first session. On
behalf of the General Assembly, I say to both that theirs
was a job well done.
I would also like to take this opportunity to express
my sincere appreciation to all Member States and
delegations for the understanding and cooperation that
they extended to the co-Chairs. It is the willingness
of Member States to engage and interact with broad
understanding

and

unf lagging

commitment

that

has made the intergovernmental negotiations such a
critical element of the General Assembly’s work, and it
will be their willingness to explore convergences and
commonalities that will take us to the reforms we seek.
While

this

session

of

intergovernmental

negotiations has concluded with much work remaining
to be done in terms of a reform model acceptable to all
Member States, I believe that the commonalities and
issues for further consideration outlined under each of
the five clusters under discussion will serve to assist
progress in the future work of the negotiations. I trust
that the intergovernmental negotiations will proceed
from here to the seventy-second session with the same
constructive energy, and in a fresh spirit of f lexibility,
so as to enable further progress to be made on the
central responsibility of the General Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 122?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 126 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(q) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Pacific Islands Forum
Draft resolution (A/71/L.77)
The President: I now give the f loor to the
representative of the Federated States of Micronesia to
introduce draft resolution A/71/L.77.
Mrs. Chigiyal (Micronesia): I have the honour
to introduce draft resolution A/71/L.77, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Pacific Islands Forum”, on behalf of the members of
the Forum.
The draft is an update of resolution 69/318 and
serves two purposes. First, it takes stock of various
developments over the past two years, and secondly,
it encourages further cooperation between the two
organizations. Let me brief ly point out a few key
elements in this year’s draft resolution.
Notably, we have welcomed the continued mutually
beneficial dialogue between the Pacific Islands Forum
leaders and the Secretary-General of the United Nations
and the possibility of a visit by the new SecretaryGeneral to our region now that he has assumed office.
We have also tried to consider practical solutions to
assist us in our sustainable development efforts. For
example, the partnerships between the United Nations
system and Pacific Islands Forum members have
yielded positive results through engagement with the
Pacific Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy
Efficiency in Tonga.
We have referenced the recently operationalized
Office of the Pacific Ocean Commissioner, which
would support our region’s efforts in implementing
the oceans agenda, including Sustainable Development
Goal 14. We have sought to consider how the United
Nations system can better deliver on the ground in
the Forum region and Forum members’ willingness to
engage in enhanced partnership. Lastly, we have sought
to recognize the importance of the recent declarations
of World Tsunami Awareness Day, the International
Day of the Tropics and World Tuna Day, respectively.
We would like to thank all the delegations that
participated constructively in the negotiations of the

17-2202111/14

A/71/PV.92

19/07/2019

draft resolution, and to express our gratitude for the
valuable support from the more than 80 delegations that
have joined us as sponsors of the draft resolution. We
would welcome and appreciate the General Assembly’s
adoption of the draft resolution by consensus.

The United States further notes that on 1 June,
the President announced that the United States will
withdraw from or renegotiate United States participation
in the Paris Agreement on Climate Change or another
international climate deal.

The President: The General Assembly will now
take action on draft resolution A/71/L.77, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Pacific Islands Forum”. The draft resolution is closed
for e-sponsorship.

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (q) of agenda item 126?

I now give the f loor to the representative of
the Secretariat.

Agenda item 7 (continued)

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/71/L.77, the following countries have
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Argentina,
Brazil, the Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Indonesia,
Israel, Jamaica, Lebanon, the Maldives, Morocco, Saint
Lucia, Seychelles, Surinam, Thailand, Turkey and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/71/L.77?
Draft resolution A/71/L.77 was adopted (resolution
71/316).

It was so decided.

Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: In order for the Assembly to take
action on the draft resolution, it will be necessary to
reopen consideration of the sub-item.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of sub-item (r) of
agenda item 126?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 126 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(r) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations

The President: Before giving the f loor for
explanations of position, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations of vote or position are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.

The President: I now give the f loor to the
representative of the Philippines to introduce draft
resolution A/71/L.76.

Mr. Dolbow (United States of America): The United
States is pleased to join the consensus on resolution
71/316. We would like to take this opportunity to
emphasize that the Small Island Developing States
Accelerated Modalities of Action Pathway, the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on
Financing for Development, and the Sendai Framework
for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030 should be
implemented in a manner that is consistent with the
rights and obligations of States under international law
and that nothing in these outcomes, including anything
referred to as agreed, creates or affect States’ rights or
obligations under international law.

Mr. Locsin (Philippines): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the States members of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
namely, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia,
Myanmar, Singapore, Thailand, Viet Nam and my own
country, the Philippines, to introduce draft resolution
A/71/L.76, entitled “Commemoration of the fiftieth
anniversary of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations”. The draft resolution is sponsored by the
States members of ASEAN, together with a number
of friends and partners from across the regions of the
Asia-Pacific, Africa, the Americas, the Caribbean and
Europe, as co-sponsors.

12/14

Draft resolution (A/71/L.76)

17-22021

19/07/2019

Fifty years ago, when ASEAN was established by
the Bangkok Declaration of 8 August 1967, its founding
fathers envisioned an organization with the primary
objective of promoting regional peace and stability
through abiding respect for justice and the rule of law
and adherence to the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. Today, ASEAN is forging ahead to
consolidate a vibrant, peaceful and outward-looking
regional organization within a global community of
nations. ASEAN represents an area that is home to
more than 630 million people — approximately 9 per
cent of the world population. Their needs, aspirations
and well-being are at the centre of our organization’s
vision for a politically cohesive, economically
integrated, socially responsible, people-oriented and
people-centred community, underpinned by three
pillars — the ASEAN Political-Security Community,
the ASEAN Economic Community and the ASEAN
Socio-Cultural Community.
The draft resolution presented to the General
Assembly today is the first commemorative one of its
kind proposed by a regional organization. It seeks to raise
awareness of ASEAN as a regional organization that
promotes multilateralism and regional peace, stability
and prosperity, and highlights complementarities
between the Kuala Lumpur Declaration on the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations 2025: Forging
ahead together and the United Nations 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
Over the years, ASEAN’s relations with the
United Nations have steadily progressed. We value the
engagement between the two organizations’ secretariats
and the regular dialogues between the United Nations
and ASEAN’s leaders, ministers and senior officials
through the ASEAN-United Nations Summit and other
meetings, including those that take place annually on
the margins of the high-level debates following the
opening of the session of the General Assembly. They
provide opportunities to pursue our complementary
agendas for people, the planet and prosperity.
We are proud of our robust and constructive
relations with ASEAN’s dialogue partners: Australia,
Canada, China, Japan, India, New Zealand, the Russian
Federation, the Republic of Korea, the United States
and the European Union, as well as with our sectoral
dialogue partners and development partners. ASEAN
also continues to play a central role in platforms that
have contributed to regional peace and stability, such
as the ASEAN Plus Three, the East Asia Summit, the

A/71/PV.92

ASEAN Regional Forum and the ASEAN Defence
Ministers’ Meeting Plus. We are equally proud of
ASEAN’s engagement with other regional groups such
as the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States, the Pacific Alliance, the Southern Common
Market and other regional organizations, in the pursuit
of common aspirations for our peoples.
We continue to see Member States’ growing interest
in enhancing cooperation with ASEAN through their
designation of more than 80 ambassadors to ASEAN
in Jakarta. We look forward to developing friendly
relations and mutually beneficial ties with other States
Members of the United Nations, in accordance with
the ASEAN Charter. All of this highlights ASEAN’s
firm belief that regional organizations and the United
Nations have unique and complementary capacities
for addressing key issues for the common good. The
draft resolution therefore not only commemorates 50
years of ASEAN but also celebrates 50 years of robust
partnerships, pioneering initiatives and the power of
possibility through constructive engagement with
all of the States Members of the United Nations to
achieve our collective goals of inclusive growth and
sustained peace.
On behalf of the ASEAN member States, 1 wish
to take this opportunity to convey our profound
appreciation to all the sponsors of the draft resolution,
as well as our dialogue partners and all Member
States, for their continued support and constructive
engagement with ASEAN.
I now humbly request that all Member States adopt
draft resolution A/71/L.76 by consensus.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/71/L.76, entitled
“Commemoration of the fiftieth anniversary of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations”.
I now give the f loor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/71/L.76, the following countries have also become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Albania, Argentina,
Belarus, Cambodia, Chile, China, Colombia, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Estonia, Georgia, Greece, Hungary,
Israel, Italy, Jordan, the Lao People’s Democratic

17-2202113/14

A/71/PV.92

Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Maldives, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Nepal,
Nigeria, Norway, Palau, Pakistan, Panama, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Tajikistan, Tonga, Turkey, the United Republic of
Tanzania, the United States of America and Uruguay.

14/14

19/07/2019

Draft resolution A/71/L.76 was adopted (resolution
71/317).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded its consideration of sub-item (r) of agenda
item 126.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

17-22021
