170

General Auembly-Thlrty-second Session

of any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with
the purposes of the United Nations,
Deeply concerned at the continuing critical situation
in the Territory, resulting from the persistent refusal
on the part of the Government of Indonesia to comply
with the provisions of the resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council,

Recalling its resolutions 3485 ( XXX) of 12 December 1975 and 31/53 of I December 1976 and
Security Council resolutions 384 (1975) of 22 December 1975 and 389 (1976) of 22 April 1976,
l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
East Timar to self-determination and independence. and
the legitimacy of their struggle to achieve that right;

2. Reaffirms its resolutions 3485 ( XXX) and 31 /
53 and Security Council resolutions 384 (1975) and
389 (1976);
3. Rejects the claim that East Timar has been
integrated into Indonesia, inasmuch as the people of
the Territory have not been able to exercise freely their
right to self-determination and independence;
4. Requests the Special Committee on ,the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples to keep the situation in the Territory under
aotive consideration, to follow the implementation of
the present resolution, to dispatch to the Territory as
soon as possible a visiting mission with a view to the
full and speedy implementation of the Declaration and
to report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirtythird session;

5. Requests the Secretary-General in consultation
with the Chairman of the Special Committee, in the
meantime to send urgently a special representative to
East Timar for the purpose of making a thorough, onthe-spot assessment of the existing situation in the Territory and of establishing contact with the representatives of the Frente Revolucionaria de Timar Leste
Independente and the Government of Indonesia, as
well as the Governments of other States concerned, in
order to prepare the ground for a visiting mission of
the Special Committee, and to report thereon to the
Special Committee;
6. Draws the attention of the Security Council, in
conformity with Article 11, paragraph 3, of the Charter
of the United Nations, to the critical situation in the
Territory of East Timor and recommends that it
should take all effective steps for the implementation
of its resolutions 384 (1975) and 389 (1976) with
a view ,to securing the full exercise by the people of
East Timor of their right to self-determination and independence;
7. Calls upon the Government of Indonesia and
the leadership of the Frente Revolucionaria de Timar
Leste Independente to facilitate the entry into East
Timar of the International Committee of the Red
Cross and other relief organizations in order to assist
the people of the Territory;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third session the item entitled "Question of
East Timar".

83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977

32/35.

Activities of foreign economic and other
interests which are impeding the implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples in Southern Rhodesia and Namibia and in all other Territories under colonial domination and ef.
forts to eliminate colonialism, apartheid
and racial discrimination in southern
Africa

The General Assembly,
Having considered ,the item entitled "Activities of
foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples in Southern Rhodesia and Namibia and in all
other Territories under colonial domination and efforts
to eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in southern Africa",
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to this question, 48
Taking into consideration the parts of the report of
the United Nations Council for Namibia 49 relating to
this question,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970,
containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration, as well as all other
resolutions of the United Nations relating ,to the item,
Taking into account the Maputo Declaration in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia and the
Programme of Action for the Liberation of Zimbabwe
and Namibia, 50 adopted by the International Conference in Support of ,the Peoples of Zimbabwe and
Namibia, held at Maputo from 16 to 21 May 1977,
as well as the Lagos Declaration for Action against
Apartheid, 51 adopted by the World Conference for
Action against Apartheid, held at Lagos from 22 to 26
August 1977,
Taking note of the decision concerning the export
of oil ,to the illegal racist regimes in southern Africa
adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its
fourteenth ordinary session, held at Libreville from 2
to 5 July 1977," 2
Rea{firmin[J the solemn obligation of the administering Powers under the Charter of the Uni,ted Nations
to promote the political, economic, social and educational advancement of the inhabitants of the Territories
under their administration and to protect the human
and natural resources of those Territories against
abuses,
4 8 Ibid., Thirt_V-S('CO/u/ Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/3::I
23/Rev.1), vol. I. chap. IV.
49 fbid., Supplement No. 24 (A/32/24), vol. I, part two,
chap. VI. and vol. II, annex XII.
50 A/32/109/Rev.1-S/12344/Rev.1, annex V. For the printed
text, sec Official Records of the Security Council, Thirtvsecond Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1977.
r.t A/CONF.91/9 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.77.XIV.2 and corrigendum), sect. X.
02 See A/32/310.

VU.

Hesolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Reaffirming that any economic or other activity
which impedes the implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples and obstructs efforts aimed at the elimination of colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination
in southern Africa and other colonial Territories violates the political, economic and social rights and
interests of the peoples of the Territories and is therefore incompatible with the purposes and principles of
the Charter,
A !firming that the natural resources of all colonial
Territories, particularly Zimbabwe and Namibia, are
the heritage of the peoples of those Territories and
that the exploitation of those resources by foreign
economic interests in conjunction with the illegal racist
minority regimes constitutes a direct violation of the
rights of the inhabitants and of the principles stated in
the Charter and all relevant resolutions of the United
Nations,
Noting with profound concern that the colonial
Powers and certain States, through their activities in
the colonial Territories, have continued to disregard
United Nations decisions relating to the item and that
they have failed to implement in particular General
Assembly resolutions 2621 (XXV) of 12 October
1970 and 31/7 of 5 November 1976, by which the
Assembly called upon the colonial Powers and those
Governments which had not yet done so to take
legislative, administrative or other measures in order
to put an end to enterprises in colonial Territories,
particularly in Africa, which are owned by their nationals or bodies corporate under their jurisdiction,
whenever such enterprises are detrimental to the interests of the inhabitants of those Territories, and to
prevent new investments which run counter to such
interests,
Condemning the intensified activities of those foreign
economic, financial and other interests which continue
to exploit the natural and human resources of the
colonial Territories and to accumulate and repatriate
huge profits to the detriment of the interests of the
inhabitants, particularly in southern Africa, thereby
impeding the realization by the peoples of the Territories of their legitimate aspirations for self-determination and independence,
Strongly condemning the support which the racist
minority regime of South Africa and the illegal racist
minority regime in Southern Rhodesia continue to
receive from those foreign economic, financial and other
interests which are collaborating with them in their
exploitation of the natural and human resources of,
and in the further entrenchment of their illegal and
racialist domination over, the international Territory
of Namibia and the Non-Self-Governing Territory of
Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe), respectively,
Strongly condemning the investment of foreign capital
in the illegal production of uranium and the collaboration by certain Western countries and other States
with the racist minority regime of South Africa in the
nuclear field which, by providing that regime with
nuclear equipment and technology, enables the latter
to develop nuclear and military capabiHties, thereby
promoting South Africa's continued illegal occupation
of Namibia as well as its growth as a nuclear Power,
Deeply concerned at the fact that foreign economic,
financial and other interests continue to deprive the
indigenous populations of other colonial Terri,tories,

171

- - - - - - - - · -----·-----

including those in the Caribbean and Pacific Ocean
regions, of their rights over the wealth of their co1:1ntries, and at the continued loss of ownership of land
by the inhabitants of those Territories as a result of
the failure of the administering Powers to take effective
steps to safeguard such ownership,
Conscious of the continuing need to mobilize world
public opinion against the involvem~nt of foreign economic, financial and other interests in the exploitation
of natural and human resources, which impedes the
independence of colonial Territories, particularly in
Africa,
l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples
of dependent Territories to self-determination and independence and to the enjoyment of the natural resources
of their Territories, as well as their right to dispose
of those resources in their best interests;
2. Reaffirms ,the relevant provisions of the Maputo
Declaration in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe
and Namibia and the Programme of Action for the
Liberation of Zimbabwe and Namibia, adopted by the
International Conference in Support of the Peoples of
Zimbabwe and Namibia, as well as the Lagos Declaration for Action against Apartheid, adopted by the World
Conference for Action against Apartheid;
3. Reiterates that any administering or occupying
Power which deprives the colonial peoples of the
exercise of their legitimate rights over their natural
resources or subordinates the rights and interests of
those peoples to foreign economic and financial interests
violates the solemn obligations it has assumed under
the Charter of the United Nations;
4. Reaffirms that, by their depletive exploitation of
natural resources, the continued accumulation and repatriation of huge profits and the use of those profits
for the enrichment of foreign settlers and the entrenchment of colonial domination over the Territories, the
activities of foreign economic, financial and other interests operating at present in the colonial Territories
of southern Africa constitute a major obstacle to political independence and to the enjoyment of the natural
resources of those Territories by the indigenous inhabitants;
5. Condemns the activities of foreign economic and
other interests in the colonial Territories that impede
the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and
the efforts to eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial
discrimination;
6. Strongly condemns all States which collaborate
politically, diplomatically, economically and militarily
with South Africa in flagrant violation of the relevant
United Nations resolutions, particularly the United
States of America, France, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the Federal Republic of Germany, Israel, Japan, Belgium and Italy;
7. Strongly condemns the United States, France,
the Federal Republic of Germany and Israel for collaborating with South Africa in nuclear matters and
requests all Governments to refrain from supplying the
racist minority regime of South Africa, directly or indirectly, with installations that might enable it to
produce uranium, plutonium and other nuclear materials, reactors or military equipment;
8. Calls once again upon all Governments which
have not done so to take legislative, administrative or

172

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

other measures in respect of their nationals and the
bodies corporate under their jurisdiction who own and
operate enterprises in colonial Territories, particularly
in Africa, which are detrimental to the interests of the
inhabitants of those Territories, in order to put an end
to such enterprises and to prevent new investments
that run counter to the interests of the inhabitants of
those Territories;
9. Requests all States to refrain from making any
investments in, or extending loans to, the minority
racist regimes in southern Africa and to refrain from
any agreements or measures to promote trade or other
economic relations with them;
10. Expresses its conviction that the scope of the
sanctions adopted against the illegal regime in Southern
Rhodesia should be expanded to cover all the measures
contemplated in Article 41 of the Charter and expresses
the hope that the Security Council will envisage adopting appropriate measures to this end;
11. Condemns all violations of the mandatory
sanctions imposed by the Security Council against the
illegal racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia,
as well as the continued failure of certain Member
States to enforce those sanctions, as being contrary
to ,the obligations assumed by them under Article 25
of the Charter;
12. Requests all States to take effective measures
to end the supply of funds and other forms of assistance,
including military supplies and equipment, to those
regimes which use such assistance to repress the peoples of the colonial Territories and their national liberation movements;
13. Calls once again upon all States to discontinue
all economic, financial or trade relations with South
Africa concerning Namibia and to refrain from entering
into economic, financial or other relations with South
Africa, acting on behalf of or concerning Namibia,
which may lend support to iits continued illegal occupation of that Territory;
14. Requests all oil-producing or oil-exporting
countries which supply crude oil and petroleum products to the racist regime of South Africa to cease fo11thwith all exports of crude oil and petroleum products to
the racist regimes in southern Africa and to take the
necessary measures against oil companies which, in
violation of the United Nations resolutions on sanctions,
continue to deliver oil to those regimes;
15. Strongly condemns the racist minority regime
of South Africa which, in violation of the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations and in open contravention of iits specific obligations under Article 25 of
the Charter, continues to collaborate with the illegal
racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia, and calls
upon that Government to cease immediately all forms
of collaboration with the illegal racist minority regime
in Southern Rhodesia;
16. Invites all Governments and organizations
within the United Nations system, having regard to the
relevant provisions of the Declaration on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, contained in General Assembly resolution 3201 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974, and of the Charter of Economic Rights
and Duties of States, contained in Assembly resolution
3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, to ensure in

particular that the permanent sovereignty of the colonial
Territories over their natural resources is fully respected
and safeguarded;
17. Calls upon the administering Powers to abolish
every discriminatory and unjust wage system which
prevails in the Territories under their administration
and to apply in each Terri,tory a uniform system of
wages to all the inhabitants without any discrimination;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake,
through the Office of Public Information of the Secretariat, a sustained and wide campaign with a view to
informing world public opinion of the facts concerning
the pillaging of natural resources and the exploitation
of the indigenous populations by foreign monopolies
and the support they render to the colonialist and racist
regimes;
19. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to continue to examine this
question and to report thereon to the General Assembly
at its thirty-third session.
83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977

32/36.

Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions associated
with the United Nations",
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained
in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
and the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration, contained in its resolution 2621
(XXV) of 12 October 1970, as well as all other relevant resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and
the Security Council on this subject, including in particular Assembly resolution 31 /30 of 29 November
1976,
Having examined the reports submitted on the item
by the Secretary-General, 53 the Economic and Social
Council 04 and the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples,"" as well as the !'elated report of the
United Nations Council for Namibia/H
Taking into account the Maputo Declaration in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia and the
Programme of Action for the Liberation of Zimbabwe
53 A/3:!/87 and Add.1-3 and A/32/286; see also A/AC.109/
L.1174.
5-i Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/32/3), chap. VII, sect. E.
55
Ibid., Supplement No. 23 (A/32/23/Rev.1), vol. I,
chap. VI
6
5 Ibid., Supplement No. 24 (A/32/24), vol. I, part two,
chaps. II and V, and vol. II, annexes III, IX and X.
