S/PV.7578

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7578th meeting

Monday, 14 December 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Pressman. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Taula
Mr. Laro
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central African Republic
(S/2015/918)
Letter dated 10 December 2015 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2015/943)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-42293 (E)
*1542293*

S/PV.7578

The situation in the Central African Republic

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in the Central African Republic (S/2015/918)
Letter dated 10 December 2015 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2015/943, annex)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/918, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central
African Republic. I also wish to draw the attention
of Council members to document S/2015/943, which
contains a letter dated 10 December 2015 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Hervé Ladsous and by Her Excellency
Ms. Raimonda Murmokaitė, Permanent Representative
of Lithuania, in her capacity as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013)
concerning the Central African Republic.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I thank you, Sir,
for this opportunity to share the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in the Central African Republic
(S/2015/918) and the update on the implementation of
the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA).
Despite the many challenges and repeated attempts
by spoilers to derail the process — in particular
during the outbreaks of violence in late September and
October — I believe that we are nonetheless in a position
to say that the Central African Republic is moving
ahead with the transition, in line with the revised
electoral calendar. Yesterday, as we are all aware, the
2/6

14/12/2015

constitutional referendum was held, ushering in the
final and most sensitive phase of the electoral process.
As Council members know, the first round of
the presidential and legislative elections is scheduled
to take place in two weeks on 27 December. In that
regard, the constitutional referendum is perhaps a dry
run for the first set of national elections. Yesterday,
the constitutional referendum was held successfully
throughout most of the country, including in a number
of hotspots, such as Bambari. Some 60 per cent of
eligible voters were able to vote yesterday, and I remind
the Council that the elections continue today in certain
localities in order to complete the process.
Clearly and unfortunately, efforts were made
by certain anti-Balaka elements and members of the
ex-Séléka Front populaire pour la renaissance de la
centrafrique led by Nourredine Adam to disrupt the
consultations in certain parts of Bangui and in the
regions. In Bangui and in Bria in particular, the proactive
and preventive measures taken by MINUSCA allowed
the voting to proceed in most polling centres despite
localized security incidents. In the towns of Birao,
Bossangoa, Ndele and Kaga Bandoro, spoilers resorted
to violence and intimidation of voters and electoral
staff, thereby preventing the holding of the referendum
despite MINUSCA attempts to thwart them. A total of
three peacekeepers were injured in incidents in Bangui
and Bria. That is why, as I said, the voting period has
been extended today in certain locations where the
voting was unable to proceed appropriately.
It must be noted that the unprecedented registration
of nearly 2 million voters, representing 95 per cent of
the estimated electorate, demonstrates the people’s
strong desire for change. The situation for refugees
is more complicated. Despite considerable efforts,
only one-third of potential voters among refugees
were able to register to vote. We must not allow the
actions of a few to disrupt the hopes and aspirations
of the many for a successful electoral process that
will return their country to constitutional order. We
must ensure that Central Africans — whether inside
or outside the country — can cast a vote to elect their
future Government, free from intimidation. MINUSCA
and the wider United Nations system will continue to
lend their full technical, logistical and security support
to enable the Transitional Authority to achieve these
objectives.
I welcome the signing of the electoral code of
conduct by the presidential candidates on 9 December.
15-42293

14/12/2015

The situation in the Central African Republic

Further to yesterday’s launch of the electoral campaign,
I appeal to all candidates to campaign peacefully. I note
the decision of the Constitutional Court approving the
final list of 30 presidential candidates, including one
woman, whereas 14 candidates were deemed ineligible.
I call on the supporters of those applicants not approved
by the Constitutional Court to respect the decision
and to avoid doing anything that could complicate or
jeopardize the electoral process.
The continued support of the countries of the
subregion, the wider international community and
the Council is absolutely essential at this moment. In
that regard, I welcome the communiqué issued by the
Economic Community of Central African States on
25 November endorsing a final technical extension
to allow for the completion of the transition, in line
with the revised electoral calendar. I also thank all
donors that have supported the electoral process, and
welcome in particular the recent pledges by Gabon and
Equatorial Guinea to close the remaining funding gap
for the elections. Pledges are one thing, however, and
honouring them is another. I would strongly encourage
all countries that have not transferred their funds to
disburse them now without delay, because the process is
under way and expenses must be covered immediately.
The timely visit of His Holiness Pope Francis to
Bangui on 29 and 30 November brought new hope to
the Central Africans and undoubtedly helped to reduce
intercommunal tensions. The remarkable image of His
Holiness’ visit to a mosque in the PK5 neighbourhood
of Bangui demonstrated once again that religion is not
at the heart of the difficulties facing the Central African
Republic. We must continue to promote the dialogue
between all communities by every means available and
support the Central Africans in further advancing the
reconciliation process at all levels.
Although the security situation naturally remains
fragile and pockets of insecurity persist throughout
the country — including in Bangui and, most
importantly, along the main road to the border
with Cameroon — MINUSCA, with the support of
Operation Sangaris, continues to adopt as robust a
posture as possible to protect civilians and create a safe
environment for the holding of free and fair elections.
The Mission has redeployed some of its forces in areas
identified as potential hot spots, and efforts have been
made to strengthen the Mission by accelerating ongoing
deployments and in redeploying, on a temporary basis,
the Senegalese rapid reaction contingent from the United

S/PV.7578

Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire in the framework of
inter-mission cooperation. I thank the Security Council
for having approved that redeployment.
I am encouraged by the efforts being made to
support the stabilization of the security situation
and open a space for dialogue, especially before the
elections. The successful launch of the precantonment
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) process, which allowed the cantonment of
approximately 1,700 combatants without obligation to
disarm, should be considered a first step towards the
genuine DDR that we will strive to achieve with the
new Government that emerges from the elections. The
recent organization of a round table on security helped
to spur the development of a national vision for security
sector reform. Addressing the integration of members of
armed groups into the security and defence forces will,
however, be essential to making sustainable progress
in DDR and security sector reform, although, as recent
events have demonstrated, that will not be enough.
We must therefore be firm and fight impunity for
perpetrators of serious violations of human rights and
humanitarian law. I urge the authorities of the Central
African Republic, with the support of MINUSCA, to
continue to prosecute the instigators and perpetrators
of serious crimes and to protect victims and witnesses.
The international community must also support the
Central African authorities in the establishment of the
special criminal court.
Three days ago, on 12 December, the central prison
in Ngaragba, Bangui, was reopened thanks to the
joint support of MINUSCA and the European Union.
Council members will recall that the reopening was
made necessary by the mass escapes that took place
during the crisis of late September, which, I recall, were
abetted by uniformed Central African troops. More
broadly, I think we must remain committed to finding
solutions with regard to national capacities to manage
security and prison facilities, which also touches on the
security of MINUSCA prison staff.
In conclusion, the efforts we have seen on the
part of some to undermine yesterday’s constitutional
referendum demonstrate that there are actors who remain
determined to derail the political process in the country.
With only two weeks until the first round of elections,
it is very important to further contain such attempts
by spoilers. The entire international community must
therefore remain united in its uncompromising message
in rejection of any attempt to derail the political process

15-422933/6

S/PV.7578

The situation in the Central African Republic

14/12/2015

from any quarter and to demonstrate that there will be
consequences for those who seek to do so.

Panel’s report, letters have been sent out to the relevant
States and organizations.

Looking ahead, we must be mindful that, as
important as the elections are, they are not an end in
themselves. More than ever, we must try to address the
root causes of the crisis, for which we will need a new
Government that works in a spirit of unity, inclusivity
and reconciliation. To address all of the priorities at the
heart of the crisis, including the humanitarian situation
and the need to reinvigorate the economy, the support of
the Council and key partners will be vital. The people
of the Central African Republic, who have experienced
such tragedy for so long, deserve nothing less.

With regard to the work of the Committee and
the Panel of Experts since my last briefing to the
Council, I wish to recall that, on 9 February 2015,
the United Nations Mine Action Service provided the
Committee with an overview of its work in the Central
African Republic. During the Committee’s informal
consultations of 31 March, the Coordinator of the Panel
of Experts presented the Panel’s programme of work.

The President: I thank Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Murmokaitė,
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013).
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I have the honour
to brief the members of the Security Council in
my capacity as the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013), concerning the Central African Republic. In
my statement, I intend to highlight the main findings
of the final report of the Panel of Experts and briefly
touch upon the discussion of the report and its
recommendations during the Committee’s meeting on
20 November. I also intend to highlight the work of
the Committee and the Panel of Experts since my last
briefing to the Council (see S/PV.7331), on 9 December
2014.
On 20 November, the Committee met with the
Panel of Experts to consider its final report and
recommendations. According to the report, armed
groups remain in control of, or still exert influence
over, almost all inhabited areas of the Central African
Republic. Armed groups are also continually rearming,
and present a key risk to the holding of elections in the
country. Attacks against peacekeepers have also been
ongoing. The report also highlighted that the Lord’s
Resistance Army continues to be a major threat in the
Central African Republic and is using the country to
gather resources. The report furthermore underlines
that the local population in the Central African Republic
has turned out in unprecedented numbers to register
for the elections, thereby demonstrating the strong
will of the country’s people for the polls to be held. In
connection with the recommendations contained in the

4/6

On 22 April, in its fourth formal meeting, the
Committee held deliberations on the reported travel
ban violations by sanctioned individuals François
Bozizé and Nourredine Adam. During the meeting,
members heard statements from the representatives
of the Permanent Missions to the United Nations of
the Central African Republic, Chad, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Republic of the Congo,
Ethiopia, Kenya, South Africa and Uganda. Committee
members also received a short briefing from the Office
of the Special Representative of INTERPOL to the
United Nations.
On 12 June, Committee members heard a
presentation by the Coordinator of the Panel of Experts
via telephone link with regard to the Panel’s progress
update submitted to the Committee on 20 May. During
the presentation, the Panel drew attention to the lack of
cooperation from some States in the region and noted
scepticism with regard to the prospect of the agreement
on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
being implemented as signed.
On 3 August, the Committee discussed the arms
embargo and related exemptions procedures via video
teleconference with representatives of the Government
of the Central African Republic, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Central
African Republic and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and the arms
expert and armed groups expert/Coordinator of the Panel
of Experts. Following that meeting, and in connection
with a request from the Central African authorities, the
Committee agreed to revise its guidelines to allow the
Central African Republic itself to submit arms embargo
exemptions requests, in addition to supplying States.
On 21 August, during its fifth formal meeting,
the Committee again discussed the arms embargo and
related exemptions procedures with representatives

15-42293

14/12/2015

The situation in the Central African Republic

of the Permanent Missions of the Central African
Republic, Chad, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Republic of the Congo, the Sudan, and South Sudan.
The formal meeting on 21 August was followed by
informal consultations of the Committee, during which
the Coordinator of the Panel of Experts presented
the Panel’s mid-term update, submitted on 29 July.
In addition to providing an overview of the findings
and recommendations of the mid-term update, the
Coordinator expressed the view that the Committee’s
decision on 20 August to add four additional names
to its sanctions list had been timely and important,
with real consequences on the ground. He called on
the Committee to consider adding the names of more
individuals and entities to its sanctions list.
With regard to the mid-term update, the Coordinator
furthermore noted that the management and storage
of weapons stockpiles still remained a major issue
in the Central African Republic. He highlighted that
the Panel had continued to investigate armed groups
in the country that had committed grave violations
of international humanitarian law, while meeting
the criteria set by the Security Council for sanctions
designations. Following the meeting, the Committee
proceeded to arrange for the dispatch of letters in line
with the Panel’s recommendations.
On 10 September, I briefed the Committee on my trip
to the Central African Republic from 25 to 28 August.
The trip represented a long-awaited opportunity to
receive feedback from the ground on the implementation
of the sanctions regime from a wide range of actors in
the Central African Republic, including Government
officials, diplomatic missions, MINUSCA senior
management and mining authorities, as well as local
religious, civil and opinion leaders. The visit also
served to pave the way for improved communication
and collaboration between the Panel of Experts and
country authorities. During my visit, I also met with
representatives of the Economic Community of Central
African States and the African Union. I concluded
that the arms embargo was still very much useful and
essential in the Central African Republic context, and
recommended the improvement of the weapons-storage
capacity of the armed forces of the country. I also noted
the extent to which violence against children was a
major issue in the Central African Republic. In that
connection, I recommended that there was a need to
add more names to the Committee’s sanctions list, in

S/PV.7578

particular in relation to the exploitation of children and
to sexual violence.
Also on the issue of children, on 3 December,
members of the Committee and the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict held a joint meeting
with Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, with regard to the impact of conflict on
children in the Central African Republic. Citing names
of perpetrators, the Special Representative called upon
the Committee and the Panel of Experts to continue to
conduct investigations on armed groups recruiting and
using children in the Central African Republic. In that
regard, I would like to inform the Council that I have
encouraged members of the Committee to consider
further designations in connection with statements
of case that were proposed by the Panel of Experts in
July and October 2014 and in January and November
2015. With the latest statements of case submitted on
18 November, the total number of cases submitted
by the Panel stands at 25, of which 20 pertain to
individuals and five to entities. As the names of only
five individuals and one entity are currently on the
Committee’s sanctions list, I hope more names will be
submitted in the remaining weeks of my chairmanship.
I also would like to inform members of the Council
about the follow-up efforts made by the Chair with the
delegations of Kenya and South Africa with regard
to the reported travel ban violations, respectively, of
sanctioned individuals François Bozizé and Nourredine
Adam to South Africa, and the letters transmitted by
the Chair in that connection on 30 October, which
requested both delegations to reply by 6 November.
On 5 November, the Permanent Mission of South
Africa replied to the Panel of Experts, indicating
that South Africa was unable to meet the deadline of
6 November and would respond in a timely manner
once the necessary processes had been completed.
Since then, the Committee has not yet heard again
from the delegation of South Africa. With regard to the
Permanent Mission of Kenya, while I am aware that
the Panel of Experts met in New York with Kenya’s
Director of the United Nations and Multilateral Affairs
Directorate, who was visiting from the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs in Nairobi, no reply has been received
from Kenya in connection with my letters of 30 October
concerning Adam’s flight to Nairobi.

15-422935/6

S/PV.7578

The situation in the Central African Republic

With the agreement of the President of the Council
and the members of the Council, therefore, and along
the lines of a similar initiative undertaken by the
Council’s President and the Chair of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo Committee in November, I
would like to propose that the President and myself
hold joint bilateral meetings with the delegations of
Kenya and South Africa with a view to obtaining a
definitive response regarding the Committee’s letters
of 30 October. It is my firm conviction that, if Member
States continue to be unable or unwilling to implement
the Council’s travel ban in the context of the Central
African Republic sanctions, the Council’s silence will

6/6

14/12/2015

send the wrong message not only to Member States in
the region and beyond, but to the sanctioned individuals
themselves — a message that there are no consequences
when one violates a travel ban imposed by the Security
Council.
The President: I thank Ambassador Murmokaitė
for her briefing.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.30 a.m.

15-42293
