S/PV.8722

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8722nd meeting

Wednesday, 12 February 2020, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Goffin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Belgium)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Auväärt
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Maman Sani
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Miguel
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Ladeb
Ms. Pierce
Ms. Norman-Chalet
Mr. Pham

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-03633 (E)
*2003633*

S/PV.8722

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 4.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Libya to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2020/113, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Belgium, China, Dominican Republic, Estonia,
France, Germany, Indonesia, Niger, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, South Africa, Tunisia, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Viet Nam
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Russian Federation
The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 14 votes in favour, none against and
1 abstention. The draft resolution has been adopted as
resolution 2510 (2020).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): As the host country of
the Berlin Conference on Libya, we are very pleased
to see Security Council endorse the conclusions of the
Conference today. With the adoption of resolution 2510
(2020), the Council sends an important signal for peace
in Libya that reaffirms the concrete commitments of all
participants in the Berlin Conference. It is crucial for
Libya that we are able to send this signal of unity.
2/8

12/02/2020

The adoption of the resolution is timely, just days
before the inaugural meeting of the international
follow-up committee to the Berlin Conference on
Libya, to be held at a ministerial level chaired by
German Foreign Minister Heiko Maas on 16 February
on the margins of the Munich Security Conference.
The international follow-up committee will coordinate
efforts to ensure the implementation of the conclusions
of the Berlin Conference.
We are also encouraged by the progress made
thus far in implementing some aspects of the Berlin
Conference conclusions. We call upon the parties to
continue their cooperation in the 5+5 Joint Military
Commission in order to work out the conditions of the
ceasefire. We also welcome the ongoing preparations
for political talks and call for the inclusive participation
and representation across all segments of Libyan society.
While taking note of the meetings of the African
Union High-Level Committee on Libya in Brazzaville
and the session on Libya during the recent African
Union summit in Addis Ababa, we welcome the ongoing
efforts of the African Union in supporting the Berlin
process. The African Union plays an important role in
finally bringing peace to Libya.
The implementation of the existing arms embargo
remains key. There cannot be a sustainable military
solution to the conflict in Libya. With today’s
resolution, the international community has once more
demonstrated its resolve to hold violators accountable.
We welcome that the resolution expressly denounces
foreign interference in the conflict in Libya. The
swift implementation of the Berlin conclusions is
now crucial in the light of the ongoing violations of
international humanitarian law and reports of mounting
civilian casualties.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I deliver this
statement on behalf of Tunisia. The Niger associates
itself with this statement.
Tunisia welcomes the adoption of resolution 2510
(2020), concerning the political process in Libya. The
resolution will support the conditions for a lasting
ceasefire in Libya as soon as possible. My country
welcomes the broad consensus in the Security Council
on the need to make progress in the political process in
Libya, put an end to hostilities, stop foreign interference
and respect the arms embargo. That is the very essence
of the conclusions of Berlin Conference.
20-03633

12/02/2020

The situation in Libya

My country welcomes the efforts of the United
Nations and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ghassan Salamé, to achieve a political
settlement to the conflict in Libya. We reiterate our
thanks to the Federal Republic of Germany for having
hosted Berlin Conference. We would also like to thank
the penholder, the United Kingdom, for its efforts
during the negotiations on the resolution. Likewise, we
thank all the members of the Security Council for their
positive approach, as well as the support provided to
my delegation’s proposals.
Tunisia made sure that the resolution mentions
the Libyan political agreement as a reference and
that it includes a commitment to Libya’s sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity,
as well as an emphasis on the fact that there is no
military solution to the crisis in Libya and that there is a
need to reach a permanent ceasefire as soon as possible,
in addition to making reference to the important role
played by the neighbouring countries and regional
organizations, in particular the African Union and
the League of Arab States, in supporting the political
process in Libya.
We welcome the initiative of the African Union to
hold a reconciliation meeting among the Libyan parties
in the spring, support the Berlin Conference conclusions
and ensure that oil operations are not disrupted, for the
benefit of all Libyans, while also addressing the threat
of terrorism in the region. Tunisia calls upon all parties
to implement this resolution and work to transform the
truce into a permanent ceasefire without further delay.
We support the 5+5 Joint Military Commission in
proceeding with its work in order to achieve that goal.
Tunisia also looks forward to convening the Libyan
political forum in the near future. We also welcome the
ongoing economic process that was recently launched
to overcome the economic challenges facing Libya.
In conclusion, in line with the Tunis communiqué
for peace, we stress that all Libyans should come to
the dialogue table and arrive at consensus to emerge
from the current crisis in the context of a political
agreement and respect for international legitimacy. We
also reiterate that a solution to the Libyan conflict must
be found among Libyans themselves, without exclusion
or marginalization and within the framework of a
comprehensive reconciliation process under a civilian
system in a unified Libyan State.

S/PV. 8722

Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
current situation in Libya is complex, sensitive and
fragile and is seriously affecting the security and
stability of neighbouring countries and the region as a
whole. China supports the continued leading role of the
United Nations in promoting a Libyan-led and Libyanowned political process. We call on all parties to the
Libyan conflict to achieve a lasting ceasefire as soon as
possible. We appreciate the constructive actions taken
recently by the international community to ease the
situation in Libya.
The recently held Berlin Conference on Libya
issued a communiqué that reflects the important
consensus reached by the participants. The Security
Council’s endorsement of the communiqué will
contribute to an early peaceful settlement of the Libyan
question. In the light of that, we adopted resolution
2510 (2020), on which China voted in favour. China
takes note of the fact that the resolution was not
adopted unanimously. We believe that the views of all
sides should be fully respected during consultations
in order to reach consensus and maintain the unity of
the Council. That is the only way for the resolution to
yield the maximum positive effect. We hope that all
parties in Libya, relevant countries in the region and
the international community will work together for the
earnest implementation of the Berlin outcome. In that
process, the Secretariat should develop a plan of action
that fully reflects the leadership and ownership of
Libyans, accommodates the concerns of all parties and
leverages the positive role of the countries concerned.
China supports the African Union and the League
of Arab States in bringing their unique influence to
bear on a political settlement to the Libyan question and
in working in synergy with the United Nations. In the
implementation of the outcome of the Berlin Conference
and the Council’s resolution, the international
community should remain highly vigilant against
terrorism in and around Libya, resolutely combat
all forms of terrorism in the country and prevent the
cross-border movement of foreign terrorist fighters. We
must prevent Libya from becoming a breeding ground
for terrorism, the spread of which can jeopardize the
country’s peace process.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Indonesia welcomes the
adoption of resolution 2510 (2020). We thank the
penholder and the members of the Security Council for
their constructive engagement. We would like to thank
Germany for hosting the Berlin Conference.

20-036333/8

S/PV.8722

The situation in Libya

But today’s resolution is not only about the Berlin
Conference. It is about giving a chance for peace to take
place in Libya. It is about giving hope to the Libyans
that peace is not elusive. It is about saving the lives of
the Libyans. It has been 11 months since the outbreak
of the current crisis in Libya, and the attention of the
world is upon us, the Security Council. Indonesia voted
in favour of resolution 2510 (2020) so as to fulfil our
moral obligation and our solemn duty as a member of
the Security Council.
We support the international efforts to find peace in
Libya, which enjoy Libyan support and have continued
in a Libyan-owned and Libyan-led process. Libya’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity are of the utmost
importance. We support the work of neighbours and
regional organizations to help resolve the conflict in
the country. We support the work of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya and of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Ghassan Salamé, including
his three-step plan and multi-track approach. We have
heard his plea, and the Council must step up.
We call on the parties in Libya to make use of
the tools available to them and engage in peaceful
dialogue in good faith and with an honest interest in
the future of Libya. We call on everyone to adhere to
their commitments under international law, as well as
to respect the arms embargo and create a conducive
atmosphere so that peace can prevail.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): We welcome the diplomatic
efforts of the United Nations, Germany and other
parties in convening the Berlin Conference on Libya.
Given the fragile situation on the ground, it is vital for
the Security Council to seize the momentum created
in Berlin and support the implementation of the
Conference’s outcome. While resolution 2510 (2020)
is not perfect, it represents a commitment on the part
of the international community to strive towards a
Libyan-led and Libyan-owned peace process to finally
put an end to the conflict in Libya. Viet Nam therefore
decided to vote in favour of resolution 2510 (2020). It
is our sincere wish that the negotiations on issues of
great importance to the international community and
the countries concerned, such as in this case, address
all concerns to ensure the unified position of the
Security Council.
Mr. Auväärt (Estonia): Estonia supported
the adoption of resolution 2510 (2020) to endorse
the Berlin Conference conclusions. The positive
4/8

12/02/2020

momentum achieved in Berlin needed to be enhanced
and solidified, and that is what the resolution does. We
thank the United Kingdom and Germany for their work
and patience in leading the negotiations over the past
three and a half weeks — a process that should have
taken far less time considering the actual urgency of
the situation on the ground in Libya. The core message
of the resolution is clear.
First, the foreign interference in the conflict and
the blatant violations of the arms embargo must stop, as
agreed on in Berlin.
Secondly, the parties to the conflict need to agree
on an immediate and lasting ceasefire, which is the
basis for any further steps towards sustainable peace
in Libya.
Last, but by no means least, international efforts
on Libya need to be led by the United Nations. Estonia
fully supports Special Representative Salamé’s
three-point plan and his mediation between the Libyan
parties. We need a united Security Council to send
a clear signal to the parties involved in the Libyan
conflict, as well as to the Libyan people in their daily
suffering, by implementing what was agreed in Berlin
and here today. Let us not fail them and continue with
the implementation of the Berlin conclusions.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation abstained in the
voting on resolution 2510 (2020), which was drafted
by the United Kingdom and Germany in support of
the Berlin Conference on Libya. We still do not have
a clear understanding of whether all Libyan parties are
ready to implement that decision, although we have
repeatedly underscored the importance of that step
both during preparations for the Berlin Conference
and after its conclusion. It was a requirement due to
the specifics of the Libyan crisis, which was the result
of gross violations of the various relevant Security
Council resolutions in 2011.
It must be highlighted that, from the very beginning,
Russian representatives played an active part in
preparations for the Conference in the German capital.
In addition to working on the final communiqué, we
tried to support our German colleagues with practical
steps to create favourable conditions for the success of
the Conference. To that end, together with Turkey, we
organized a meeting of the Libyan parties in Moscow
on 13 January. Our initiative was aimed at achieving
the establishment of a ceasefire in Libya and became a
20-03633

12/02/2020

The situation in Libya

significant contribution to international efforts. Is that
not proof that Russia demonstrated as much interest
as anyone else in coordinating and implementing the
Berlin decisions, if not more?
Nevertheless, the way in which subsequent work
unfolded at the United Nations suggests that many were
more interested in simply adopting a Security Council
resolution as quickly as possible, regardless of how it
would be implemented. If the resolution is an end in
itself, then it appears that we have achieved that goal.
The Berlin Conference was designed as one of the
steps in Special Representative Salamé’s three-point
plan, namely, the consolidation of external actors in the
interest of creating the necessary conditions to launch
a peace process in Libya. We are all in agreement with
regard to that goal. All of the participants in Berlin
signed the document. If it were a matter of welcoming
that result at the Security Council, we could have done
so the very next day after the Conference. Instead, we
were told that it was necessary to adopt a resolution that
would look to the future and have more muscle. The
idea itself is not a bad one, but it does have one defect
that we are tired of repeating: the absence of clearly
expressed consent by the Libyan parties themselves.
That is the fundamental principle of the Libyan peace
process, which is enshrined in Security Council
resolutions on the matter.
Allow me to reiterate that only the Libyans
themselves should determine the future of their
country. I stress that that principle must extend to
the recommendations set out in the Berlin outcome
document and apply to those aspects that are to be
implemented by the Libyan parties, not by external
actors. We spoke about that principle with both the
organizers of the meeting in Germany and United
Nations officials. Was the consent of the Libyan
parties obtained? No. Were there any serious attempts
to obtain it? No. Meanwhile, we urged our colleagues
not to rush into adopting a resolution. That was also
discussed by other members of the Council that were
not invited to Berlin but have a direct interest in the
Libyan peace process.
The Libyans have just begun their dialogue,
including within the framework of the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission, through which the ceasefire
parameters should be formulated, as mentioned in the
Berlin communiqué. Why could we not wait for the
outcome of the Libyan consultations? Then we could

S/PV. 8722

have confirmed that the Libyans themselves were
in agreement and the Security Council could have
enshrined their decision. Instead, what we have today
is a document that orders the execution of something
that does not yet exist, provides for the possibility
of imposing sanctions for the non-implementation
of something that does not yet exist and requires the
Secretary-General to provide his recommendations in
that regard.
We doubt that such ultimatums will encourage
the Libyans to come to an agreement sooner. It is our
sincere wish to see the provisions of Security Council
resolutions on Libya implemented. We would like this
document to be viable; however, we do not believe that
it will be possible on the basis of this text. Therefore,
we could not vote in favour of it. If resolution 2510
(2020) is not implemented, we will remind the Council
of what we have said today. We have a number of other
criticisms regarding the text of the resolution, the
details of which I will not elaborate on, as we voiced all
of our concerns during consultations. Unfortunately,
they were rejected by the co-penholders.
I would like to mention one more thing. Yesterday
we adopted another resolution on Libya (resolution
2509 (2020)) (see S/PV.8719), a so-called sanctions
resolution. We could not help but notice the liberal
approach taken by some of our colleagues in reflecting
the realities on the ground in the texts of resolutions.
In one case, despite a particular event being a one-off,
it was persistently inserted into documents and,
in another, when an abundance of information and
facts from a variety of sources was available, they
were disregarded.
In conclusion, yesterday and today we have
adopted two resolutions on Libya on which there is no
consensus. That is a result of the actions of some of our
colleagues, about which we cannot express anything
but deep disappointment and regret.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
First, I would like to thank the United Kingdom,
as penholder, for proposing resolution 2510 (2020),
which was just adopted. However, I want to note that
we are disappointed that today’s vote did not garner
unanimous support among the members of the Security
Council, despite commitments agreed to by leaders
in Berlin, including the Russian Federation. It is also
very unfortunate that foreign mercenaries, including
from the Kremlin-linked Wagner Group, are making

20-036335/8

S/PV.8722

The situation in Libya

an inclusive political solution harder to achieve. Such
actions undermine the achievement of a political
solution facilitated by the United Nations and are not
helping the Libyan parties to come together, as was
stated was necessary.
However, through the resolution just adopted, the
Security Council answers the call of the Libyan people
for the international community to stop using their
country to wage conflict; to stop driving Libyans from
their homes; to help foster respect for international
humanitarian law and the need for unhindered
life-saving humanitarian access; to support their
desire for democratic governance; and to let schools
reopen and health centres restock. By voting to adopt
this resolution, the United States emphasizes the need
for additional accountability for those Member States
that continue to violate the arms embargo in spite of
the explicit commitments made in Berlin — violations
that continued immediately following the Berlin
Conference. External actors must stop fuelling the
conflict. Countries that participated in the Berlin
Conference committed to respect the arms embargo
in promises made by those at the highest levels of
Government. Resolution 2510 (2020) makes it clear that
now is the time for all Member States to comply with
the United Nations arms embargo.
The United States also reiterates its call for
de-escalation and the immediate withdrawal of
all foreign forces, including foreign mercenaries
and fighters. It is deeply regrettable that, despite
commitments made at the Berlin Conference, again,
some countries — including from around this table and
others mentioned in the report of the Panel of Experts (see
S/2019/914) — continue to send military equipment and
personnel to Libya. We remain concerned about reports
that forces affiliated with both the Libyan National
Army (LNA) and the Government of National Accord
(GNA) are contemplating significant military action in
the near future. Whether offensive or pre-emptive in
nature, such actions would violate the understandings
reached in Berlin.
Resolution 2510 (2020) clearly supports the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya in its important work
to have both the LNA and the GNA agree to de-escalate
and take active steps to establish a lasting ceasefire
through ongoing 5+5 Joint Military Commission talks.
Those talks should continue unimpeded.
6/8

12/02/2020

The United States also condemns the grave threat to
Libya’s unity and to the well-being of the Libyan people
posed by the shutdown of Libyan oil and gas facilities
by the Libyan National Army. Libya’s energy resources
belong to its people and underlie Libya’s economic
well-being. The Council previously made it clear that
no party should use those resources as a political
bargaining chip. The facilities must be reopened without
preconditions. Economic issues are core drivers of the
ongoing conflict, and Libya’s resources and revenues
must also be distributed transparently and equitably for
the benefit of all Libyan people.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Resolution 2510
(2020), which we just adopted, is viable. We all want to
see it implemented. I must say, it is the first time that I
have heard a period of three weeks after a conference
described as a rush. Some of us might think it is a bit
leisurely given the situation on the ground. However,
the important thing is that the resolution gives
concrete expression to the commitments that leaders,
including President Putin, adopted at Berlin, so that
the international community and the United Nations
can take action to uphold the arms embargo, assist the
parties in arriving at a ceasefire, make preparations to
look at options for monitoring it before it is agreed and
monitor that ceasefire once agreed. The most important
thing, though, is that the players are now in no doubt
as to the strong will of the Security Council. We want
to see a ceasefire, we want to see the arms embargo
upheld and we want to help the United Nations assist
the parties in arriving at a Libyan-owned and Libyanled solution. The United Nations might be front and
centre of the international community’s efforts, but it
is able to call on the support of the African Union, the
League of Arab States and the European Union.
On a general point, I want to stress again that
the Security Council does not act only when parties
ask it to act. The whole point of having the Security
Council is that it can step into a situation and make its
own decisions. That is why it is a sovereign Council.
Furthermore, consensus should never mean, and has
never meant, the lowest common denominator.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I am not going to repeat what I said before
about why we have doubts about whether resolution
20-03633

12/02/2020

The situation in Libya

2510 (2020) can be implemented. That is what led us to
abstain in the voting. We will see; events will show us
who was right. If the resolution has a positive impact on
resolving the conflict, I will be the first to acknowledge
that I was wrong. However, in the form in which it was
drafted, we have serious doubts that the resolution will
contribute to any kind of resolution, at least in the way
that we would like to see.
I would like to add that we are accustomed to the
United States being obsessed with trying to find a
Russian fingerprint in every situation. Instead of trying
to find those who are guilty and attaching labels, let
us instead remember what led to the current situation
in Libya. If members do not recall what that was, let
me remind them. A Security Council resolution was
blatantly violated in 2011, after which the country,
which had been thriving, was destroyed — we know
by which countries — and Libyan statehood basically
ceased to exist. As a result, Libya became what it
became, and we still cannot put it back together again.
Furthermore, Libya has become a haven for all types
of foreign terrorist fighters from all sorts of countries.
I also recall that Russia wanted to include a reference
to those terrorists in the resolution. The country that
was most against doing so was the United States.
Rhetorically, I wonder why.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elsonni (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We also express our appreciation to the
members of the Council for their efforts in adopting
resolution 2510 (2020), although it is long-overdue given
the events in my country for more than 10 months now.
We welcome the confirmation by the Council that
the only solution to the Libyan crisis is a political one.
While we understand the reservations of some States
with regard to certain paragraphs in the resolution,
we hope to work together in order to bring our views
closer together and overcome any differences, with
a view to achieving full consensus as we saw at the
Berlin Conference. That would free Libyans from the
international restrictions, leading to self-determination.
As we hear every single day, the solution should be a
Libyan-led and Libyan-owned.
Today’s resolution is undoubtedly an official
acknowledgement of the failure of the military

S/PV. 8722

adventure embarked upon by the aggressor and
his supporters, and of the failure of the attempted
usurpation of authority by force, as well as the failure
of the coup against legitimacy. We are here today trying
again to return to dialogue and a peaceful solution,
which was just around the corner last April. We hope
that the States supporting the aggression that has led to
the killing, displacement and deepening of the wounds
of Libyans have been convinced of the fact that the era
of imposing solutions by force is long gone.
We welcome the resolution, which is committed to
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and national unity
of Libya, and which reconfirmed resolutions 2259
(2015) and 2441 (2018), regarding the Libyan Political
Agreement and other sub-agreements emanating
from it. The resolution emphasizes the legitimacy of
the Government of National Accord and its exclusive
direct supervision of the sovereign institutions and the
national oil facilities. It also condemns the closure of
oil facilities and stresses the need for them to reopen.
Their closure affects all Libyans and threatens an allout economic collapse in the country.
At the same time, we thank Germany for its
efforts and diplomacy and reiterate our support for
the outcomes of the Berlin Conference to reach a
peaceful solution to the Libyan crisis. We hope that
all the States that took part in the Conference will be
committed to what was agreed upon and abide by the
resolution. We also welcome the resolution’s mention
of the importance of the African Union (AU) and the
outcomes of the recently held summit in Addis Ababa.
We hope that the AU will play an active role under
South Africa’s chairmanship, especially when it comes
to national reconciliation.
Although we welcome this resolution, we are
cautiously optimistic. We wonder why there are
persistent violations of the truce and continued
bombardment and killing of civilians. Why are there
threats against civilian airports? Why is there a
ban on the landing of aircraft, as experienced by the
United Nations and the Special Envoy’s team? That
was mentioned in a statement issued by the team this
morning. What are the guarantees for the success of
the outcomes of Berlin Conference and the political
track, including the discussions to be held in Geneva?
What are the guarantees for the success of the Berlin
Conference? Thus far, we have not seen any concrete
results from what is known as the 5+5 Libyan Joint
Military Commission when it comes to confirming a

20-036337/8

S/PV.8722

The situation in Libya

ceasefire? Some parties have not yet given the names of
their representatives for the political dialogue process.
Others are apprehensive regarding the selection and
representation mechanism, and about repeating past
mistakes. Those are legitimate questions that need to
be answered.
The resolution has raised our hopes, and we remain
hopeful that there might be a strong international will
for its implementation. Will the Council this time be
able to put an end to the obstructionists? Will it be
able to end violations and war crimes and hold their
perpetrators accountable? Will it put an end to the flow
of mercenaries? According to the report of the Panel
of Experts on the Sudan (see S/2020/36), at least five
Darfur armed groups have joined the Haftar militias,
including the Sudan Liberation Movement/Army, the
Transitional Council of the Sudan Liberation Movement/
Army, the Justice and Equality Movement, the Sudan
liberation Forces and the Sudanese Revolutionary
Awakening Council.
There are thousands of mercenaries and materiel
spread out in Al-Jufra, Al-Hone, Al-Qatrun and
southern Tripoli, as well as in the oil crescent area.

8/8

12/02/2020

Sudanese mercenaries are intent on closing Libyan
oil facilities. Some are trying to spread the rumour
that those closures were carried out by Libyan tribes
demanding equitable distribution of wealth. Many of
those and others are contributing to the destabilization
of the uncontrolled southern part of Libya, similar to
what happened during the August 2019 massacre in
Murzuq, which involved the killing nearly 40 citizens
by direct air strikes. This information does not come
from us; rather, it is derived from the relevant United
Nations reports. Yet there are those who continue to
call those people the Libyan National Army.
In conclusion, we thank the States that have begun
to reconsider their positions after understanding the
aggressor’s intentions. We would like to remind all
present that we are eager to reach a peaceful solution,
stop the bloodshed and work to find a platform for
dialogue among all Libyans, without exception. We
will spare no effort in working towards achieving that
goal. We will, however, remain vigilant and prepared
for ill-intentioned actions. For as we say, according to
the Hadith, “Once bitten, twice shy”.
The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.

20-03633
