140

General Assembly-Fortieth Session

issues and to bring them to a successful end by reach~ng
mutually acceptable and just solutions in accordance wtth
the objectives agreed upon;
7. Invites the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly, in his annual reports, on the pro~ess
achieved in the implementation of the present resolution.
119th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/179.

Patterns of consumption: qualitative aspects
of development
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the provisions of the Charter of t~e
United Nations, in particular Article 55, and the provisions of articles 22 to 26 of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 18 as well as the International Covenant on
Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights, 19
Recalling General Assembly resolution 3345 (XXIX) of
17 December 1974 and Economic and Social Council resolution 1981/51 of 22 July 1981 on the interrelationships
between population, resources, environment and development, as well as the discussion of the reports of the Secretary-General on the question, 20
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the overall socio-economic perspective of the world economy to the year 2000, 21
Convinced of the necessity to preserve in the long term
the balance between resources, population, environment
and development, taking into account the advances i:nade
in science and technology and the progress accomplished
in the transfer of technological innovations to developing
countries,
Recalling further, as stated in paragrai;,h 8 of_the Inte~ational Development Strategy for the Third Umted Nations
Development Decade, 22 that the development process
must promote human dignity, economic growth, productive employment and social equity and that the ultimate
aim of development is the constant improvement of the
well-being of the entire population on the basis of its full
participation in the process of development and a fair distribution of the benefits therefrom, within the framework
of the development plans and national priorities of each
country,
Reaffirming, in accordance with the goals and objecti~es
of the International Development Strategy for the Third
United Nations Development Decade, in particular paragraph 42 thereof, that the international community will
provide technical and financial support to achieve immediate and long-term social and economic objectives in the
context of an overall substantial increase in resources for
development, paying due respect to the cultural identities
of nations and peoples,
Considering that, in order to satisfy the fundamental
socio-economic needs, it is important to promote, in
accordance with national economic plans and priorities,
the production of goods and services necessary for the
improvement of the human condition,
Noting that the United Nations has undertaken to establish consolidated inventories of data on the environment,
natural resources, existing infrastructures and population,
including the structure and socio-economic needs of population groups,
Recalling also that the Statistical Commission, the
United Nations Research Institute for Social Development
18 Resolution 2 I 7 A (Ill).
19 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
20Efl979/75, E/1981/65. N36/571.

and other bodies in the United Nations system have
undertaken studies of socio-economic indicators,
Aware of the need for methods to measure with greater
accuracy the level of satisfaction of socio-economic needs
in the developing countries, in order to facilitate the search
for better ways of improving living standards,
l . Reaffirms the common goal pursue<1: by the international community of realizing, through national effo_rts and
international co-operation, and in accordance wtth the
organization and resources of each cou~try, t~e ~njoyment
of the economic, social and cultural nghts mdispensable
for the development of the human condition as well as for
the well-being of individuals and their families, especially
in regard to food, clothing, housing, education, health care
and necessary social services;
2. Considers that an accurate assessment of the ~dvances in living standards require~ a reliable measu~n~ mstrument consisting of a set of ind1ca~ors related to hvmg c<;>nditions, employment and the circumsta~ces unde~l)'.mg
them, and the improvement of basic national statlst~cal
programmes and capabilities related to food, ~lothmg,
housing, education, health care and necessary social services;
3. Notes the importance of identifying, for national
use, indicative patterns of cons1;1mption that adeq1:13tely
meet fundamental socio-economic needs and are tailored
to local and national requirements, particularly in developing countries, taking into account national experience,
plans and strategies;
4. Encourages, in this regard, countries to undertake
efforts to collect, tabulate and regularly publish accurate
and updated data on consumption and living standards for
different population groups, bearing in mind the ne_ed ~or
more international attention to be given to the quahtat1ve
aspects of development;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
implement General Assembly resolution 33~5 (XXIX~ in
order to assist all States, particularly developmg countnes,
and the organs of the United Nations in their efforts to
advance knowledge on the interrelated issues of resources,
population, environment and development;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
report on patterns of consumption ~nd related ~ocio-economic indicators, based on the views of all mterested
States and on information about the work done so far by
relevant bodies in the United Nations system, in particular
the United Nations Research Institute for Social Development and to submit the report to the Statistical Commission ~t its twenty-fourth session for consideration, and
requests the Economic and Social Council to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-second session.
l 19th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/180.

Agreement between the United Nations and
the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization
The General Assembly,
Recalling paragraph 11 of its resolution 34/96 of 13
December 1979,
Having considered Economic and Social Council resolution 1985/81 of 12 December 1985, and the draft agreement annexed thereto, intended to bring the United
21 N40/519.

22 Resolution 35/56 annex

141

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Nations Industrial Development Organization into relationship with the United Nations in accordance with Articles 57 and 63 of the Charter of the United Nations,
Approves the Agreement between the United Nations
and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization set forth in the annex to the present resolution.
119th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

ANNEX
Aan,ement between the United Nadons and the United Nadons
lndutrial Development Orpnizadon

PREAMBLE
In consideration of the provisions of Article 57 of the Charter of the
United Nations and ofarticle 18 of the Constitution of the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization, the United Nations and the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization agree as follows:
Article I

RECOONITION
The United Nations recognizes the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (hereinafter called the "Organization") as a specialized
agency within the United Nations system as defined in its Constitution
and as being responsible for taking appropriate action in accordance with
its Constitution, as well as with any treaties and agreements administered
by it.

CO-ORDINATION AND CO-OPERATION
In its relations with the United Nations, its organs and the agencies of
the United Nations system, the Organization recognizes the co-ordinating
role, as well as the comprehensive responsibilities in promoting economic
and social development, of the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council under the Charter of the United Nations. The Organization,
in exercise of its central co-ordinating role in the field of industrial development, recognizes the need for effective co-ordination and co-operation
with the United Nations, its organs and the agencies within the United
Nations system. Accordingly, the Organization agrees to co-operate with
the United Nations in whatever measure may be necessary to effect the
required co-ordination of policies and activities. The Organization agrees
further to participate in the work ofany United Nations bodies which have
been established or may be established for the purpose of facilitating such
co-operation and co-ordination, in particular through membership in the
Administrative Committee on Co-ordination.
Article 3

RECIPROCAL REPRESENTATION
(a) Representatives of the United Nations shall be invited to attend the
sessions of all the bodies of the Organization and all such other meetings
convened by the Organization, and to participate, without the right to vote,
in the deliberations of such bodies and at such meetings. Written statements presented by the United Nations shall be distributed by the Organization to its members.
(b) Representatives of the Organization shall be invited to attend meetings and to participate, without the right to vote and in accordance with the
relevant rules of procedure, in the deliberations of the Economic and Social
Council, its commissions and committees, of the Main Committees and
other organs of the General Assembly, of the Governing Council of the
United Nations Development Programme, and of the conferences and
meetings of the United Nations, with respect to items of the agenda
relating to industrial development matters within the scope of the activities
of the Organization and other matters of mutual interest. Written statements presented by the Organization shall be distributed by the Secretariat
of the United Nations to the members of the above-mentioned bodies, in
accordance with the relevant rules of proc..--dure.
(c) Representatives of the Organization shall be invited, for purposes of
consultation, to attend meetings of the General Assembly when matters as
defined in paragraph (b) above are under discussion.

Article 4

PROPOSAL OF AGENDA ITEMS
(a) After such preliminary consultation as may be necessary, the
United Nations may propose items for consideration by the Organization.
The Organization shall arrange for the inclusion of such items in the provisional agenda of its General Conference, Industrial Development Board,
Programme and Budget Committee, or any other subsidiary body, as
appropriate.
(b) After such preliminary consultation as may be necessary, the
Organization may propose items for consideration by the United Nations.
The United Nations shall arrange for the inclusion of such items in the provisional agenda of the Economic and Social Council or, as appropriate and
in accordance with the relevant rules of procedure, of other organs or
bodies of the United Nations.
Article 5

RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE UNITED NATIONS
Having regard to the obligation of the United Nations to promote
the objectives set forth in Article 55 of the Charter of the United Nations
and the function and power of the Economic and Social Council, under
Article 62 of the Charter, to make or initiate studies and reports with
respect to international economic, social, cultural, educational, health and
related matters and to make recommendations concerning these matters to
the specialized agencies concerned, and having regard also to the responsibility of the United Nations, under Articles 58 and 63 of the Charter, to
make recommendations for the co-ordination of the policies and activities
of such specialized agencies, the Organization agrees to arrange for the submission, as soon as possible, to the appropriate organ of the Organization,
of all formal recommendations which the United Nations may make to it.
(b) The Organization agrees to enter into consultation with the United
Nations upon request with respect to such recommendations, and in due
course to report to the United Nations on the action taken by the Organization or by its members to give effect to such recommendations, or on the
other results of their consideration.
(a)

Article 6

ANNUAL REPORT OF THE ORGANIZATION, INFORMATION AND
DOCUMENTS
(a) The Organization shall submit to the United Nations an annual
report on its activities.
(b) Subject to such arrangements as may be necessary for the safeguarding of confidential material, full and prompt exchange of appropriate information and documents shall be made between the United Nations and the
Organization.
Article 7

STATISTICAL SERVICES
(a) The United Nations and the Organization agree to strive for the
maximum co-operation, the elimination of all undesirable duplication
between them and the most efficient use of their technical personnel in
their respective collection, analysis, publication and dissemination of statistical information. They agree to combine their efforts to secure the greatest possible usefulness and utilization of statistical information and to minimize the burden placed upon Governments and other organizations from
which such information may be collected.
(b) The Organization recognizes the United Nations as the central
agency for the collection, analysis, publication, standardization and
improvement of statistics serving the general purposes of international
organizations.
(c) The United Nations recognizes the Organization as an appropriate
agency for the collection, analysis, publication, standardization and
improvement of statistics within its sphere, without prejudice to the right
of the United Nations, its organs and other agencies within the United
Nations system to concern themselves with such statistics in so far as they
may be essential for their own purposes or for the improvement of statistics throughout the world.
(d) The United Nations shall, in consultation with the Organization
and other agencies within the United Nations system, develop administrative instruments and procedures through which effective statistical cooperation may be secured between the United Nations, the Organization
and other agencies within the United Nations system brought into relationship with it.
(e) It is recognized as desirable that the collection of statistical information should not be duplicated by the United Nations or any of the agencies
within the United Nations system whenever it is practicable for any of

General Assembly-Fom_·e_th_Ses_s_i_o_i.____________

142

them to utilize information or materials which another may have available.
(j) In order to collect statistical information for general use, it is agreed
that data supplied to the Organization for incorporation in its basic statistical series or special reports should, so far as is practicable. be made available to the United Nations on request.
(g) It is agreed that data supplied to the United Nations for incorporation in its basic statistical series or special reports should, so far as is
practicable and appropriate. be made available to the Organization upon
request.
Article 8

ASSISTANCE TO THE UNITED NATIONS
The Organization shall. in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and the Constitution of the Organization, as well as any treaties
and agreements administered by it. co-operate with the United Nations by
furnishing to it such information. special reports and studies, and by rendering such assistance to it, as the United Nations may request.
Article 9

TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE
The United Nations and the Organization undertake to work together in
the provision of technical assistance in the field of industrial development.
In particular, they undertake to avoid undesirable duplication of activities
and services and agree to take such measures as may be required to achieve
effective co-ordination within the framework of existing co-ordinating
machinery in the field of technical assistance, taking into account the
respective roles and responsibilities of the United Nations and the Organization under their constitutive instruments, as well as those of other organizations participating in technical assistance activities. To this end, the
Organization recognizes the overall responsibilities of the resident coordinators for operational activities for development, as formulated in the
relevant General Assembly resolutions, and agrees to give consideration to
the common use of available services as far as is practicable. The United
Nations will make available to the Organization its administrative services
in this field for use as requested.
Articll' 10

TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGY
The Organization agrees to co-operate within the field of its competence
with the United Nations and its organs, particularly the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development and the United Nations Development Programme, as well as the agencies within the United Nations system, in promoting and facilitating the transfer of technology to and among
developing countries in such a manner as to assist the Organization in
attaining the objectives set forth in the Constitution.
Arttcle 11

TRUST, NON-SELF-GOVERNING AND OTHER TERRITORIES
The Organization agrees to co-operate within the field of its competence
with the United Nations in giving effect to the principles and obligations
set forth in Chapters XI, XII and XIII of the Charter of the United Nations
and other internationally recognized principles and obligations regarding
colonial countries and peoples, with regard to matters affecting the wellbeing and development of the peoples of the Trust, Non-Self-Governing
and other Territories.
Article 12

INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE
(a) The Organization agrees to furnish any information which may be
requested by the International Court of Justice in pursuance of Article 34
of the Statute of the Court.
(b) The General Assembly of the United Nations authorizes the Organization to request advisory opinions of the International Court of Justice
on legal questions arising within the scope of the Organization's activities
other than questions concerning the mutual relationships between the
Organization and the United Nations or other agencies within the United
Nations system.
(c) Such requests may be addressed to the International Court of Justice by the General Conference or by the Industrial Development Board of
the Organization.
(d) When requesting the International Court of Justice to give an advisory opinion, the Organization shall inform the Economic and Social
Council of the request.

Article 13

RELATIONS WITH OTHER AGENCIES WITHIN THE UNITED
NATIONS SYSTEM
The Organization shall inform the Economic and Social Council of
matters of inter-agency concern within its competence, and of any formal
agreement on such matters to be concluded between the Organization and
another agency within the United Nations system.
Article /4

ADMINISTRATIVE CO-OPERATION
ta) The United Nations and the Organization recognize the desirabilil\
of co-operation in administrative matters of mutual interest.
(b) Accordingly, the United Nations and the Organization undertake to
consult together, and with other agencies concerned within the United
Nations system, from time to time concerning these matters, particular!)
the most efficient and harmonized use of facilities, staff and services and
appropriate methods of avoiding the establishment and operation of corn
petitive or overlapping facilities and services with a view to securing as
much uniformity in these matters as possible.
(c) The consultations referred to in this article shall be utilized to establish the most equitable manner in which any special services or assistanet·
furnished, on request, by the Organization to the United Nations or by the
United Nations to the Organization shall be financed.
(d) The consultations referred to in this article shall also explore the
possibility of continuing or establishing common facilities or services m
specific areas, including the possibility of one organization providing such
facilities or services to one or several other organizations, and establish the
most equitable manner in which such facilities or services shall be
financed.
Article I 5

REGIONAL AND BRANCH OFFICES
Any regional or branch offices which the Organization may establish
shall closely co-operate with the regional or branch offices which the
United Nations has established or may establish, in particular the offices of
the regional commissions and of the resident co-ordinators.
Article 16

PERSONNEL ARRANGEMENTS
(a) The United Nations and the Organization agree to develop, in the
interests of uniform standards of international employment and to the
extent feasible, common personnel standards, methods and arrangements
designed to avoid unjustified differences in terms and conditions of
employment, to avoid competition in recruitment of personnel, and to
facilitate any mutually desirable and beneficial interchange of personnel.
For this purpose the Organization agrees to accept the Statute of the International Civil Service Commission.
(b) The United Nations and the Organization agree:
(i) To consult together from time to time concerning matters of
mutual interest relating to the terms and conditions of employment of the officers and staff, with a view to securing as much uniformity in these matters as may be feasible;
(ii) To co-operate in the interchange of personnel when desirable, on a
temporary or a permanent basis, making due provision for the
retention of seniority and pension rights;
(iii) That the Organization shall participate in the United Nations Joint
Staff Pension Fund in accordance with the Regulations of the Fund
and shall accept the jurisdiction of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal in matters involving applications alleging nonobservance of these Regulations;
(iv) To co-operate with the agencies in the United Nations system in
the establishment and operation of suitable machinery for the settlement of disputes arising in connection with the employment of
personnel and related matters.
(c) The United Nations and the Organization agree to co-operate fully
in ensuring that, to the extent possible, all members of the staff of the
United Nations who were assigned to the United Nations Industrial Development Organization when it was a United Nations organ should be
offered appointments by the Organization that preserve their acquired
rights and contractual status.
(d) The terms and conditions under which any facilities or services of
the Organization or the United Nations in connection with the matters
referred to in this article are to be extended to the other shall. where neces-

V.

143

Resolutiflns adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

sary, be the subject of complementary agreements concluded for this purpose.

General Assembly and by the Industrial Development Board of the Organization upon authorization of the General Conference of the Organization.

Article 17

40/181. Food and agricultural problems

BUDGETARY AND FINANCIAL MATTERS
(a) The Organization recognizes the desirability of establishing close
budgetary and financial relationships with the United Nations in order that
the administrative operations of the United Nations and the agencies
within the United Nations system shall be carried out in the most efficient
and economical manner possible, and that the maximum measure of coordination and uniformity with respect to these operations shall be
secured.
(b) The Organization agrees to accept the Statute of the Joint Inspection Unit.
(c) The Organization agrees to conform, as far as may be practicable
and appropriate, to standard practices and forms recommended by the
United Nations.
(d) Financial and budgetary arrangements entered into between the
United Nations and the Organization shall be approved in accordance with
their respective constitutive instruments.
(e) In the preparation of the budget of the Organization, the DirectorGeneral of the Organization shall consult with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations with a view to achieving, in so far as is practicable, uniformity in presentation of the budgets of the United Nations and of the
agencies within the United Nations system for the purposes of providing a
basis for comparison of the several budgets.
(I) The Organization agrees to transmit its proposed budgets to the
United Nations not later than when the said budgets are transmitted to its
members so as to enable the General A~sembly of the United Nations to
examine them and make recommendations, in accordance with paragraph
3 of Article 17 of the Charter of the United Nations.
(g) Representatives of the Organization shall be entitled to participate,
without vote, in the deliberations of the General Assembly or any committee thereof established by it, at all times when the budget of the Organization or general administrative or fmancial questions concerning the Organization are under consideration.

The General Assembly'.
Recalling the Declaration and the Programme of Action
on the Establishment of a New International Economic
Order, contained in its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of l May 197 4, the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States, contained in its resolution 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 1974, resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic
co-operation, and the International Development Strategy
for the Third United Nations Development Decade, contained in the annex tn its resolution 35/56 of 5 December
1980,
Reaffirming the Universal Declaration on the Eradication of Hunger and Malnutrition adopted by the World
Food Conference 23 and the Programme of Action adopted
by the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural
Development, 24
Stressing the imperative need to keep food and
agricultural issues at the centre of global attention,
Stressing also the urgent need for the international community in its development efforts to take determined
action towards the elimination of, inter alia, poverty, hunger and malnutrition, and infant mortality,
Reaffirming the Declaration on the Critical Economic
Situation in Africa, adopted by the General Assembly on 3
December 1984, 25
Reaffirming that food and agricultural problems in
developing countries should be considered in a comprehensive manner in their different dimensions and in their
immediate, short-term and long-term perspectives,
Affirming the urgent need for sustained international
support for the efforts of the African countries towards
rehabilitation and long-term development of their food
and agriculture,
Reaffirming that the right to food is a universal human
right which should be guaranteed to all people and, in that
context, believing in the general principle that food should
not be used as an instrument of political pressure,
Reaffirming also that the maintenance of peace and
security and the strengthening of international co-operation in food and agriculture are important for improved
economic conditions and enhanced food security,
I. Reaffirms its resolutions 38/ l 58 of 19 December
1983 and 39/ 166 of 17 December 1984, and Economic
and Social Council resolution 1984/54 of 25 July 1984, as
well as all other relevant resolutions concerning food and
agriculture, and calls for their immediate and effective
implementation;
2. Welcomes the conclusions and recommendations,
as adopted, contained in the report of the World Food
Council on the work of its eleventh ministerial session,
held in Paris from 10 to 13 June 1985; 26
3. Welcomes also the conclusions and recommendations contained in the tenth annual report of the Committee on Food Aid Policies and Programmes of the World
Food Programme 27 and m the report of the Committee on
its nineteenth session; 28

Article 18

UNITED NATIONS LAISSEZ-PASSER
Officials of the Organization shall be entitled, in accordance with such
special arrangements as may be concluded between the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and the Director-General of the Organization, to use
the laissez-passer of the United Nations.
Article HI

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE AGREEMENT
The Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Director-General
of the Organization may enter into such supplementary arrangements for
the implementation of this Agreement as may be found desirable.
Article 20

AMENDMENT AND REVISION
This Agreement may be amended or revised by agreement between the
United Nations and the Organization and any such amendment or revision
agreed upon between the Economic and Social Council of the United
Nations and the Industrial Development Board of the Organization shall
come into force on approval by tht i ieneral Assembly of the United
Nations and the Gt>neral Conference of the Organization.
Article l 1

ENTRY INTO FORCE
This Agreement shall enter into force on its approval by the General
Assembly of the United Nations and the General Conference of the Organization.
(b) Without prejudice to the provision of paragraph (a) of this article,
the present Agreement shall be applied provisionally when it has been
approved by the Economic and Social Council upon authori7.ation of the
(a)

23 Report of the World Food Conferenc,•. Rome. 5-16 November 1974
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E. 75 11.A.3), chap. I.
24 See Food and Agricullure Organization ,1fthe I 1nited Nat1um. Report of
the W(lr/d Conference on Agra,·,an Refiirm and Ri,,a! [)e,·rlf'pme'II Rome.
17-20 July 1919 (WCARRD,REP). part one
J5 Resolution 39/29, annex.
26 O/licial Records of the Ueneral Assemblv. F.:m,eth Spssi•m, Supplement
No. /9(A/40/19), part one.
•

27 See El 1985/110. The annual report was issued as document WFP/CFA:
19/21.
28 See World Food Programmr, Report of the Nineteenth Session of the

Comm11t,•1· on Food Aid Pn/ic1e-. and Programmes. Rome. 20-3/ Mar JV/15

(WFP ("FA 19122)

•
