United Nations

A/RES/56/165

General Assembly

Distr.: General
26 February 2002

Fifty-sixth session
Agenda item 119 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/56/583/Add.2)]

56/165. Globalization and its impact on the full enjoyment of all
human rights
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
and expressing in particular the need to achieve international cooperation in
promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for
all without distinction,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 as well as the Vienna
Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on Human
Rights on 25 June 1993, 2
Recalling also the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 3 and
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 3
Recalling further the Declaration on the Right to Development adopted by the
General Assembly in its resolution 41/128 of 4 December 1986,
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration 4 and the outcome
documents of the twenty-third 5 and twenty-fourth 6 special sessions of the General
Assembly, held, respectively, in New York from 5 to 10 June 2000 and Geneva from
26 June to 1 July 2000,
Recalling also its resolution 55/102 of 4 December 2000,
Recognizing that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent
and interrelated and that the international community must treat human rights
globally in a fair and equal manner, on the same footing and with the same
emphasis,

_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
3
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
4
See resolution 55/2.
5
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
6
Resolution S-24/2, annex.
2

01 48834

A/RES/56/165

Realizing that globalization affects all countries differently and makes them
more exposed to external developments, positive as well as negative, including in
the field of human rights,
Realizing also that globalization is not merely an economic process but that it
also has social, political, environmental, cultural and legal dimensions which have
an impact on the full enjoyment of all human rights,
Recognizing that multilateral mechanisms have a unique role to play in
meeting the challenges and opportunities presented by globalization,
Expressing concern at the negative impact of international financial turbulence
on social and economic development and on the full enjoyment of all human rights,
Deeply concerned that the widening gap between the developed and the
developing countries, and within countries, has contributed, inter alia, to deepening
poverty and has adversely affected the full enjoyment of all human rights, in
particular in developing countries,
Noting that human beings strive for a world that is respectful of human rights
and cultural diversity and that, in this regard, they work to ensure that all activities,
including those affected by globalization, are consistent with those aims,
1.
Recognizes that, while globalization, by its impact on, inter alia, the role
of the State, may affect human rights, the promotion and protection of all human
rights is first and foremost the responsibility of the State;
2.
Reaffirms that narrowing the gap between rich and poor, both within and
between countries, is an explicit goal at the national and international levels, as part
of the effort to create an enabling environment for the full enjoyment of all human
rights;
3.
Also reaffirms the commitment to create an environment at both the
national and the global level that is conducive to development and to the elimination
of poverty through, inter alia, good governance within each country and at the
international level, transparency in the financial, monetary and trading systems and
commitment to an open, equitable, rule-based, predictable and non-discriminatory
multilateral trading and financial system;
4.
Recognizes that, while globalization offers great opportunities, its
benefits are very unevenly shared and its costs are unevenly distributed, an aspect of
the process that affects the full enjoyment of all human rights, in particular in
developing countries;
5.
Also recognizes that only through broad and sustained efforts, including
policies and measures at the global level to create a shared future based upon our
common humanity in all its diversity, can globalization be made fully inclusive and
equitable and have a human face, thus contributing to the full enjoyment of all
human rights;
6.
Affirms that globalization is a complex process of structural
transformation, with numerous interdisciplinary aspects, which has an impact on the
enjoyment of civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights, including the right
to development;
7.
Also affirms that the international community should strive to respond to
the challenges and opportunities posed by globalization in a manner that ensures
respect for the cultural diversity of all;

2

A/RES/56/165

8.
Underlines, therefore, the need to continue to analyse the consequences
of globalization for the full enjoyment of all human rights;
9.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General, 7 and requests the
Secretary-General to seek further the views of Member States and to submit a
comprehensive report on this subject to the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh
session.
88th plenary meeting
19 December 2001

_______________
7

A/56/254 and Add.1.

3
