United Nations

A/RES/66/180

General Assembly

Distr.: General
30 March 2012

Sixty-sixth session
Agenda item 107

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 19 December 2011
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/66/463)]

66/180. Strengthening crime prevention and criminal justice
responses to protect cultural property, especially with
regard to its trafficking
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 58/17 of 3 December 2003, 61/52 of 4 December
2006 and 64/78 of 7 December 2009 on the return or restitution of cultural property
to the countries of origin, Economic and Social Council resolutions 2003/29 of
22 July 2003 entitled “Prevention of crimes that infringe on the cultural heritage of
peoples in the form of movable property”, 2004/34 of 21 July 2004 and 2008/23 of
24 July 2008 entitled “Protection against trafficking in cultural property” and
2010/19 of 22 July 2010 entitled “Crime prevention and criminal justice responses
to protect cultural property, especially with regard to its trafficking”, and the
Salvador Declaration on Comprehensive Strategies for Global Challenges: Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice Systems and Their Development in a Changing
World, 1
Recalling also the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime, adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 55/25 of 15 November
2000, 2 as well as the United Nations Convention against Corruption, adopted by the
Assembly in its resolution 58/4 of 31 October 2003, 3
Recalling further the Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing
the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property, adopted
by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization on 14 November 1970, 4 the Convention on Stolen or Illegally
Exported Cultural Objects, adopted by the International Institute for the Unification
of Private Law on 24 June 1995, 5 and the Convention for the Protection of Cultural

_______________
1

Resolution 65/230, annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574.
3
Ibid., vol. 2349, No. 42146.
4
Ibid., vol. 823, No. 11806.
5
Ibid., vol. 2421, No. 43718.
2

11-46962

*1146962*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/66/180

Property in the Event of Armed Conflict, adopted at The Hague on 14 May 1954, 6
and the two Protocols thereto, adopted on 14 May 19546 and 26 March 1999, 7 and
reaffirming the necessity for those States that have not done so to consider ratifying
or acceding to and, as States parties, implementing those international instruments,
Reiterating the significance of cultural property as part of the common
heritage of humankind and as unique and important testimony of the culture and
identity of peoples and the necessity of protecting it, and reaffirming in that regard
the need to strengthen international cooperation in preventing, prosecuting and
punishing all aspects of trafficking in cultural property,
Concerned that demand for stolen, looted and illicitly exported or imported
cultural property is growing and fuels further looting, destruction, removal and theft
of and trafficking in such unique property, and recognizing that urgent and
commensurate legislative and administrative measures are required to discourage
demand for illicitly acquired cultural property in the market,
Alarmed at the growing involvement of organized criminal groups in all forms
and aspects of trafficking in cultural property and related offences, and observing
that cultural property is increasingly being sold through markets, including in
auctions, in particular over the Internet, and that such property is being unlawfully
excavated and illicitly exported or imported, with the facilitation of modern and
sophisticated technologies,
Inviting Member States to protect cultural property and prevent trafficking in
such property by introducing appropriate legislation, including, in particular,
procedures for its seizure, recovery and return, as well as by promoting education,
launching awareness-raising campaigns, locating and inventorying such property,
adopting adequate security measures, developing the capacities and human
resources of monitoring institutions, such as the police and customs services, and of
the tourism sector, involving the media and disseminating information on the theft
and pillaging of cultural property,
Acknowledging the important contribution of the International Scientific and
Professional Advisory Council of the United Nations crime prevention and criminal
justice programme network in this field,
Recognizing the indispensable role of crime prevention and criminal justice
responses in combating all forms and aspects of trafficking in cultural property and
related offences in a comprehensive and effective manner,
Welcomes Economic and Social Council resolution 2010/19, as well as
1.
resolution 5/7 of 22 October 2010 entitled “Combating transnational organized
crime against cultural property”, adopted by the Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime at its fifth
session, held in Vienna from 18 to 22 October 2010; 8
2.
Urges Member States that are parties to the aforementioned conventions,
including the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime2
and the United Nations Convention against Corruption,3 to fully implement them,
encourages those Member States that have not yet done so to consider becoming

_______________
6

Ibid., vol. 249, No. 3511.
Ibid., vol. 2253, No. 3511.
8
See CTOC/COP/2010/17, chap. I, sect. A.
7

2

A/RES/66/180

parties to those conventions, and encourages Member States and relevant
international organizations to strengthen crime prevention and criminal justice
responses to protect cultural property, especially with regard to its trafficking,
within the framework of relevant United Nations conventions and resolutions, for
the purpose of providing the widest possible international cooperation to address
such crimes, including for extradition, mutual legal assistance and the confiscation
and return of stolen cultural property to its rightful owner;
Welcomes the decision taken by the Economic and Social Council in its
3.
resolution 2010/19 to convene at least one additional meeting of the open-ended
intergovernmental expert group on protection against trafficking in cultural property
established within the framework of the Commission on Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice, and encourages Member States and other donors to support the
convening of that expert group meeting and to submit to the Commission at its
twenty-second session practical proposals for implementing, where appropriate, the
recommendations made by the expert group at its meeting held in Vienna from 24 to
26 November 2009, 9 with due attention to aspects of criminalization, international
cooperation and mutual legal assistance;
Also welcomes the request made by the Conference of the Parties to the
4.
United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime at its fifth
session to its Working Group on International Cooperation and its Open-ended
Interim Working Group of Government Experts on Technical Assistance to examine
the relevant recommendations and outcomes of the meetings of the expert group and
to make recommendations for consideration by the Conference of the Parties in
order to promote the practical application of the Convention, by considering the
extent and adequacy of existing norms, as well as other normative developments,
with due attention to aspects of criminalization and international cooperation,
including mutual legal assistance and extradition, in this regard;
Urges Member States and relevant institutions, as appropriate, to
5.
reinforce and fully implement mechanisms to strengthen international cooperation,
including mutual legal assistance, in order to combat all forms and aspects of
trafficking in cultural property and related offences, such as the theft, looting,
damage, removal, pillage and destruction of cultural property, and to facilitate the
recovery and return of stolen cultural property, and requests the Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice to continue their
efforts to effectively strengthen crime prevention and criminal justice responses to
protect cultural property, especially with regard to its trafficking, bearing in mind, in
particular, paragraph 12 of Economic and Social Council resolution 2010/19;
Urges Member States to consider, among other effective measures within
6.
the framework of their national legislation, criminalizing activities related to all
forms and aspects of trafficking in cultural property and related offences by using a
broad definition that can be applied to all stolen, looted, unlawfully excavated and
illicitly exported or imported cultural property, and invites them to make trafficking
in cultural property, including stealing and looting at archaeological and other
cultural sites, a serious crime, as defined in article 2 of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, with a view to fully utilizing
that Convention for the purpose of extensive international cooperation in fighting all
forms and aspects of trafficking in cultural property and related offences;
_______________
9

See E/CN.15/2010/5.

3

A/RES/66/180

7.
Also urges Member States to take all appropriate steps and effective
measures to strengthen legislative and administrative measures aimed at countering
trade in stolen, looted and illicitly exported or imported cultural property, including
appropriate domestic measures to maximize the transparency of activities of traders
in cultural property in the market, in particular through effective regulations and
supervision of dealers in antiquities, intermediaries and similar institutions, in
accordance with their national law and other applicable law;
Invites Member States to continue to submit, in writing, comments on the
8.
model treaty for the prevention of crimes that infringe on the cultural heritage of
peoples in the form of movable property, 10 including views on its potential utility
and on whether any improvements to it should be considered at the earliest possible
date, in order to assist the Secretariat in preparing an analysis and a report to be
presented to the expert group on protection against trafficking in cultural property at
its next meeting, as well as to the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice at its twenty-second session;
Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, within its
9.
mandate, in consultation with Member States and in close cooperation, as
appropriate, with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) and
other competent international organizations:
(a) To further explore the development of specific guidelines for crime
prevention and criminal justice responses with respect to trafficking in cultural
property;
(b) To explore possibilities for the collection, analysis and dissemination of
data specifically addressing the relevant aspects of trafficking in cultural property;
(c) To continue to collect, analyse and disseminate information on crime
trends through the United Nations Survey of Crime Trends and Operations of
Criminal Justice Systems;
(d)

To promote good practices, including in international cooperation;

(e) To assist Member States, upon request, in strengthening crime prevention
and criminal justice responses to protect cultural property, especially with regard to
its trafficking;
(f) To consider, where appropriate, addressing trafficking in cultural
property in its regional, interregional and thematic programmes;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Commission on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice at its twenty-second session on the implementation
of the present resolution;
11. Invites Member States and other donors to provide extrabudgetary
resources for the purposes of the present resolution, in accordance with the rules and
procedures of the United Nations.
89th plenary meeting
19 December 2011
_______________
10

Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, Havana,
27 August–7 September 1990: report prepared by the Secretariat (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.91.IV.2), chap. I, sect. B, resolution 1, annex.

4
