S/2002/1146

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 October 2002
English
Original: French

Letter dated 15 October 2002 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the statement by the President of the Security
Council dated 19 December 2001 (S/PRST/2001/39), whereby the Security Council
renewed for a period of six months the mandate of the Panel of Experts on the
Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Council requested the Panel to submit to it
an interim report after three months, followed by a final report at the end of its
mandate. I refer also to the letter dated 12 July 2002 from the President
(S/2002/763), by which the Security Council extended the mandate of the Panel
until 31 October 2002.
I have the honour to transmit to you the final report of the Panel, which was
submitted to me by its Chairman, Mr. Mahmoud Kassem. This independent report
comprises an evaluation of the situation on the ground and the Panel’s observations
on the illegal exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I should be grateful if you would bring the report to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

02-62179 (E) 171002 181002

*0262179*

S/2002/1146

Annex
Letter dated 8 October 2002 from the Chairman of the Panel of
Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and
Other Forms of Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
addressed to the Secretary-General
[Original: English]
In accordance with the statement of the President of the Security Council
(S/PRST/2001/39) dated 19 December 2001 and the letter dated 12 July 2002
addressed to you by the President of the Council, the Panel of Experts on the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is pleased to submit its report for transmission to the
President of the Security Council.
(Signed) Mahmoud Kassem
Chairman
Panel of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo

2

S/2002/1146

Final report of the Panel of Experts on the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of
Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Contents
Paragraphs

Page

I.

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1–11

4

II.

Change in tactics by elite networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12–21

5

III.

Government-controlled area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

22–64

7

IV.

Rwanda-controlled area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

65–96

14

V.

Uganda-controlled area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

97–131

19

VI.

Collaboration of the Panel with the Porter Commission in Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . .

132–138

24

VII.

Transit and end-user trade issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

139–148

26

VIII.

Observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

149–154

28

IX.

Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

155–160

29

X.

Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

161–188

30

Annexes
I.

Companies on which the Panel recommends the placing of financial restrictions

II.

Persons for whom the Panel recommends a travel ban and financial restrictions

III.

Business enterprises considered by the Panel to be in violation of the OECD Guidelines
for Multinational Enterprises

IV.

Countries visited and representatives of Governments and organizations interviewed

V.

Abbreviations

3

S/2002/1146

I. Introduction
1.
The Security Council, in a statement by its
President dated 19 December 2001 (S/PRST/2001/39),
requested the Secretary-General to renew for six
months the mandate of the Panel of Experts on the
Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other
Forms of Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and asked the Panel to submit both an interim
and a final report. The new mandate stipulated that the
reports should include the following:

the Great Lakes region, the Panel travelled to Pretoria
on 28 April to brief the mission’s members.
4.
To orient its work under the current mandate, the
Panel developed two successive plans of action, which
were transmitted to the Council. Under these plans,
fact-finding focused on diamonds, gold, coltan, copper,
cobalt, timber, wildlife reserves, fiscal resources and
trade in general.

(a) An update of relevant data and an analysis
of further information from all relevant countries,
including in particular from those which thus far had
not provided the Panel with the requested information;

5.
The Panel determined that a central focus of its
work should be gathering information about politically
and economically powerful groups involved in the
exploitation activities, which are often highly
criminalized. As a result, the Panel developed the
central concept of the elite network (outlined in section
II) as an operational thesis.

(b) An evaluation of the possible actions that
could be taken by the Council, including those
recommended by the Panel in its report (S/2001/357)
and the addendum thereto (S/2001/1072), in order to
help bring to an end the plundering of the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
taking into account the impact of such actions on the
financing of the conflict and their potential impact on
the humanitarian and economic situation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo;

6.
In organizing its investigations, the Panel divided
the Democratic Republic of the Congo into three areas,
namely, the Government-controlled area, the Rwandacontrolled area and the Uganda-controlled area. These
descriptors are based on the identity of the actors that
constitute the three principal networks involved in the
exploitation. The Panel also concluded that each of
these three areas, while conforming to the Panel’s
understanding of the elite networks, featured
substantive variations.

(c) Recommendations on specific actions that
the international community, in support of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
might take, working through existing international
organizations, mechanisms and United Nations bodies,
to address the issues in the report and its addendum;

7.
The Panel obtained information from a wide
variety of sources, including from Governments
(civilian
and
military
representatives),
intergovernmental organizations, non-governmental
organizations, businesses and private individuals.
Owing to the nature of its mandate, gaining access to
information has been difficult. Nevertheless, the Panel
collected
well-substantiated
and
independently
corroborated information from multiple sources. These
knowledgeable
sources
provided
documents
and/or eye-witness observations. It is this type of
information — consisting mostly of documentary
evidence — that the Panel has relied on its report.

(d) Recommendations on possible steps that
might be taken by transit countries as well as end-users
to contribute to ending illegal exploitation of the
natural resources and other forms of wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
2.
The Security Council also stressed the importance
of the Panel’s maintaining a high level of collaboration
with all the Congolese players, governmental as well as
non-governmental, throughout the national territory.
3.
The Panel submitted to the Security Council an
interim report (S/2002/565) on 22 May 2002. At the
request of the Council, the Panel responded in writing
to questions and comments from Council members
regarding the interim report and the Panel’s ongoing
work. Prior to presenting its interim report, and at the
request of the head of the Security Council mission to

4

8.
The Panel has operated under a reasonable
standard of proof, without recourse to judicial authority
to subpoena testimony or documents. It obtains
information from sources on a strictly voluntary basis.
Furthermore, the Panel has made every effort to fairly
and objectively evaluate the information it has
gathered.
9.
Throughout its work, the Panel has paid close
attention to the evolution of the peace process in the

S/2002/1146

Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as that in
neighbouring Burundi. The Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement of 1999 and the Arusha Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation, of 2000, served as important
points of reference for its work. The Sun City, Pretoria
and Luanda Agreements have also informed the Panel’s
work.

it impossible to maintain large forces in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Governments of Rwanda
and Zimbabwe, as well as powerful individuals in
Uganda, have adopted other strategies for maintaining
the mechanisms for revenue generation, many of which
involve criminal activities, once their troops have
departed.

10.

14. The Uganda People’s Defence Forces continue to
provoke ethnic conflict, as in the past, clearly
cognizant that the unrest in Ituri will require the
continuing presence of a minimum of UPDF personnel.
The Panel has evidence that high-ranking UPDF
officers have taken steps to train local militia to serve
as a paramilitary force, directly and discreetly under
UPDF command, which will be capable of performing
the same functions as UPDF. There will be little change
in the control that Ugandans now exercise over trade
flows and economic resources. As UPDF continue to
arm local groups, only less conspicuously than before,
the departure of Ugandan armed forces is unlikely to
alter economic activities by those powerful individuals
in the north-eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The Panel was composed as follows:
Ambassador Mahmoud Kassem (Egypt),
Chairman
Jim Freedman (Canada)
Mel Holt (United States of America)
Bruno Schiemsky (Belgium)
Moustapha Tall (Senegal).

11. Two part-time technical advisers, Gilbert Barthe
(Switzerland) and Patrick Smith (United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland), also served with
the Panel. In addition, two political officers, an
administrator and a secretary assisted the Panel.

II. Change in tactics by elite networks
12. The regional conflict that drew the armies of
seven African States into the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has diminished in intensity, but the
overlapping microconflicts that it provoked continue.
These conflicts are fought over minerals, farm produce,
land and even tax revenues. Criminal groups linked to
the armies of Rwanda, Uganda and Zimbabwe and the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
have benefited from the microconflicts. Those groups
will not disband voluntarily even as the foreign
military forces continue their withdrawals. They have
built up a self-financing war economy centred on
mineral exploitation.
13. Facilitated by South Africa and Angola, the
Pretoria and Luanda Agreements have prompted the
recent troop withdrawals from the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Welcome as they may be, these
withdrawals are unlikely to alter the determination of
Rwanda and Zimbabwe, and Ugandan individuals, to
exercise economic control over portions of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The departure of
their forces will do little to reduce economic control, or
the means of achieving it, since the use of national
armies is only one among many means for exercising
it. All three countries have anticipated the day when
pressure from the international community would make

15. Like UPDF, and under pressure from its closest
allies, Rwanda has started withdrawing. It has prepared
for withdrawal by putting in place economic control
mechanisms that do not rely on an explicit presence of
the Rwandan Patriotic Army. It has replaced Congolese
directors of parastatals with businessmen from Kigali
to ensure continuing revenue from water, power and
transportation facilities. It has replaced local currency
with Rwandan currency. RPA battalions that specialize
in mining activities remain in place, though they have
ceased wearing RPA uniforms and will continue the
activities under a commercial guise. The Panel’s
sources have reported that RPA recently undertook an
operation to obtain a large number of Congolese
passports so as to give an appropriate identity to RPA
officers who continue to be stationed at strategically
important sites in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
16. The Panel has learned of other tactics for
disguising the continuing presence of an armed force
loyal to Rwanda. Reliable sources have reported an
initiative by the Chief of Staff of the Armée nationale
congolaise, Major Sylvain Mbuki, to reorganize the
RCD-Goma forces in order to accommodate large
numbers of RPA soldiers inside ANC units and local
defence forces made up of pro-Rwanda elements. Most
of the ANC units have had RPA leadership for some

5

S/2002/1146

time, and now, with this reorganization, a significant
number of RPA soldiers will be integrated into the
ANC rank and file. Instead of departing for Rwanda,
large numbers of Rwandan Hutus serving in RPA have
been provided with new uniforms and assigned to ANC
brigades as Congolese Hutu. Rwanda has diverted
attention from those soldiers staying in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo by drawing particular attention
to those who depart. Ceremonies have been held at
points of re-entry. In fact, the number of soldiers who
have left the Democratic Republic of the Congo is so
far only a portion of the total number of RPA troops in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, which
various sources estimate at between 35,000 and 50,000.
Simultaneously with the RPA troop withdrawals,
Rwandan officials have repatriated to North Kivu
thousands of Congolese Tutsi refugees under duress
from the camps around Byumba and Kibuye Provinces
in Rwanda. Schools in the Rwandan camps have
remained closed and some camp structures have been
razed to encourage further repatriations. All the Panel’s
sources have also suggested that this movement could
be part of the new tactic for maintaining Rwanda’s
presence in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
17. Although troops of the Zimbabwe Defence Forces
have been a major guarantor of the security of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
against regional rivals, its senior officers have enriched
themselves from the country’s mineral assets under the
pretext of arrangements set up to repay Zimbabwe for
military services. Now ZDF is establishing new
companies and contractual arrangements to defend its
economic interests in the longer term should there be a
complete withdrawal of ZDF troops. New trade and
service agreements were signed between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zimbabwe just
prior to the announced withdrawal of ZDF troops from
the diamond centre of Mbuji Mayi late in August 2002.
18. Towards the end of its mandate, the Panel
received a copy of a memorandum dated August 2002
from the Defence Minister, Sidney Sekeramayi, to
President Robert Mugabe, proposing that a joint
Zimbabwe-Democratic Republic of the Congo
company be set up in Mauritius to disguise the
continuing economic interests of ZDF in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The memorandum
states: “Your Excellency would be aware of the wave
of negative publicity and criticism that the DRC-

6

Zimbabwe joint ventures have attracted, which tends to
inform the current United Nations Panel investigations
into our commercial activities.” It also refers to plans
to set up a private Zimbabwean military company to
guard Zimbabwe’s economic investments in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo after the planned
withdrawal of ZDF troops. It states that this company
was formed to operate alongside a new military
company owned by the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
19. At the same time, local militias and local
politicians have supplemented the role that State
armies previously played in ensuring access to and
control of valuable resources and diverting State
revenue. The looting that was previously conducted by
the armies themselves has been replaced with
organized systems of embezzlement, tax fraud,
extortion, the use of stock options as kickbacks and
diversion of State funds conducted by groups that
closely resemble criminal organizations.
20. Such activities have become increasingly
prominent in the techniques of exploitation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Panel has
identified three distinct groups engaged in activities in
three different areas and refers to them as elite
networks. These elite networks have control over a
range of commercial activities involving the
exploitation of natural resources, diversion of taxes and
other revenue generation activities in the three separate
areas controlled by the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda,
respectively.
21. The Panel has identified the following elements
that are common to all of the elite networks and that
are essential to understanding the nature of the
exploitation carried out by these networks in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo:
• The networks consist of a small core of political
and military elites and business persons and, in
the case of the occupied areas, selected rebel
leaders and administrators. Some members of the
elite networks occupy key positions in their
respective Governments or rebel groups.
• Members of these networks cooperate to generate
revenue and, in the case of Rwanda, institutional
financial gain.

S/2002/1146

• The elite networks ensure the viability of their
economic activities through control over the
military and other security forces that they use to
intimidate, threaten violence or carry out selected
acts of violence.
• The networks monopolize production, commerce
and fiscal functions.
• The elite networks maintain the facade of rebel
administrations in the occupied areas to generate
public revenues that they then divert into the
networks, thereby depleting the public treasury.
• The elite networks derive financial benefit
through a variety of criminal activities including
theft, embezzlement and diversion of “public”
funds, undervaluation of goods, smuggling, false
invoicing, non-payment of taxes, kickbacks to
public officials and bribery.
• The elite networks form business companies or
joint ventures that are fronts through which
members of the networks carry on their respective
commercial activities.
• The elite networks draw support for their
economic activities through the networks and
“services” (air transport, illegal arms dealing and
transactions involving the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo) of organized
or transnational criminal groups.

III. Government-controlled area
22. The elite network of Congolese and Zimbabwean
political, military and commercial interests seeks to
maintain its grip on the main mineral resources —
diamonds, cobalt, copper, germanium — of the
Government-controlled area. This network has
transferred ownership of at least US$ 5 billion of assets
from the State mining sector to private companies
under its control in the past three years with no
compensation or benefit for the State treasury of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
23. This network benefits from instability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Its representatives
in the Kinshasa Government and the Zimbabwe
Defence Forces have fuelled instability by supporting
armed groups opposing Rwanda and Burundi.

24. Even if present moves towards peace lead to a
complete withdrawal of Zimbabwean forces, the
network’s grip on the richest mineral assets of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and related
businesses will remain. Zimbabwe’s political-military
elite signed six major trade and service agreements in
August 2002 with the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Reliable sources have told the
Panel about plans to set up new holding companies to
disguise the continuing ZDF commercial operations in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and a ZDFcontrolled private military company to be deployed in
the country to guard those assets.

The elite network
25. The elite network in the Government-held area
comprises three circles of power, namely, Congolese
and Zimbabwean government officials and private
businessmen. Chief figures in the Congolese branch of
the network are the National Security Minister,
Mwenze Kongolo, a shareholder and deal-broker for
both diamond and cobalt ventures; the Minister of
Presidency and Portfolio, Augustin Katumba Mwanke,
a former employee of Bateman’s mining company in
South Africa and a key power broker in mining and
diplomatic deals; the President of the State diamond
company, Société minière de Bakwanga (MIBA), JeanCharles Okoto; the Planning Minister and former
Deputy Defence Minister, General Denis Kalume
Numbi, a stakeholder in the lucrative Sengamines
diamond deal and in COSLEG; and the Director
General of Gécamines, Yumba Monga, pivotal in
facilitating several asset-stripping joint ventures
between the State mining company and private
companies.
26. The Congolese branch also includes active, but
less visible members. Frédéric Tshineu Kabasele is a
director of three joint ventures with Zimbabwe using
the COSLEG platform — the diamond trading
Minerals Business Company, the logging company
SOCEBO and the First Banking Corporation Congo.
The Director of the National Intelligence Agency,
Didier Kazadi Nyembwe, has oversight of many of the
private commercial operations and has been linked by
several sources to arms supplies for Burundi opposition
groups and Mayi-Mayi groups in Maniema and South
Kivu. COSLEG, a Congo-Zimbabwe joint stock
company, remains a key vehicle for military-backed

7

S/2002/1146

commerce involving mostly diamonds, banking and
timber in the Government-held areas. The Technical
Director of COSLEG, Mfuni Kazadi, specializes in the
writing of joint venture contracts to accommodate the
private interests of the elite network.

Colonel Tshinga Dube of Zimbabwe Defence Industries
to the Ukrainian diamond and arms dealer Leonid
Minim, who currently faces smuggling charges in Italy.
The diamond mining operations have been conducted
in great secrecy.

27. The key strategist for the Zimbabwean branch of
the elite network is the Speaker of the Parliament and
former National Security Minister, Emmerson
Dambudzo Mnangagwa. Mr. Mnangagwa has won
strong support from senior military and intelligence
officers for an aggressive policy in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. His key ally is a Commander of
ZDF and Executive Chairman of COSLEG, General
Vitalis Musunga Gava Zvinavashe. The General and
his family have been involved in diamond trading and
supply contracts in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. A long-time ally of President Mugabe, Air
Marshal Perence Shiri, has been involved in military
procurement and organizing air support for the proKinshasa armed groups fighting in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. He is also part of
the inner circle of ZDF diamond traders who have
turned Harare into a significant illicit diamond-trading
centre.

30. Among the businessmen in the elite network, a
Belgian national, George Forrest, pioneered the
exploitative joint venture agreements between private
companies and Gécamines. Mr. Forrest owes his
commercial ascendancy to his long-standing ties to the
establishment in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. One of his companies also makes and markets
military equipment. Since 1994, he has owned 100 per
cent of New Lachaussée in Belgium, which is a leading
manufacturer of cartridge casings, grenades, light
weapons and cannon launchers. In a flagrant conflict of
interest, Mr. Forrest was appointed Chairman of
Gécamines from November 1999 to August 2001 while
his private companies negotiated new contracts with
the explicit intention of using Gécamines’ assets for
personal gain. During that time he built up the most
wide-ranging private mining portfolio in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. He benefits from
strong backing from some political quarters in Belgium
where some of his companies are based. His operations
have been strongly criticized (one Belgian diplomatic
cable referred to Mr. Forrest running a “strategy of
attrition” in the mining sector of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo) and have recently come under
the scrutiny of the Belgian Senate’s investigation into
resource exploitation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

28. Other prominent Zimbabwean members of the
network include Brigadier General Sibusiso Busi
Moyo, who is Director General of COSLEG. Brigadier
Moyo advised both Tremalt and Oryx Natural
Resources, which represented covert Zimbabwean
military financial interests in negotiations with State
mining companies of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Air Commodore Mike Tichafa Karakadzai is
Deputy Secretary of COSLEG, directing policy and
procurement. He played a key role in arranging the
Tremalt cobalt and copper deal. Colonel Simpson
Sikhulile Nyathi is Director of defence policy for
COSLEG. The Minister of Defence and former
Security Minister, Sidney Sekeramayi, coordinates with
the military leadership and is a shareholder in
COSLEG. The Panel has a copy of a letter from Mr.
Sekeramayi thanking the Chief Executive of Oryx
Natural Resources, Thamer Bin Said Ahmed AlShanfari, for his material and moral support during the
parliamentary elections of 2000. Such contributions
violate Zimbabwean law.
29. In June 2002, the Panel learned of a secret new
ZDF diamond mining operation in Kalobo in Kasai
Occidental run by Dube Associates. This company is
linked, according to banking documents, through

8

31. The techniques used by Mr. Forrest have since
been replicated by Zimbabwean-backed entrepreneurs
John Arnold Bredenkamp and Mr. Al-Shanfari. Mr.
Bredenkamp, who has an estimated personal net worth
of over $500 million, is experienced in setting up
clandestine
companies
and
sanctions-busting
operations. Mr. Al-Shanfari has gained privileged
access to the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and its diamond concessions in exchange
for raising capital from some powerful entrepreneurs in
the Gulf such as Issa al-Kawari who manages the
fortune of the deposed Amir of Qatar. Also working
with ZDF is a convicted criminal based in South
Africa, Nico Shefer, who has arranged for Zimbabwean
officers to be trained in diamond valuation in
Johannesburg. Mr. Shefer’s company, Tandan
Holdings, has a 50 per cent stake in Thorntree

S/2002/1146

Industries, a joint venture diamond-trading company
with ZDF.
32. Zimbabwean Billy Rautenbach headed a joint
venture cobalt-mining company and was Chief
Executive of Gécamines from November 1998 to
March 2000. Although stripped of his cobalt
concessions in Katanga, Mr. Rautenbach told the Panel
that the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo had offered his company, Ridgepointe
International, mining rights to Gécamines concessions
at Shinkolobwe, which include substantial deposits of
uranium, copper and cobalt. Mr. Rautenbach’s
representatives said that any new agreement would be
subject to the new mining code of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and any uranium mining
operations would be open to inspections by the
International Atomic Energy Agency.
33. Such high levels of mineral exploitation would be
impossible without the collusion of highly placed
government officials who provide mining licences and
export permits in return for private gain. The Panel has
compiled
extensive
documentation
of
such
facilitations. For example, in its attempts to buy rights
to the Kolwezi Tailings, First Quantum Minerals
(FQM) of Canada offered a down payment to the State
of $100 million, cash payments and shares held in trust
for Government officials. According to documents in
the possession of the Panel, the payments list included
the National Security Minister, Mwenze Kongolo; the
Director of the National Intelligence Agency, Didier
Kazadi Nyembwe; the Director General of Gécamines,
Yumba Monga; and the former Minister of the
Presidency, Pierre-Victor Mpoyo. The FQM share offer
to those officials was premised on a sharp rise in its
share price once it was announced that it had secured
some of the most valuable mineral concessions in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
34. The Panel has documents showing that three
“clans” of Lebanese origin, who operate licensed
diamond businesses in Antwerp, purchased diamonds
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo worth
$150 million in 2001, either directly through Kinshasa
or through comptoirs in the Republic of the Congo. The
three “clans” — Ahmad, Nassour and Khanafer — are
distinct
criminal
organizations
that
operate
internationally. Their activities, known to intelligence
services
and
police
organizations,
include
counterfeiting,
money-laundering
and
diamond
smuggling. Several credible sources have reported that

the clans also have ties with Amal and Hezbollah.
Some businesses associated with the clans are Sierra
Gem Diamonds, Asa Diam, Triple A Diamonds and
Echogem. A group linked to the clans operations is
providing counterfeit United States dollars to former
generals from the time of President Mobutu, who are
trying to overthrow the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Strategies and sources of revenue
35. The Panel has identified five strategies for
generating revenues for the elite network through
diamond, copper and cobalt mining companies. The
network coordinates its operations between its
political, military and business wings to generate
maximum income.
Asset stripping of State mining companies
36. The richest and most readily exploitable of the
publicly owned mineral assets of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are being moved into joint
ventures that are controlled by the network’s private
companies. These transactions, which are controlled
through secret contracts and off-shore private
companies, amount to a multi-billion-dollar corporate
theft of the country’s mineral assets. Some 30
businessmen, politicians and military officers are the
main beneficiaries of the arrangements. The elite
network has been trying to legitimize such corporate
theft and market these assets to legitimate international
mining companies.
37. The Panel has now obtained documentary
evidence that Mr. Al-Shanfari’s company, Oryx Natural
Resources, is being used as a front for ZDF and its
military company OSLEG. Sengamines claims an 800
square kilometre concession, just south of Mbuji Mayi,
carved out of the concession of the Société Minière de
Bakwanga.
According
to
company
officials,
Sengamines’ diamond concessions would be worth at
least $2 billion if they were put into full production.
38. Sengamines claimed that it had reconfigured its
equity after a failed attempt to be listed on the London
Stock Exchange in June 2000, as follows: 49 per cent
for Oryx Natural Resources, 35 per cent for COMIEXCongo, and 16 per cent for MIBA. The Panel has
learned that this purported buyout never happened. It
was a device to disguise the close association between

9

S/2002/1146

Sengamines and ZDF, and to deceive international
investors. ZDF, through OSLEG, owns the 49 per cent
of Sengamines that is publicly claimed by Oryx. In the
course of a meeting held on 1 August 2000, OSLEG
nominated Oryx to hold its 49 per cent interest in
Sengamines; 35 per cent is held by COMIEX-Congo,
and 16 per cent has been allocated to MIBA.
39. Tremalt Ltd., represented by Mr. Bredenkamp,
holds the rights to exploit six Gécamines concessions
containing over 2.7 million tons of copper and 325,000
tons of cobalt over 25 years. Tremalt paid the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
just $400,000, but the estimated worth of the six
concessions exceeds $1 billion. The joint venture
running the concession is the Kababankola Mining
Company, in which Tremalt has an 80 per cent share to
Gécamines’ 20 per cent. Under this agreement, the
Panel has learned that Gécamines derives no direct
financial benefit. Although Tremalt representatives told
the Panel that they have invested $15 million to date,
there are no signs of substantial investments having
been made on the concessions, nor has any schedule of
investment in the form of a business plan been released
to Gécamines.
40. Like Oryx, Tremalt insists that its operations are
not linked to ZDF or the Government of Zimbabwe.
However, the Panel has obtained a copy of the
confidential profit-sharing agreement, under which
Tremalt retains 32 per cent of net profits, and
undertakes to pay 34 per cent of net profits to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and 34 per cent to
Zimbabwe. This profit-sharing agreement was the
subject of a confidential memorandum from the
Defence Minister, Mr. Sekeramayi, to President
Mugabe in August 2002. Tremalt also undertakes to
provide the Congolese and Zimbabwean militaries with
motor vehicles, trucks, buses and cash payments as
necessary. These are to be subtracted from the two
countries’ part of the profit share. A forum has been
established between Tremalt and ZDF to plan strategy
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and “look
after the interests of the Zimbabweans”. Meeting
monthly, the forum’s main members are General
Zvinavashe, Brigadier Moyo, Air Commodore
Karakadzai, Mr. Bredenkamp, the Managing Director
of KMC, Colin Blythe-Wood, and the Director of
KMC, Gary Webster.
41. Gécamines officials told the Panel that the
National Security Minister of the Democratic Republic

10

of the Congo, Mwenze Kongolo had pressured their
negotiators to agree to the joint venture contract
despite its negative implications for the State
company’s finances. The ultimate owners and
beneficiaries of Tremalt are hidden behind a web of
trusts and private holding companies registered in the
British Virgin Islands and the Isle of Man to whose
records the Panel was not allowed direct access.
Control of procurement and accounting
42. Management control is essential to the elite
network’s strategy for extracting maximum revenue
from the joint ventures. Much of the revenue from the
joint ventures is off the balance sheet in overpriced
subcontracting and procurement arrangements with
companies and individuals linked to the network. The
two biggest Zimbabwe-Democratic Republic of the
Congo joint ventures — Sengamines and KMC — are
declaring huge losses.
Enterprise General Malta Forrest and Groupe
George Forrest
43. Groupe George Forrest (GGF) in partnership with
the United States-based OM Group currently runs one
of the most profitable mining operations from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo with only the most
marginal benefit for the State mining company,
Gécamines. Through this venture, the Scories du Terril
de Lubumbashi (STL), also known as the Big Hill
Project, Mr. Forrest and OM Group have secured
access to a copper and cobalt stockpile which contains
over 3,000 tons of germanium, a rare metal used in
optical fibres, infrared lenses and telecommunication
satellites. This stockpile, formerly the property of
Gécamines, has a current market value of more than $2
billion. Although the shareholdings for the STL project
are divided between OM Group (55 per cent), GGF (25
per cent) and Gécamines (20 per cent), the State
company has been expressly excluded from the
revenues derived from the germanium processing.
44. Gécamines officials complain that OM Group and
GGF have deliberately ignored the agreed technical
plan for the STL project, which provided for two
electric-powered refineries and a converter to be built
adjacent to the copper and cobalt stockpile. This would
have meant that all the germanium would have been
processed within the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and Gécamines would have been entitled to a
revenue share. Instead the semi-processed ore is

S/2002/1146

shipped to OM Group’s plant in Finland where the
germanium is extracted. The former Chairman of
Gécamines, Mr. Forrest, whose construction companies
built the STL project, has declined to intervene on
behalf of the State company. Gécamines has rejected an
offer by OM Group to cede the State company just 5
per cent of the revenues from the germanium
processing in Finland.
45. Mr. Forrest has used his position in the elite
network in an attempt to control the mining sector in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, according to
several reliable sources. For example, the Kinross Gold
Corporation of Canada had sought to invest up to $1
billion in copper and cobalt mining operations, but was
thwarted by interventions from Mr. Forrest and senior
Government officials. The company returned to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo late in 2001 as part
of Kinross-Forrest Ltd., a company registered in the
British Virgin Islands. A smaller Belgian-based
company, Madsa, obtained the support of the World
Bank and the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization for a $20 million development package to
build processing plants to service the mining sector: a
smelter, an acid manufacturing plant and a cement
factory. Mr. Forrest and his business allies have
opposed this development, in part, it seems, because it
would cut their profits from the current overpriced
procurement contracts.
Tremalt Ltd. (John Bredenkamp)
46. Tremalt’s 80 per cent stake in KMC gives it
management control over day-to-day administration
and longer-term strategic decisions about exploiting the
concession. Tremalt also procures equipment for ZDF
and the Congolese Armed Forces (FAC), the cost of
which it deducts from their share of KMC profits.
Although Ridgepointe International, run by Mr.
Rautenbach, the previous foreign investor in the
Kababankola concessions, had to operate with much
more dilapidated processing plants, it generated more
than $20 million profit within 18 months of taking
over. Industry analysts say that Tremalt’s claimed
losses of more than $13 million from February 2001 to
July 2002 are not credible.
Organized theft
47. FAC and ZDF officers who controlled security at
the main joint venture sites have been involved in and
facilitate high levels of theft from production. Reliable

sources have informed the Panel that managers in
several companies, with support from the members of
the elite network, collude in these thefts.
48. The State-owned Société minière de Bakwanga
diamond company has been plundered by a
management that condones widespread theft by
company insiders. Three theft rings operate in the
MIBA compound known as the polygone. The first of
these rings was organized and operated by 48
Zimbabwean soldiers who had been stationed at five
different locations throughout the large mining site.
Zimbabwe military personnel allow groups of people to
enter the polygone and dig for diamonds, and in
exchange receive compensation in the form of money
and diamonds.
49. A second theft ring is operated by the Brigade
Minière or provincial mining police, who are trained to
guard the mine. Previously sacked for theft, Brigade
Minière Commander Mushitu has returned to the force.
In exchange for protection, the Commander receives
sacks of diamond-rich gravel. However, the diamond
diggers are often caught in exchanges of fire between
the Brigade Minière and the Zimbabweans in their
efforts to control the diamond thefts.
50. These losses are probably modest compared to
the losses from a third theft ring that involves highlevel MIBA managers and occurs inside the cleaning,
sorting and classification operation facility. The thefts
include gem and near-gem production. About 50 per
cent of all company revenues are generated by the 3 to
4 per cent of gem and near-gem production. The drop
in revenues resulting from theft has been estimated at
about 25 per cent of total revenue, roughly 25 million
dollars per annum. Under pressure from its creditors,
MIBA was obliged to engage the services of a private
security firm, Overseas Security Services, which
determined that a criminal syndicate was operating
inside the classification operation.
Using the corporate facade as a cover for
criminal activities
51. Some members of the elite network running joint
ventures are linked to the smuggling of precious metals
and gems, arms trafficking, illegal foreign exchange
trading and money-laundering. The Panel has received
extensive documentation and first-hand testimony
explaining the mechanics of these criminal operations.

11

S/2002/1146

52. Sengamines supplements its revenues by
laundering diamonds smuggled from Angola and Sierra
Leone. Sengamines also smuggles its own diamonds
out of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Panel has learned of specific instances, times, places
and persons involved. For example, in March 2001, Mr.
Al-Shanfari instructed his security chief to smuggle
diamonds from the Sengamines concession to
Johannesburg, South Africa, and deliver them to Ken
Roberts, the chief executive of Serengeti Diamonds.
53. Sengamines has also served as a front for illegal
foreign exchange transactions using several routes into
and out of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Most
of the latter involved breaking the country’s foreign
exchange laws and profiting from arbitrage between
differential exchange rates for the United States dollar
and Congolese franc in Kinshasa and the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, respectively. In one
example, on 13 March 2000, Oryx officials in Kinshasa
loaded an aircraft belonging to Mr. Bredenkamp with
eight crates of Congolese francs for shipment to
Harare. The Panel also has documentation
substantiating information that an Oryx employee
regularly transported parcels of United States dollars
($500,000 at a time) that were withdrawn from
the Oryx account at Hambros Bank, London, to
Kinshasa without declaring them to the Congolese
authorities; at Kinshasa the money was changed into
Congolese francs and further transported to Harare
and the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Oryx employees said they were asked to pay
Mr. Mnangagwa a commission on these transactions
which contravened Zimbabwe law. Despite repeated
claims by Mr. Bredenkamp’s representatives that he has
no business relationship with Mr. Al-Shanfari,
the Panel has received a document — dated January
2001 and jointly signed by Mr. Bredenkamp and
Mr. Al-Shanfari — guaranteeing a $1.5 million loan to
Oryx Natural Resources from Python Services Ltd.
Mining revenues and the military
54. The procurement of military equipment and
services is a major source of revenue for the elite
network. Several joint venture mining companies have
strong links with the military supply companies who
facilitate their operations in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The Panel has information that diamond
revenues were used to pay for arms purchases for FAC
and indirectly used to finance the contribution of the

12

Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to salary payments for ZDF. It has received a document
recording a transfer of MIBA funds requested by
Brigadier General François Olenga for the purchase of
weapons for FAC.
55. Oryx Natural Resources has a close working
relationship with Avient Air, a military company which
supplies services and equipment to ZDF and FAC. In
April 2002, Avient Air brokered the sale of six attack
helicopters to the Kinshasa Government. Bank records
show several transactions between Avient and accused
trafficker Leonid Minim. Under the management of
Andrew Smith, a former British army captain, Gerry
O’Brien and Lewis Kling, Avient was contracted to
organize bombing raids into the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo in 1999 and 2000. At the same
time Avient organized logistics and transportation of
mining equipment for Sengamines and enjoyed security
clearance as a military company working with ZDF.
The Panel has a record of a payment in September
2001 of $35,000 from the Oryx account at Banque
Belgolaise to Avient Ltd., Avient Air’s sister company
based in the United Kingdom.
56. John Bredenkamp, who has a history of
clandestine military procurement, has an investment in
Aviation Consultancy Services Company (ACS). The
Panel has confirmed, independently of Mr.
Bredenkamp, that this company represents British
Aerospace, Dornier of France and Agusta of Italy in
Africa. Far from being a passive investor in ACS as
Tremalt representatives claimed, Mr. Bredenkamp
actively seeks business using high-level political
contacts. In discussions with senior officials he has
offered to mediate sales of British Aerospace military
equipment to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Bredenkamp’s representatives claimed that his
companies observed European Union sanctions on
Zimbabwe, but British Aerospace spare parts for ZDF
Hawk jets were supplied early in 2002 in breach of
those sanctions. Mr. Bredenkamp also controls
Raceview Enterprises, which supplies logistics to ZDF.
The Panel has obtained copies of Raceview invoices to
ZDF dated 6 July 2001 for deliveries worth
$3.5 million of camouflage cloth, batteries, fuels and
lubricating oil, boots and rations. It also has copies of
invoices for aircraft spares for the Air Force of
Zimbabwe worth another $3 million.

S/2002/1146

Case study of a commercial chain involving
diamonds
57. The Democratic Republic of the CongoZimbabwe joint venture Minerals Business Company
represents Zimbabwe’s interests in the lucrative
diamond trade of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It buys and markets production from the joint
venture Sengamines, which has attempted to conceal its
links with ZDF. The Minerals Business Company uses
Zimbabwe’s military and political influence to evade
the legal requirements of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and to avoid paying the costly licensing
fees. The refusal of MBC to honour its obligations to
the public treasury has prompted official complaints
from the Ministry of Mines demanding that MBC
comply with the law. MBC officials have asserted that
Zimbabwean entities are not obliged to adhere to the
laws of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
58. The Minerals Business Company allows a limited
number of other diamond companies to take advantage
of the privileged status it enjoys in Kinshasa. Sandrian
Mining, based in Kinshasa, has a contractual
relationship with MBC. Thorntree Industries, a joint
venture between South Africa-based Nico Shefer’s
Tandan group and ZDF, also has contracts with MBC,
as does Mixen Trading, which has offices in
Zimbabwe. MBC sells to the United States-based
Flashes of Color, and the Swiss-registered Ibryn &
Associates, as well as to the Belgian-registered Jewel
Impex, Komal Gems and Diagem. One of the most
important trading partners of MBC is the Belgianbased company Abadiam, which buys from MBC as
well as directly from Sengamines. The Panel has bank
records dated September 2001 showing transfers of
more than $1 million from the Belgian account of Oryx
Natural Resources to Abadiam.

Collapse of the public sector; armed
conflict and its humanitarian
consequences
Kasai Oriental and Kasai Occidental
59. The diversion of funds from State companies and
public coffers, by fraud or under the pretext of effort de
guerre, has contributed to eliminating funds available
for public services. The public sector in the two Kasai
Provinces has effectively disappeared. Of the five
water production plants in Kasai Oriental, four plants

no longer function and the fifth, in the city of Mbuji
Mayi, is said to function at less than 20 per cent
capacity. Of the six water production plants in Kasai
Occidental, five no longer function; the sixth, in the
city of Kananga, operates at best at 10 per cent
capacity.
60. Government officials blame the precipitous
decline in public spending on the war. Most soldiers
are unpaid and become social predators, financing
themselves through theft and pillage, living off the
population they are presumed to protect, and provincial
governments make little effort to discourage them.
Taxes and licensing fees have nevertheless increased,
as have the forced acquisition of the resources of State
enterprises in the name of the war effort. The
Government has therefore benefited from the state of
war by using it as a pretext, not only to justify an
increase in demands on the population to increase
government revenues, but also to justify a decrease in
expenditure. Insecurity in the Government-controlled
area is only a small part of the consequences of support
for the military in war. It is much more a consequence
of the deliberate neglect of the military, who by virtue
of this neglect turn their weapons on the population.
61. The pretext of war, increased government levies,
unpaid salaries and the absence of government services
have combined to precipitate a collapse in the urban
economies of Mbuji Mayi, Kananga and, to a lesser
extent, of Lubumbashi. Banks no longer offer credit in
the Kasai Provinces. The absence of local credit and
the decline of road transport have forced most local
industries in Kananga to close.
Katanga
62. Lubumbashi, and southern Katanga generally,
have been affected by Rwanda’s presence in the north.
The occupation by RPA of the northern portion of
Katanga, the rich agricultural plains around Nyunzu
and Kongolo, has cut the southern portion off from
what was once the breadbasket of Katanga.
63. A recent study by Médecins sans Frontières in
Kilwa, a representative town in southern Katanga south
of the front line, with a population of 350,000, has
found a death rate for children under 5 of 3.2 per
10,000 per day. Over the course of a year this means
that 12 per cent of all children under 5 years old will
die, and one out of every four children die over a
period of two years. Notably, virtually none (0.6 per

13

S/2002/1146

cent) of the deaths resulted from violence. Deaths
instead result from illness — malaria and dysentery:
conditions closely linked to malnutrition and the
absence of medical facilities.
64. Malaria and dysentery are treatable. International
non-governmental organizations — World Vision and
Médecins sans Frontières in this case — try to step in
where government facilities no longer function.
However, the soaring death rates in the Governmentheld areas around Ankoro, Kilwa, Dubie and Lwanza,
especially where medical facilities are non-existent and
where State medical professionals receive no salaries,
are indications of Government negligence. The rates of
malnutrition and mortality are measures of that
negligence and are the consequence, in part, of
diverting State resources from State companies such as
Gécamines into the private accounts of Zimbabwean
individuals, other private interests, and Congolese
individuals.

IV. Rwanda-controlled area
65. The claims of Rwanda concerning its security
have justified the continuing presence of its armed
forces, whose real long-term purpose is, to use the term
employed by the Congo Desk of the Rwandan Patriotic
Army, to “secure property”. Rwanda’s leaders have
succeeded in persuading the international community
that their military presence in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo protects the country against
hostile groups in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, who, they claim, are actively mounting an
invasion against them.
66. The Panel has extensive evidence to the contrary.
For example, the Panel is in possession of a letter,
dated 26 May 2000, from Jean-Pierre Ondekane, First
Vice-President and Chief of the Military High
Command for RCD-Goma, urging all army units to
maintain good relations “with our Interahamwe and
Mayi-Mayi brothers”, and further, “if necessary to let
them exploit the sub-soil for their survival”.
67. Prominent members of a Congolese Hutu group,
Benemugabohumwe, recently began to encourage
Hutus living in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
some of them opposition groups, to work instead for
the cause of Rwanda in the country. Eugene Serufuli,
RCD-Goma Governor of North Kivu Province and
reportedly himself a Hutu, has promoted a non-

14

governmental organization, Tous pour la paix et la
démocratie, aiming to conscript Hutus of all political
persuasions to throw in their lot with the Rwandans.
Their purpose, as described by the Nord Kivu Reveil in
a circular dated 16 April 2002, has been to “express
allegiance to Rwanda by joining its efforts to control
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo”.
68. A 30-year-old Interahamwe combatant living in
the area of Bukavu described the situation in a taped
interview with a United Nations officer in early 2002.
We haven’t fought much with the RPA in
the last two years. We think they are tired of this
war, like we are. In any case, they aren’t here in
the Congo to chase us, like they pretend. I have
seen the gold and coltan mining they do here, we
see how they rob the population. These are the
reasons for their being here. The RPA come and
shoot in the air and raid the villagers’ houses but
they don’t attack us any more. If you are lucky,
and you have a big brother in the RPA, he might
be able to get you some food and ammunition.
69. On the basis of its analysis of considerable
documentation and oral testimony, the Panel holds the
view that the rationale for Rwanda’s presence is to
increase the numbers of Rwandans in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and to encourage
those settled there to act in unison to support its
exercise of economic control. The recent departure of
troops should not be interpreted as a sign of Rwanda’s
willingness to reduce its considerable involvement in
the evacuation of valuable resources, to reduce the
level of armed conflict or to diminish the humanitarian
crisis in the region. Economic exploitation in its
various forms will continue, relying on a less
conspicuous armed force and alternative strategies for
carrying out the exploitative activities.

The elite network
70. The elite network’s operations in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo are managed
centrally from the RPA Congo Desk, which serves to
link the commercial and military activities of RPA. The
Panel has described this function in some detail in
previous reports. The Panel continues to receive
documentation on ways in which the proceeds of the
RPA commercial wing finance an armed presence. As
an illustration, the Panel has recently acquired

S/2002/1146

documents showing coltan sales being negotiated by
ranking Congo Desk officials. The Panel has copies of
faxes sent from the office of RPA Major Dan Munyuza
on behalf of Maniema Mining Company and another
fax sent from the office of RPA Chief of Staff General
James Kaberebe.
71. While revenues and expenditure in the Congo
Desk are considerable, they are kept strictly separate
from Rwanda’s national budget. A reliable source
associated with the Congo Desk has calculated that
income to the Desk provided 80 per cent of all RPA
expenditure in 1999. The official Rwandan budget for
1999 allocated $80 million to the military. If this
official budget allocation of $80 million represents the
20 per cent referred to by the Panel’s source as the
portion of military expenditure not covered by the
Congo Desk, then the total military budget from all
sources would approximate $400 million. This comes
to 20 per cent of GNP for 1999 and approximately 150
per cent of recurring budget expenditure for that year.
The Congo Desk’s contribution to Rwanda’s military
expenses would therefore have been in the order of
$320 million. The activities funded by revenues
generated by the Congo Desk strongly shape Rwanda’s
foreign policy and directly influence national decisionmaking in a number of domains. These transactions
are, however, hidden from the scrutiny of international
organizations.
72. The elite network maintains close commercial
ties with transnational criminal networks, including
those of Victor Bout, Sanjivan Ruprah and Richard
Muamba Nozi. Victor Bout’s aircraft are utilized for a
number of purposes including transport of coltan and
cassiterite, the transport of supplies into mining sites,
and the transport of military troops and equipment.
During the last major military campaign in Pweto,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Victor Bout’s
aircraft were used to transport RPA personnel to the
area.
73. While Sanjivan Ruprah has frequently worked
within Victor Bout’s criminal organization, he
maintains an independent affiliation with the Congo
Desk in Kigali. On 7 February 2002, Mr. Ruprah was
arrested in Belgium on suspicion of planning to
provide 6 million new zaire banknotes — still valid in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo — to
RCD-Goma with financing by diamond dealers based
in Belgium. The President of RCD-Goma, Adolphe
Onusumba, who has kinship and business ties with

Mr. Ruprah, played a key role in this counterfeit
operation. Another group, the Muamba Nozi
counterfeiting operation, also provides counterfeit
Congolese francs to RCD-Goma. Its regional base of
operations is located at Nairobi, where they print and
distribute to the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo large quantities of counterfeit Congolese francs.
Officials in the Central Bank of Kinshasa have
informed the Panel that Mr. Muamba Nozi’s counterfeit
activities are politically motivated and designed to
deliberately destabilize the present regime by
weakening the currency.

Strategies and sources of revenue
Coltan
74. The end of the SOMIGL coltan monopoly in
April 2001 was less a consequence of the falling price
of coltan and more a consequence of Rwanda’s
determination to capture more of the revenue that was
being taken in taxes by the RCD-Goma rebel
administration. The termination of the agreement with
SOMIGL made it possible for RPA to frustrate the
efforts of RCD-Goma to raise revenue for its own
purposes.
75. The bulk of coltan exported from the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as much as 60 to
70 per cent, has been mined under the direct
surveillance of RPA mining détachés and evacuated by
aircraft from airstrips near mining sites directly to
Kigali or Cyangugu. No taxes are paid. Rwandan
military aircraft, Victor Bout’s aircraft and small airline
companies are used in the evacuation of the coltan.
RPA has maintained control over most of the coltan
sites where rich deposits are found, where the
percentage of tantalum is high, and where local
airstrips are accessible. A variety of forced labour
regimes are found at sites that have been managed by
RPA mining détachés, some for coltan collection, some
for transport, others for domestic services. Many
accounts report the widespread use of prisoners
imported from Rwanda who work as indentured labour.
76. A smaller portion, perhaps 15 to 25 per cent of
the total coltan exported, is purchased by comptoirs
owned by Rwandans who buy from local négotiants at
remote coltan sites or from the agents of local defence
groups. More typically these comptoirs, owned by
Rwandan army officers or those closely linked to the

15

S/2002/1146

Government of Rwanda, such as MHI comptoir, Eagle
Wings or Rwanda Metals, have obtained their own
mining sites and conscript their own workers to exploit
the sites under severe conditions.
77. The smallest portion of coltan is purchased by the
few remaining Congolese-owned comptoirs at one of
the large number of coltan sites in remote areas. Most
of the Congolese comptoirs have found it impossible to
compete with the RPA or Rwanda-owned comptoirs.
78. As mining profits to the Congo Desk have
increased, the share of RCD-Goma has declined. The
Congo Desk has perennially deprived its junior partner,
RCD-Goma, of any significant share in resources and
prerogatives, and RCD-Goma has perennially
complained.
RCD-Goma
administrators
have
frequently pointed out that they were unable to manage
their army without sufficient revenue. Lacking
financial support, the ANC brigades have turned to
pillaging villagers throughout the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The third Brigade has stolen a
large number of cattle around Kalemie, and the first
Brigade has taken diamonds from Opala. The Panel
possesses extensive documentation on these activities.
Most of these rebel forces are under the command of
RPA officers. They have little hesitation, when so
directed, in attacking local self-defence groups who
obstruct their commercial operations, to eliminate
specific enemies, to provide security around gold,
coltan and diamond rich areas, to provide police
services in urban areas and occasionally to keep a force
present along the front lines. Since ANC troops are
neither paid nor disciplined, they use their weapons to
prey on the population, frequently burning whole
villages to acquire property and food.
Case study of a commercial chain involving
coltan
79. Eagle Wings Resources International, a coltan
comptoir in Bukavu, is a subsidiary of Trinitech
International Inc., based in Ohio, United States. Eagle
Wings has offices in Rwanda, Burundi and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The manager of
Eagle Wings in Kigali has close ties to the Rwandan
regime. Consequently, Eagle Wings operates in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as a Rwandacontrolled comptoir with all the privileges derived
from this connection. Eagle Wings is not obliged to
fulfil its full responsibilities to the public treasury
managed by the RCD-Goma administration. Like other

16

Rwanda-controlled coltan comptoirs, Eagle Wings
collaborates with RPA to receive privileged access to
coltan sites and captive labour.
80. Approximately 25 per cent of Eagle Wings coltan
is shipped from Kigali to the Ulba Metallurgical Plant
of NAC Kazatomprom, in Kazakhstan. Another 25 per
cent is sold to the parent company of Eagle Wings,
Trinitech International Inc. in the United States, which
arranges for sales to both Ulba and to the Chinese
processing facility at Ningxia Non-Ferrous Metals
Smeltery (NNMS). H. C. Starck, based in Germany and
a subsidiary of the transnational corporation Bayer AG,
purchases about 15 per cent of Eagle Wings coltan.
H. C. Starck has denied on numerous occasions
obtaining coltan originating from Central Africa. In a
press statement issued on 24 May 2002, H. C. Starck
reiterated that the company had purchased no material
originating in Central Africa since August 2001. The
Panel possesses documents showing the contrary. In the
same press release, H. C. Starck claimed that its coltan
originates from “peasant suppliers” and not from rebel
groups. In fact, no coltan exits from the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo without benefiting
either the rebel group or foreign armies.
81. In one instance on which the Panel has
documentation, Mozambique Gemstone Company
provided false documents establishing Mozambique as
the origin of a shipment of coltan originating in
Rwanda and transiting through South Africa.
Mozambique Gemstone Company then sold the
consignment to AMC African Trading and Consulting
Company Ltd., based in South Africa, which
subsequently sold the consignment to H. C. Starck Ltd.
in Rayong, Thailand, on 21 September 2001. H. C.
Starck sent a letter of credit for this consignment on
9 May 2002 to Chemie Pharmacie Holland, which
oversaw the transaction, and which is a commercial
partner of Eagle Wings providing logistical and
financial services. Eagle Wings is the only coltan
source for Chemie Pharmacie. Eagle Wings has no
operations in Mozambique.
82. The Panel has also had direct contacts with the
Chinese processing facility, NNMS, to determine
whether they use coltan originating in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. NNMS
categorically denied doing business with “any
individual or any entity that represents somebody or
some entity in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.”
In fact, a number of brokers trading in coltan

S/2002/1146

originating from the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo have informed the Panel of their sales to
NNMS. A publicity presentation prepared by NNMS
itself has stated that the reason that they are able to
provide low prices for their output is that NNMS buys
significant amounts of cheap raw material from Central
Africa. One NNMS report notes that 50 per cent of all
coltan purchased for processing originates in Central
Africa. Frequent follow-up Panel enquiries with NNMS
were ignored.
Diamonds
83. The diamond market was the prize Rwanda
fought Uganda to have for its own. After the last clash
in Kisangani in June 2000, RPA worked through the
RCD-Goma administration to funnel all the diamonds
in Kisangani through the Congo Desk control. The
technique was to oblige all local diamond traders to
sell to one principal comptoir holding exclusive export
rights.
84. The Congo Desk gave Aziz Nassour the first
monopoly. Aziz Nassour fell out of favour with the
Congo Desk and was replaced by an Israeli diamond
dealer, Philippe Surowicz. Diamond traders in
Kisangani remember the Surowicz period as a “reign of
terror”. Diamond sellers frequently reported entering
“Monsieur Philippe’s” comptoir only to be confronted
with RPA military who named a derisory price and
took the diamonds. The Congo Desk replaced
Mr. Surowicz in October 2001 with a Lebanese, Hamad
Khalil, who worked through the Bakayoko comptoir in
Kisangani.
85. In mid-November 2001, the Department of
Lands, Mines and Energy of RCD-Goma conducted a
study of Hamad Khalil’s performance in the first month
of his tenure. His quota had been set at a minimum of
$500,000 per month. Mr. Khalil met his quota
exporting diamonds valued at $576,380 over a period
of 27 days. The performance was adequate, but it was
far below the Kisangani sales potential of up to
$2 million per month. His poor performance raised the
suspicion that the Congo Desk was using Mr. Khalil to
divert revenues that might otherwise accrue to the
RCD-Goma administration. A similar inspection of
diamond production in the Sankuru and Lodja areas of
Northern Kasai the week before had also revealed that
RPA officers were clandestinely taking large quantities
of diamonds out of Northern Kasai directly to the
Congo Desk in Kigali. RCD-Goma determined that Mr.

Khalil was undervaluing the diamonds, and the
consequence was a reduction in taxes payable to RCDGoma’s public treasury as well as a greater margin of
profit for Mr. Khalil and the Congo Desk. The study
concludes that “The public treasury would have four
times the present revenue from diamonds were it not
for fraudulent practices and the under-valuation of
diamonds”.
Imports, taxation and requisition by the
public sector
86. The controversial “conflict” diamonds from
Kisangani are marketed by criminal networks.
Proceeds from these criminal sales are laundered by the
purchase of large quantities of household goods in
Dubai — sugar, soap, cloth and medicines — which are
then imported to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and offered to local sellers at attractive prices. The
Rwandan wholesalers use the profits in Congolese
francs to buy dollars and, to close the trade circuit, to
purchase diamonds.
87. The interest of the RPA commercial wing in
selling consumables at attractive prices is not only to
launder money from criminal diamond sales, but also
to place the once-thriving Kisangani economy under
Rwanda’s control. The cloths that were once
manufactured at the Kisangani Sotexki factory and
renowned for their quality no longer compete with the
cheaper imports, and the result is that the Sotexki
labour force, once 2,000, now stands at 100. The palm
oil once produced locally at the Unilever-owned plant
can no longer compete with the imported oil that is
sold in Kisangani at a third of the price of locally
produced oil. The Unilever-owned palm oil plants in
Kisangani are practically at a standstill. Weakening
local production not only undermines the local
manufacturing economy and makes the Kisangani
population captive consumers, it also shifts Kisangani’s
manufacturing economy to Kigali.
88. Another strategy for raising revenue is to use
RCD-Goma’s public sector facade to requisition funds
from public enterprises. On 21 November 2001, the
Secretary General of RCD-Goma requisitioned by
decree all revenues generated by public utilities and
parastatals. On the following day the Secretary General
annulled all existing collective agreements for workers
in those enterprises. The decrees were applicable to all
public enterprises, including the water utility, the
airport authorities, the electricity utility, the road and

17

S/2002/1146

transport authority among others. RCD-Goma declared
the requisitions to be in the public interest. Within a
month, the water utility lacked sufficient funds to
purchase water purification chemicals in Kisangani and
Bukavu and power stations stopped functioning for
lack of necessary repairs. The International Committee
of the Red Cross has stepped in to provide 60 tons of
chemicals for water purification and has financed
costly repairs at Tshopo power station to avert a
discontinuation of water supply in Kisangani and avert
a cholera outbreak. The parastatal transport company
ceased to function, and the airport authorities appealed
to RCD-Goma to restore a portion of the requisitioned
funds since no salaries had been paid for six months.
89. Following a decree on 15 March 2002, new taxes
were introduced and all existing tax rates have been
increased. Over an 18-month period, since the previous
tax decree of September 2000, taxes on electrical
consumption have increased by 200 per cent. Licences
for trading in agricultural products increased fourfold.
Most licensing fees for operating a business were
doubled or tripled. The number of different taxes
collected in the area under RCD-Goma administration
has increased four times since 1998. None of the tax
revenue is used to provide public services.

Armed conflict and its consequences
90. Medical practitioners, church workers, and nongovernmental organizations in northern Katanga all
attest to rapidly escalating disorder in Kalemie and an
increased use of arms by a wide range of groups, some
affiliated with RCD-Goma and others not. Fighting
between RPA and FAC has been limited to Rwanda’s
seizure of northern Katanga in November 1998 and a
government counter-offensive in October 2000. These
confrontations resulted in considerable displacement of
populations in the path of troop movements. However,
it was the aftermath of those confrontations that
resulted in the most severe armed conflict. Rwandan
troops seized material for their campaigns. The RCDGoma third ANC Brigade, following Rwanda’s
example in their own random fashion, seized food and
other property. Armed movements arose among local
populations for self-defence, and occasionally these
local militias banded together with other local militias
to create larger armed groups. The Panel has received
extensive documentation from local lawyers, Catholic
and Protestant churches, the Fédération des Entreprises

18

au Congo and others detailing thefts of cattle valued at
more than $15 million, thefts of over $1 million worth
of retail goods and the destruction or fraudulent sale of
equipment from the Société nationale de chemin de fer
du Congo.
91. The Catholic Church in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo has spoken out boldly about the
thefts, killings, torture, extortions, rapes and piracy on
Lake Tanganyika perpetrated originally by RPA and
continued by ANC, the RCD-Goma police and the
Banyamulenge militia. The Church, and most notably
the Bishop of Kalemie-Kirungu, recently headed a
campaign to expose these abuses. Directors of RCDGoma’s Department of Security and Information
responded by threatening to kill prominent church
leaders. The Catholic Diocese published a list of those
threats on 15 May 2002.
92. The multiplication of armed forces and fighting
in the interior have all but destroyed farm production
on the rich plateau in the interior of northern Katanga.
Excesses by RPA in requisitioning resources for the
“war effort” set a standard for behaviour by the far less
disciplined ANC rebel forces, who have ravaged the
countryside. Growers are reluctant to invest in crops
when they are so likely to be stolen. Large numbers of
persons have been displaced from their homes and have
abandoned their lands out of fear. The Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has estimated
that, in the northern Katanga area alone, 350,000
displaced persons are living away from their homes,
with neighbours, in the cities or in the bush.
93. Armed conflict along the Masisi-Walikale-Goma
axis arises from tensions between the large numbers of
RPA in place to manage mining operations and Hutus
who may be resident, but who are also imported or
conscripted by Rwandan forces to carry out mining
under forced labour conditions. Separate Rwandaowned comptoirs have quarrelled among themselves
for access to sites. RPA forces have attacked and
burned villages to seize coltan mined by some Hutu
groups or local villagers. The Panel has taken
testimony from villagers who have been forced to leave
their villages following attacks. With minor exceptions,
the objective of military activity is to secure access to
mining sites or ensure a supply of captive labour.
94. Population displacement is the outcome of
frequent armed conflict, with the predictable
consequences of food insecurity, malnutrition and high

S/2002/1146

mortality rates for both the displaced and host
populations. The Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs estimated that 1.5 million
persons were displaced in March 2001 in the areas
occupied by Rwanda in North and South Kivu,
Maniema and Katanga, nearly 14 per cent of the
population. More than three quarters of families living
in the rural areas have probably been forced to move at
least once in the last five years. This degree of armed
conflict undermines local authority and encourages an
abusive social environment. Public infrastructure is
destroyed. School enrolment in Shabunda has dropped
56 per cent since 1998. Men are led to abuse women on
a surprising scale throughout the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. International non-governmental
organizations have provided comprehensive reports
about groups of women being taken hostage and
submitted to long periods of sexual abuse. Children
become instruments of war, forced to work in the
mines and conscripted into armed forces. United
Nations officials have suggested that the number of
child soldiers in the rebel armies is much higher than
reported by the rebel administrations, and that 50 per
cent of local defence and Mayi-Mayi groups are
children.

Malnutrition and mortality
95. Malnutrition studies carried out by nongovernmental organizations in both northern Katanga
and the Kivus have shown that, in some places, as
many as 25 to 30 per cent of all children under 5 years
are malnourished. In most cases, this is due to the large
numbers of displaced persons who have been forced to
leave their own agricultural production and have taken
refuge in nearby host villages. A number of studies
have shown the close link between elevated
malnutrition levels and mortality rates in this region.
96. The most commonly quoted conclusion from the
International Rescue Committee’s surveys is that 2.5
million more people died since the beginning of the
war than would have died had the war not occurred.
While the study is directly relevant to the sample
population of 1.3 million, the International Rescue
Committee has assumed that conditions are sufficiently
similar throughout all five provinces of the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo to justify applying
the mortality rates found in the sampled population to
the larger population in all five provinces. The study

covered the period from August 1998 to April 2001. If
one assumes mortality to have continued at the same
rate, this would mean that more than 3.5 million excess
deaths would have occurred from the beginning of the
war up to September 2002. These deaths are a direct
result of the occupation by Rwanda and Uganda.
Extensive mortality, especially mortality among
children, is the consequence of a cycle of aggression,
the multiplication of armed forces, a high frequency of
conflict and its consequences, especially displacement.
One should not be surprised to find, in areas most
affected by the conflict, a mortality rate for children
under 5 years of 35 per cent.

V. Uganda-controlled area
97. The objective of the elite network in the areas
controlled by Uganda has been to exercise
monopolistic control over the area’s principal natural
resources, cross-border trade, and tax revenues for the
purpose of enriching members of the network.
Notwithstanding the current political rapprochement
and the apparent momentum towards normalizing
relations between Uganda and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the elite network continues to increase its
economic hold over the area.

The elite network
98. The elite network operating out of Uganda is
decentralized and loosely hierarchical, unlike the
network operating out of Rwanda. The Uganda network
consists of a core group of members including certain
high-ranking UPDF officers, private businessmen and
selected rebel leaders/administrators. UPDF Lieutenant
General (Ret.) Salim Saleh and Major General James
Kazini are the key figures. Other members include the
Chief of Military Intelligence, Colonel Noble
Mayombo, UPDF Colonel Kahinda Otafiire and
Colonel Peter Karim. Private entrepreneurs include
Sam Engola, Jacob Manu Soba and Mannase Savo and
other Savo family members. Rebel politicians and
administrators include Professor Wamba dia Wamba,
Roger Lumbala, John Tibasima, Mbusa Nyamwisi and
Toma Lubanga.
99. The network continues to conduct activities
through front companies such as the Victoria Group,
Trinity Investment, LA CONMET and Sagricof. Each

19

S/2002/1146

of these companies may concentrate on one or two
commercial niches, though these may change. The role
of the companies is to manage their respective niche
activities by assembling the personnel, logistics and
occasionally the financing for the operations.
100. The network generates revenue from the export of
primary materials, from controlling the import of
consumables, from theft and tax fraud. The success of
the network’s activities in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo relies on three interconnected features,
namely, military intimidation; maintenance of a public
sector facade, in the form of a rebel movement
administration; and manipulation of the money supply
and the banking sector, using counterfeit currency and
other related mechanisms.
101. The Uganda People’s Defence Forces and their
associated rebel militias have been used as the de facto
enforcement arm of the network, ensuring the
network’s pre-eminent commercial position through
intimidation, and the threat and use of force. UPDF or
militias associated with individual UPDF officers have
established physical control over areas containing
commercially viable natural resources — coltan,
diamonds, timber and gold. They establish authority in
major urban and financial centres, such as Bunia, Beni
and Butembo, where they use the rebel administration
as a public sector facade to generate revenue,
specifically to collect taxes under various pretexts,
including licensing fees for commercial operators,
import and export duties and taxes on specific
products.
102. Uganda has recently agreed to withdraw all
UPDF troops except for a reinforced battalion in Bunia
and a small number of units on the slopes of the
Ruwenzori Mountains. In anticipation of this
withdrawal, a paramilitary force is being trained under
the personal authority of Lt. General Saleh which,
according to the Panel’s sources, is expected to
continue to facilitate the commercial activities of
UPDF officers after UPDF have departed. This military
group draws on dissidents from Jean-Pierre Bemba’s
MLC, members of the Uganda-supported RCD-Congo
including its leaders Professor Kin-kiey Mulumba and
Kabanga Babadi, and others in the north-eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo who have supported
UPDF in the past. It has been reported that Lt. General
Saleh discreetly provides financial support for this new
rebel group. The Panel’s sources have indicated that
Heckie Horn, Managing Director of Saracen Uganda

20

Ltd., is a key partner with Lt. General Saleh in
supporting this paramilitary group and that Lt. General
Saleh himself is a 25 per cent owner in Saracen.
Saracen’s managing director also provides military
training and arms to members of this group. In an
interview with Panel members, the Managing Director
of Saracen Ltd. categorically denied any involvement
with Lt. General Saleh’s activities in the north-eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
103. Panel sources report that Lt. General Saleh and
Mr. Horn consulted President Joseph Kabila to obtain
support for this covert operation. Its primary objective
has been to replace Mbusa Nyamwisi with Roger
Lumbala as head of RCD-K/ML in order to ensure
access to the diamond-rich areas around Buta and Isiro
controlled by Mr. Lumbala’s rebel group, RCDNational. This objective has largely been achieved.
Their more long-term objective is to bring about the
downfall of Jean-Pierre Bemba, adding the growing
number of dissidents in Mr. Bemba’s ranks to the new
rebel movement RCD-Congo. With increased numbers
and training, they will then be in a position to confront
RCD-Goma and Rwanda.
104. Members of the Ugandan network are typically
tax exempt. The Panel is in possession of documents
showing that the network uses its control over the
RCD-K/ML rebel administration to request tax
exonerations for imports of high-value commodities.
The granting of numerous tax exonerations to UPDF
Colonel Otafiire between late 2001 and early 2002 is
one of numerous cases. Not only did Colonel Otafiire
benefit financially but, eventually, those exonerations
forced local competitors out of markets in Bunia and
Beni, leaving the petrol trade largely under the control
of the network.
105. Local commercial operators are, however,
required to pay substantial import and export duties.
These operators may be favoured with discounted tax
payment deals, in the form of prefinancing
arrangements, but tax payment for local operators is
mandatory. Prefinancing arrangements involve the
payment by an importer of discounted tax payments in
exchange for a financial payment to an authorizing
rebel politician or administrator. None of these
payments to the rebel administration is used to finance
public services.
106. The network uses its economic influence to
control the banking sector, which in turn allows the

S/2002/1146

network to further control access to operating capital
for commercial operators in the area. Economically
speaking, this region has become a captive region, where
the types of commercial ventures are manipulated and
the viability of local businesses is controlled.
Furthermore, the flow of money is regulated by the
network through currency trading and the widespread
introduction of counterfeit Congolese francs.
107. As in the past, the network continues to involve
the transnational criminal group of Victor Bout. Mr.
Bout recently purchased the Uganda-based nonoperational airline company Okapi Air. The purchase
of the company allowed Victor Bout to use Okapi’s
licences. The company was subsequently renamed
Odessa. The Panel is in possession of a list of outbound
flights from 1998 to the beginning of 2002 from
Entebbe International Airport, which confirms the
operational activities of Mr. Bout’s aircraft from
Ugandan territory. Currently, Mr. Bout’s aircraft share
the flight times and destinations (slots) with Planet Air,
which is owned by the wife of Lt. General Salim Saleh
and which facilitates the activities of Mr. Bout by filing
flight plans for his aircraft.

Strategies and sources of revenue
Coltan
108. Coltan has been exploited extensively in
Orientale Province by various armed groups under the
protection of UPDF. A number of coltan operations,
especially under the supervision of UPDF Colonels
Muzora and Burundi, have been coordinated under the
front company Trinity Investment, where UPDF Major
General Kazini is the principal figure. Armed groups
frequently identified with militias under the command
of UPDF officers manage sites in remote locations
where diggers pay a daily fee to exploit an area.
Case study of a commercial chain
involving coltan
109. During March 2002, Panel members met with
Valentina Piskunova who, together with her husband
Anatoly Piskunov, represents and operates the company
LA CONMET from its base in Kampala. During
discussions with the Panel, Ms. Piskunova explained
that, because of the collapsed international coltan
market, prices for the mineral in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo had dropped

dramatically. However, Ms. Piskunova told the Panel
that the continuing international interest in coltan from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is due to the
“very low” labour costs for extracting the mineral.
Therefore, the company continued to buy coltan from
its office at Butembo in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. She said that their purchase price for coltan
with a 30 per cent tantalum content was $10 per
kilogram. The same coltan was then sold for $17 per
kilogram.
110. Ms. Piskunova went on to tell the Panel that the
company’s coltan was transported by road across the
border between the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Uganda at Kasindi to Entebbe International
Airport, where it was then transported by Boeing 707,
via Sharjah, United Arab Emirates, at a cost of
$140,000 per flight, to Ulba, Kazakhstan, for
processing.
111. In addition to the profit made on the sales of
coltan, LA CONMET also experienced savings by
being granted “full exoneration” for “all activities
involving exploitation for the territory of Beni-Lubero”
(Democratic Republic of the Congo), including
freedom from paying fiscal and customs duties. The
document granting the exonerations is in the possession
of the Panel. It was signed at Kampala by Mbusa
Myamwisi, then Commissioner General for RCDKisangani, on 5 January 2000, identifying Salim Saleh
as the owner of LA CONMET and designating his
representatives as “the Russian group LA CONMET”.
Diamonds
112. The network coordinates all elements of the
diamond trade, local buying houses, Lebanese
exporters, army protection from UPDF and individual
militias, tax exonerations from the public sector, and
Lebanese connections in Antwerp, under the aegis of
the front company, the Victoria Group. Considerable
evidence available to the Panel has named the
Lebanese-born, Khalil Nazeem Ibrahim, and another
known as Mr. Abbas, as the present focal points in
Kampala for Victoria’s diamond operations. The Panel
has credible evidence that Khalil Nazeem Ibrahim used
the capital and marketing services of Hemang Nananal
Shah, proprietor of Nami Gems in Antwerp. Lt.
General Saleh is recognized by the Panel’s sources in
Bunia, Kisangani and Kampala as the founder and
director of the Victoria Group and as the mastermind of
its operations.

21

S/2002/1146

113. The Lebanese individuals, together with their
families, who are commonly named in connection with
the Victoria Group, are also regarded as closely
associated with the Lebanese families Khanafer and
Ahmad. Khanafer Nahim, in particular, has been named
as a key figure in Victoria Group operations. He is well
known by a number of national intelligence and police
organizations for the production of counterfeit
currency, money-laundering and diamond smuggling
on behalf of generals who were prominent in President
Mobutu’s time and are still interested in returning to
power. The Victoria Group’s use of counterfeit United
States currency in Bunia to purchase gold from local
comptoirs is widely known.
Tax fraud and the requisition of assets
114. Control over imports is as lucrative as the
monopolization of exports. Exoneration from import
duties gives the network an advantage in the northeastern Democratic Republic of the Congo over local
importers who pay duties and taxes. An across-theboard exoneration was recently proclaimed in the
Protocole d’Accord issued by RCD-K/ML on 22
February 2002, which ensured Ugandan commercial
operators complete exoneration from all taxes in the
area under their control.
115. But increased profit margins from tax-free
imports provide only a fraction of the benefits. Equally
lucrative is access to the taxes themselves,
monopolized by the network that uses the rebel
administration’s facade of a public treasury and its
collection agents to raise revenue from local
businessmen and the population at large. Hundreds of
containers are imported each month into the Butembo,
Beni and Bunia areas, and importers are obliged to pay
an average of $8,000 per container. Revenue from these
import duties can be considerable. Some revenue is
also diverted through prefinancing arrangements,
which provide discounted import duties in exchange
for kickbacks to rebel politicians. The Panel’s sources
insist that the revenues generated from import duties
and prefinancing payments are diverted to UPDF
officers. None is utilized for public services.
116. Trinity Investment’s local transporters in Bunia,
the Savo family group among others, carry agricultural
products, wood and cattle from Bunia to Kampala
exempt from UPDF toll barriers and export taxes.
Trinity investment also works with another front
company under the name of Sagricof to fraudulently

22

evacuate wood from North Kivu and the Ituri area.
Tree plantations have been raided in the areas of
Mahagi and Djugu along the north-eastern border with
Uganda. Concerned citizens and research by local nongovernmental organizations have identified Colonel
Peter Karim and Colonel Otafiire, in addition to the
Ugandan parliamentarian Sam Ngola, as key figures in
the illegal logging and fraudulent evacuation of wood.
117. Many of the cattle removed have been forcibly
taken from villages that have been the objects of attack
by Hema militia supported by UPDF troops. The Panel
has received reports from ranchers in areas to the south
of Bunia as well as to the north in Mahagi detailing the
removal of large numbers of cattle by UPDF troops.
The representative of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations in Bunia has
reported the more recent UPDF practice of offering
protection to ranchers against attacks that they
themselves have orchestrated, in exchange for regular
payment in animals. UPDF have also required local
butchers to hand over hides from animals butchered
locally, and these hides are then transported to
Kampala where they are reputedly sold to Bata Shoe
Manufacturing.
Economic exploitation and ethnic conflict
118. The ongoing armed conflict between members of
the Hema and Lendu clans stems, in part, from
attempts by powerful Hema businessmen and
politicians to increase the benefits they derive from the
commercial activities of the elite network through their
front companies, the Victoria Group and Trinity
Investment, in the Ituri area.
119. Hema clan members, particularly members of the
sub-clan Gegere, have justified the purchase of arms
and the training of their own militia by the need to
defend themselves against their traditional enemies, the
Lendu. It is true that a long-festering dispute over land
has resulted in discord between the two groups.
Recently, however, the traditional enmity over land and
the ongoing feud between the two groups is used as a
rationale by the Hema, and especially by the extremist
sub-clan Gegere, for importing arms and training their
own militia with the ultimate unspoken objective of
consolidating their economic strength in the region.
120. The Gegere sub-clan plays an important role in
the operation of the elite network. The majority of
transporters and local traders in Bunia come from this

S/2002/1146

group. Jacob Manu Soba, Manasse Savo and other
members of the Savo family are among those who have
provisioned UPDF in the area and who provide
transport, logistical services and local commercial
links. They have established close links with a
succession of UPDF commanders and troops in the
area and work closely with them in conducting crossborder trade.
121. The Hema fill an important niche in the operation
of the criminal enterprises as truck owners and
businessmen. They transport shipments of primary
products from Ituri across the border to Uganda under
the protection of UPDF troops and return with
gasoline, cigarettes and arms, all exempt from taxation.
They benefit from the trade and the generous profit
margins, and from their association with the Trinity
Group’s Ugandan patrons. But their niche has remained
marginal. They control none of the primary product
exports themselves. They remain peripheral to the
alliance between RCD-K/ML leaders, the Ugandan
patrons and UPDF. The plot to replace Mr. Nyamwisi
with Mr. Lubanga, which appears now to be a fait
accompli in Bunia, is part of an attempt by these Hema
traders to secure greater control over the spoils
available to inside members of RCD-K/ML.
122. UPDF have created the conditions that require the
presence of troops and their continued involvement in
commercial operations. This has entailed providing
arms to both sides in the ethnic conflict, the Lendu and
the Hema. The consequent increase in ethnic fighting
has resulted in UPDF being urged to assist in furthering
the peace process in Bunia. This function was
formalized in an official Protocole d’Accord signed on
22 February 2002 by Mbusa Nyamwisi and John
Tibasima as President and Vice-President of RCDK/ML and by Colonel Noble Mayombo as an official
representative of the Government of Uganda. The
Protocole d’Accord gave UPDF official responsibility
for reducing the conflits armés inter-ethnique en Ituri
and for assisting in bringing about a retour de la paix
by keeping a contingent in place for observation and
for negotiating an eventual long-term solution. In
exchange, UPDF were promised a monthly stipend of
$25,000 from the RCD-K/ML public treasury, and all
Ugandan enterprises that were approved by UPDF were
accorded exoneration from all duties and taxes due to
the rebel administration. This has given UPDF a
legitimate cover for continuing military support for the
elite network’s activities in the area.

123. The Protocole d’Accord was signed a week after
UPDF had been involved in a succession of attacks,
from 11 to 16 February 2002, on villagers at Geti. The
Panel’s sources on the matter stated that the attack had
been financed by Hema businessmen in Bunia. The
UPDF motive was clarified even further in the course
of a meeting with RCD-K/ML department chiefs on 12
July 2002, when a Panel member was informed that the
Hema businessmen in question sought to have control
over gold deposits in the Geti area, and that in fact the
ethnic conflict was a minor issue.

Armed conflict and its consequences
124. UPDF military operations have contributed to the
arming of large numbers. UPDF have trained the
militia of their Ituri commercial allies, the Hema, and
provoked the need for the victims of Hema attacks to
defend themselves. Lendu villages have mounted their
own local forces, and they in turn have frequently
attacked Hema villages. The creation of local selfdefence groups is a familiar pattern: local ethnic groups
frequently assemble armed groups to defend their
villages or collectivities.
125. Armed conflict has spread throughout society, as
economic and personal insecurity reach extreme levels.
Large numbers of young men join one or another
armed group because they have no other means of
finding food or medicine or because they have no one
to care for them. The young men in the Armé
Patriotique Congolaise are unpaid but are provided
with weapons and a uniform giving them the tools for
menacing others. Widespread armed activity is
characterized by opportunistic and chaotic encounters.
Children are killed, adult victims are eviscerated,
women are raped, property stolen, houses burned,
churches demolished and whatever infrastructure exists
is laid waste.
126. In the cities, young men dressed in military
uniform and equipped with guns target businesses,
households and churches. In the countryside, armed
groups target whole villages. The attack on the village
of Mpingi on 24 December 2001 is illustrative. A small
Mayi-Mayi group had teamed up with a group claiming
to be members of a Hutu opposition to set up a
roadblock on the road from Butembo to Kanyabayonga.
When the roadblock drew the attention of APC, the
Mayi-Mayi group withdrew to the west into the village
of Mpingi where they sought refuge. APC followed

23

S/2002/1146

them in force and attacked the entire village of Mpingi,
destroyed and burned houses, vandalized the church,
razed the school and clinic and forced the residents to
flee. Targeting whole villages with violence, brutally
raping and murdering residents, removing livestock,
food and other property and dispersing residents has
been the trademark of armed aggression. A portion of
those who flee seek protection in nearby villages,
abandoning their own productive activities in their
home village while becoming dependent on the
resources of host populations.
127. A portion of the displaced population take refuge
in urban areas where they benefit from somewhat better
security but have little, if any, means for survival.
Unemployment rates in cities and towns often reach 90
per cent. An income survey by civil society groups in
Butembo found that 90 per cent lived on a few cents a
day and ate one meal a day. Urban families break up to
seek survival in separate ways. The women engage in
prostitution, the older men may return to what remains
of their villages or mining sites and the young men
enter the rebel army, swelling both the ranks of its
forces and the numbers of young boys without
subsistence possessing weapons.
128. In March 2001, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs estimated that there were
620,000 displaced persons in North Kivu, which
amounted to 16 per cent of the total population. The
area covered by the Office’s survey includes both
Uganda-controlled and Rwanda-controlled areas, but
the conditions surveyed are representative of the
Uganda-controlled area. Given the frequency of
displacement in the area, this would mean that four out
of five rural residents have been forcibly displaced at
one time or another since 1998. This is the highest
number ever registered for Africa. These aggregates
have been confirmed for specific localities surveyed by
international non-governmental organizations.
129. The spread of HIV/AIDS, the large numbers of
child soldiers and the rape of women are other
consequences of the pervasive armed conflict. Many
soldiers are young boys who hardly seem capable of
wielding the weapons they carry. The issue of child
soldiers surfaced when 700 young recruits from the
Bunia area were discovered at a UPDF training camp
in Tchakwanzi, Uganda, of whom 165 were between 14
and 16 years of age. The programme to demobilize
those 165 children, two of whom were girls, has
attracted considerable attention. The issue also

24

received attention recently when the Governor of
Bunea, Jean-Pierre Molondo, revealed that, of the
recruits being trained for the extremist Hema militia,
60 per cent were under the age of 18.

Malnutrition and mortality
130. Population displacement has a direct impact on
agricultural production, food security and levels of
malnutrition. The threat of attack and displacement is
so prevalent in this area that farm families adopt
farming strategies that minimize losses under
conditions of extreme insecurity. They cease raising
animals, since animals can be easily stolen. Fewer
families raise protein-rich legumes, since these crops
require attention through the growing cycle, and this
attention can rarely be given. Malnutrition, in turn,
substantially increases the exposure of the population
to life-threatening illnesses.
131. The International Rescue Committee surveys
provide the most comprehensive research into mortality
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. None
of the health zones sampled in its two major surveys
was in the areas now controlled by Uganda. However,
the pattern of armed conflict, population displacement,
food insecurity and malnutrition in Uganda-controlled
areas resembles the pattern that explains the very high
mortality rates in the seven health zones where the
research was conducted. The Committee’s team judged
the similarities to be sufficient to warrant extrapolating
the results of areas sampled in the Kivus to the entire
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, including
areas under Ugandan control. The Panel concurs. One
can expect the same range of mortality for children
under 5, from nearly 30 per cent per year in areas of
extreme insecurity without health facilities to 7 per
cent in areas where there is less insecurity and some
services. For the more than 20 million people living in
the five eastern provinces, the number of excess deaths
directly attributable to Rwandan and Ugandan
occupation can be estimated at between 3 million and
3.5 million.

VI. Collaboration of the Panel with the
Porter Commission in Uganda
132. During its previous mandate, the Panel’s relations
with the Judicial Commission of Inquiry headed by

S/2002/1146

Justice David Porter (Porter Commission) were
occasionally
strained.
However,
with
the
encouragement of Member States, notably the members
of the Security Council, the Panel established an
amiable working relationship with the Commission.
This relationship is unique in the history of panels of
experts mandated by the Council, given the degree and
the nature of the cooperation developed between the
two bodies.

analysis and used this analysis to imply that they may
be forgeries. The analysis of those documents,
however, suggested that the signatures were probably
genuine. During a specially arranged hearing aimed at
corroborating the authenticity of certain documents
transmitted by the Panel, the Porter Commission
submitted one of the Panel’s informants to an unusually
aggressive questioning designed to frighten the
individual and discredit his testimony.

133. Panel members held frequent discussions with the
Porter Commission. From the outset, Justice Porter was
critical of the quality of the Panel’s reports and the
credibility of its sources. At the same time, he claimed
that the Commission’s investigations, ongoing now for
more than a year, were stymied primarily because of a
“conspiracy of silence” within UPDF. Under the
Commission of Inquiry Act, the Commission has the
power to conduct searches and compel the production
of documents and testimony.

136. When the Commission recalled Major General
James Kazini in May 2002 to question him on the basis
of documents supplied by the Panel, the UPDF military
commander finally admitted that the signatures on the
documents were indeed his and accepted that the
documents related to his actions as the former
commander of UPDF operations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Justice Porter commented
during the questioning that General Kazini, who had
consistently denied under oath any involvement in such
illicit economic exploits, had perjured himself
repeatedly during both that hearing and his original
testimony before the Commission the previous year.
The head of the Commission also conceded, according
to transcripts of the hearing, that the Panel’s
“allegations” about General Kazini’s involvement in
exploitation activities, including those related to the
diamond trade and tax revenues, “were actually true”.
Justice Porter reconfirmed these observations in
meetings with the Panel, again conceding that the
conclusions of the Panel’s earlier reports about this
officer and the involvement of UPDF in the illicit
exploitation were “right”. In an electronic message
dated 25 May 2002, Justice Porter wrote to the
Chairman of the Panel regarding the documentary
evidence provided and General Kazini’s second
appearance before the Commission. He expressed his
appreciation to the Panel, saying, “We feel, and hope
you agree, that with your assistance we have at last
been able to break what we have described as a
conspiracy of silence within UPDF, at least in relation
to diamonds and ‘security payments’, and we are
extremely grateful to you for enabling us to do so.”

134. The Panel made evidence available to the
Commission, including copies of 12 letters and a
statement from a witness, together with five original
audiotapes containing testimony given by a primary
source. These materials represent only a small sample
of the documentation gathered by the Panel on the
involvement of leading Ugandan military and senior
Ugandan Government personnel. They provide
evidence of criminal activity by such ranking Ugandan
authorities. They show officials demanding extortionist
payments and tax exonerations from Congolese rebel
movements, including the UPDF Chief of Staff
demanding that his vehicles transporting coltan be
allowed to cross the border without paying export
duties. The Panel also arranged for one of its sources to
testify before the Commission at a special hearing in
spite of the risk of exposure to the source. In exchange,
the Porter Commission provided the Panel with copies
of the testimony of certain high-ranking military
officers, Government officials, private businessmen
and other individuals who had appeared before it.
135. The Panel’s many efforts to establish a
constructive relationship with the Commission have
mostly been met with attempts to dismiss its
credibility. The Commission has challenged the
authenticity of letters provided by the Panel that show
significant payments to UPDF officers from rebel
movement budgets, even when reliable witnesses have
testified to their validity. It has submitted other
documents signed by ranking officials to handwriting

137. During the Panel’s last meeting with the
Commission in September 2002 in Kampala, Justice
Porter explained that any recommendation by the
Commission to refer an individual for criminal
prosecution as the result of its enquiries must first be
approved by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
President Museveni. A criminal investigation would

25

S/2002/1146

then be necessary before the authorities could
determine if grounds for prosecution existed. The Panel
also understood that, in spite of the Commission’s
extensive investigative powers, its terms of reference
restrict the scope of its enquiries into the activities of
military personnel. It is not empowered to obtain
military records and documents from the Defence
Ministry. Nor can it conduct audits of individual
officers’ finances.
138. The Porter Commission’s mandate has now been
extended beyond that of the Panel, to 15 November
2002, allowing it the opportunity to comment on the
Panel’s report. In the event that the Porter Commission
ignores or rejects the validity and evidentiary value of
the documents provided or attempts to further discredit
the Panel’s work, the Chairman of the Panel requests
that the Security Council authorize the Panel to
respond to the Commission’s report in a letter
addressed to the Security Council, which would be
circulated as a United Nations document.

VII. Transit and end-user trade issues
Transit countries
139. The Panel identified 11 African States through
whose territory goods originating in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are likely to pass. Some are
directly involved in the conflict, namely, Burundi,
Rwanda, Uganda and Zimbabwe. The remaining seven
are the Central African Republic, Kenya, Mozambique,
the Republic of the Congo, South Africa, the United
Republic of Tanzania and Zambia. The Panel submitted
questions to all 11 countries and held substantive
discussions with government representatives from five.
The Panel enquired about relevant legislation,
investigations into the flow of the commodities,
measures taken to curb those flows, other possible
action to be taken and those Governments’ needs for
assistance. Four of the 11 countries — the Republic of
the Congo, Mozambique, the United Republic of
Tanzania and Zimbabwe — declined to respond. The
Panel later identified yet another transit point for
Congolese coltan, Nigeria, and requested information
about this trade. No response was received. Virtually
none of the countries that responded to the Panel’s
questions had conducted any investigations or adopted
any specific procedures for the identification or
inspection of the transiting of commodities from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Ugandan

26

authorities mentioned the impounding of a cargo of
smuggled ivory. South African officials confirmed the
seizure of a sizeable clandestine shipment of diamonds
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, but
provided no details. None of the authorities in these
countries gave any indication that Congolese resources
traded through their territories should or could be
regarded as conflict goods. Almost none of the
countries proposed any meaningful measures to help
curb trade in Congolese commodities that are tainted
by criminality and militarization. Kenya, however,
proposed the reopening of the Northern Corridor route,
under the Transit Transport Coordination Authority,
with the assistance of the international community.
140. Reliable sources have told the Panel that gem
diamonds from Mbuji Mayi in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo account for much of the
phenomenal increase in diamonds transiting through
Dubai in recent years. Exports from the United Arab
Emirates to Antwerp increased to $149.5 million in
2001 from $4.2 million in 1998 according to the
Diamond High Council’s statistics. The Panel has been
told of chartered flights direct from Mbuji Mayi to
Dubai, and other routes via Dar es Salaam, on which
illicit diamond exports have been carried. Likewise,
Dubai has become a transit point for coltan from the
Uganda-controlled area and a portion of the diamonds
originating from Kisangani in the Rwanda-controlled
area. The arms and diamond smuggler Victor Bout uses
the United Arab Emirates as his permanent base, with
nine of his aircraft stationed at Ra’s al Khaimah
International Airport.
End-user countries
141. In an effort to determine what measures might be
taken at the end of the commercial chain to control the
trade in resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and sever its links to the armed conflict, the
Panel surveyed 17 end-user countries in Asia, Europe,
the Middle East and North America. Many of these
countries serve as secondary transit points and
processing centres as well as major consumer markets.
They included Belgium, China, France, Germany,
India, Israel, Japan, Kazakhstan, Lebanon, Malaysia,
the Netherlands, the Russian Federation, Switzerland,
Thailand, the United Arab Emirates, the United
Kingdom and the United States. In its requests, the
Panel stressed that its aim was not to obstruct trade, but
to identify mechanisms or practices that would

S/2002/1146

eliminate the costs in war and human lives that occur in
the course of extracting and commercializing resources
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In seeking
these countries’ views, the Panel made reference to a
range of possible initiatives, while leaving open the
possibility for innovation based on lessons learned
from other conflict situations. Four countries did not
respond: India, Kazakhstan, Malaysia and the United
Arab Emirates. Few respondents commented explicitly
on the role that the trade in these commodities plays in
fuelling the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
142. The responses nevertheless indicated that efforts
are being stepped up to tackle the illicit trade in natural
resources and that awareness is growing of the ethical
responsibilities posed by conflict-driven trade in
commodities. France, Japan, Israel, Thailand and the
United States emphasized the adequacy of existing
certificates of origin or product certification regimes in
stemming the illegal trade, including the certification
scheme now in the process of being implemented under
the Kimberley Process. Like China, the Russian
Federation stressed that its participation in the
Kimberley Process is aimed at helping to sever the
links between the illegal trade in rough diamonds and
armed conflict, particularly in Africa. Germany stated
that companies in transit and end-user countries should
cease all commercial and transport activities related to
the trade in resources from the region, “unless their
counterparts are able to provide clearly documented
certificates of origin”. Most responses did not evaluate
the comparative successes and failures of certification
regimes in the face of highly criminalized or opaque
commercial chains. Switzerland expressed the view
that until the Kimberley Process certification scheme
had entered into force and more experience had been
gained from its implementation, it would be premature
to comment on the use of such regimes in regulating
the trade in commodities from certain regions. Enduser countries did not specifically call for countries
bordering the Democratic Republic of the Congo such
as Burundi, the Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and
Uganda, which also trade in rough diamonds, to join
the Kimberley Process. Lebanon suggested that
standardized, mandatory certificates of origin could be
developed for certain precious commodities through
the relevant United Nations body or bodies.
143. The Russian Federation cautioned that any
proposed measures on curbing conflict-linked trade

should not hinder legitimate trade in primary
commodities or “impose an excessive burden on the
countries participating in such trade”. Several
European Union members, including France and the
Netherlands, observed that any measures affecting
trade flows would have to be taken within the
framework of the European Union and its trade
regulations. Belgium and the United Kingdom stressed
that the burden of ensuring transparency in commercial
and financial flows or supply chains should be borne
primarily by private companies and should be based on
either voluntary measures or the OECD Guidelines for
Multinational Enterprises. Germany echoed this, saying
that it had appealed to German companies to adhere to
those guidelines as well as the principles of the
European Union Commission’s Green Paper on Social
Responsibility and the United Nations Global Compact
in their business activities in the region. Germany also
encouraged the Panel to continue its efforts to increase
the transparency of the commercial chains for the
natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, especially by intensifying its dialogue with
private companies. Only Belgium suggested the
possibility of imposing targeted sanctions against
businesses or individuals profiting from the trade in
conflict goods. The Netherlands expressed the view
that the verification of commodities would be less
difficult and costly if carried out at the beginning of the
commercial chain.
144. Belgium, Germany and the United States also
highlighted the re-establishment of the State’s authority
throughout the territory of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo as essential to combating the illicit
exploitation, and the need for capacity-building to help
achieve this. Similarly, Lebanon said that the customs
administration of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo should be reinforced so that it could more
effectively control borders, monitor trade flows and
prevent smuggling.
International and regional organizations
145. The Southern African Development Community
shared the view of some end-user States that existing
certificates of origin were adequate for demonstrating
that products had been legally produced and acquired.
Customs intelligence and investigative capability for
combating smuggling are still being developed within
SADC. Issues of capacity-building and information-

27

S/2002/1146

sharing within the region will have to be addressed as
this process advances.
146. The World Customs Organization informed the
Panel that it had established a network of Regional
Intelligence Liaison Offices, each assigned to a number
of countries, to facilitate the exchange of information
and cooperation within a region. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo and many francophone
countries in the surrounding region are attached to the
Liaison Office at Douala, Cameroon. WCO observed
that the use of the Liaison Office and the WCO
Internet-based Customs Enforcement Network by the
Douala region’s members was quite low. It stressed that
curbing fraudulent trade in commodities transiting
through a region depends on effective communication
between the countries concerned.
147. With regard to trade flows, the World Trade
Organization explained in its reply to the Panel that
two provisions of the 1994 GATT, a component of the
WTO treaty, authorize members to take measures that
otherwise would be inconsistent with GATT/WTO
rules. These rules generally prohibit trade restrictions
and discrimination. Articles XXI (c) and XX describe
situations and policy aims permitting exceptional
measures. The former, the security exception provision,
refers to exceptions related to a State fulfilling its
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations.
This might serve as justification for Members taking
action in compliance with a Security Council resolution
on maintaining peace and security, commented WTO.
Article XX, the provision on general exceptions, may
be evoked if the measure is adopted pursuant to one or
more policies listed in the article’s subparagraphs. For
example, subparagraph (b) refers to measures
necessary to protect human life.
148. The Economic Commission for Africa concurred
with Belgium that “smart sanctions” should be part of
the solution to ending the illegal trade. It added that the
Governments of the countries involved should also be
“held accountable for the illegal activities of
individuals and/or companies as well as banks that are
operating in their country since they have the power to
regulate them”.

VIII. Observations
149. The illegal exploitation of natural resources,
gross violations of human rights and a dire

28

humanitarian situation are some of the consequences of
four years of war and the lack of a central government
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo with the
authority and capacity to protect its citizens and
resources.
150. The withdrawal of foreign forces is an important
step towards ending the illegal exploitation of natural
resources. Yet the necessary networks have already
become deeply embedded to ensure that the illegal
exploitation continues, independent of the physical
presence of the foreign armies.
151. Another step towards halting the exploitation of
natural resources will be the early establishment of an
all-inclusive transitional government in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which would ensure that
central government control is reinstated and that viable
local administrations are empowered to protect and
regulate the exploitation activities to the benefit of the
populace. However, it is clear that, even with the
establishment of an all-inclusive government,
exercising effective control over territory and natural
resources would require time and would be possible
only within the context of a broader framework of
sound institution-building. In the interim, it is the view
of the Panel that continued monitoring and reporting on
the illegal exploitation of resources will at least serve
to deter these activities.
152. The most important element in effectively halting
the illegal exploitation of resources in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo relates to the political will of
those who support, protect and benefit from the
networks. This may pose a great challenge, given the
intricate relationships they have forged and the
dependency they have developed on the profits from
these activities. The war economy controlled by the
three elite networks operating in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo dominates the economic
activities of much of the Great Lakes region. Yet the
Lusaka, Pretoria and Luanda Agreements do not
address this all-important economic component of the
conflict.
153. Armed groups, whether foreign or Congolese,
who are benefiting from these exploitation activities,
should also be taken into account in efforts to halt the
exploitation. Years of lawlessness and a Government
incapable of protecting its citizens have allowed the
armed groups to loot and plunder the country’s
resources with impunity. While some hide behind a

S/2002/1146

political agenda, all are pursuing illegal economic
activities as a matter of survival. It is hoped that
progress in the peace process, together with an
effective and responsive programme of disarmament,
demobilization, rehabilitation, reintegration and
resettlement, would provide better alternatives to the
armed groups. This would require the necessary
funding for reintegration programmes and security
assurances for those who are not wanted for war crimes
or acts of genocide. The international community must,
therefore, provide the assistance to these programmes,
invest in publicizing them and encourage the armed
groups to participate.
154. The Panel is hoping that this report will
contribute to a shift in policies — in the light of the
recent encouraging political and military developments
on the ground — that will bring the exploitation of
resources back to a legally acceptable level.

IX. Conclusions
155. An embargo or a moratorium banning the export
of raw materials originating in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo does not seem to be a viable
means of helping to improve the situation of the
country’s Government, citizens or natural environment.
Massive technical and financial assistance for the
population would be required to offset the
humanitarian impact of such restrictive measures. At
the same time, if the Panel in its report does not
recommend any punitive measures to curb the illegal
exploitation and trade originating in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, this will only encourage a
continuation of the exploitation by different criminal
organizations. This could easily lead to an increase in
these activities. There must be sustained efforts to deter
illicit and illegal exploitation.
156. Restrictive measures nevertheless need to be
taken vis-à-vis the role of companies and individuals
involved in arms supply and resource plundering. The
international and multinational dimension of these
illegal activities is very important. Ethical and
transparent business practices are needed to combat
these illegal activities.
157. The establishment of a transitional government in
Kinshasa should be accompanied by four elements,
namely, the disarmament of all rebel groups in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; phased withdrawal

of foreign troops; measures to drastically curb the
illegal exploitation and encourage legal exploitation;
and the application of serious leverage through
multilateral pressures and incentives. To these elements
must be added a dynamic monitoring process. All must
be phased, interlinked and ongoing. This dynamic
package would not only advance the peace process in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, but would also
lead to a peaceful and final settlement of the
exploitation issue, ensuring that legal modes of
resource exploitation prevail. The first two elements
seem to be finding their way to an interlinked and
phased implementation as a result of the recent
agreements signed in Pretoria and Luanda. The third
element is intrinsically linked with the fourth, namely
applying leverage through incentives and disincentives.
158. In order to readjust the present process of illegal
exploitation and encourage legal exploitation, which
could contribute to the economic stability of all parties,
there is a need to apply forceful disincentives and
incentives. These should be monitored through a
proactive monitoring body. Until now, all the parties
involved in the illegal exploitation have had no strong
incentive to alter the economic status quo. It is
necessary, therefore, to find measures that address their
fears of losing revenues. Such measures will however
be effective only if a political process is undertaken
simultaneously.
159. Reconstructing and reorienting the region’s
economies are essential to peacemaking and peacebuilding. The Panel believes that a peace dividend in
the form of economic incentives should be emphasized
by the international community in order to promote the
parties’ adherence to the peace agreements and
encourage confidence-building. The Panel also
proposes in its recommendations that a set of
disincentives be enacted to apply pressure in the case
of non-compliance with the agreements.
160. Many of the Panel’s conclusions about the
economic roots and consequences of the conflict have
been echoed in ideas associated with the proposals for
an international conference on peace, security,
democracy and sustainable development in the Great
Lakes region. Recently signed agreements may signal
that the time for organizing this conference is
approaching. Such a conference would be an ideal
forum to address the need to reorient the regional
trading system to post-conflict imperatives and for
negotiating the framework of a multilateral agreement

29

S/2002/1146

to carry this out. This reorientation will require
providing the incentives and means to promote regional
economic integration, which would marginalize
criminal and military-driven trade in favour of
legitimate commercial development that is transparent
and growth-oriented. Supporting regional economic
integration could help to gradually draw the countries
involved in the conflict closer and act as a barrier to
future outbreaks of armed conflict.

X. Recommendations
Peace dividend
161. In the light of the new dynamic and progress
created by the signing of the political and military
agreements in Sun City, Pretoria and Luanda, the Panel
believes that a set of agreements or initiatives on
reconstruction and sustainable development are needed
to address the economic dimension of the Lusaka peace
process and provide incentives for continuing progress.
The first set of initiatives could be for quick-disbursing
aid for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
other Great Lakes countries involved in the conflict,
for reconstruction and rehabilitation programmes,
aimed at creating jobs, rebuilding infrastructure and
improving conditions for local populations, notably in
the areas of education, health, water and sanitation.
162. Regional economic integration and trade could be
the focus of an agreement or set of agreements that
could emerge from discussions regionally, including at
the international conference on peace, security and
sustainable development. The international community,
in particular the United Nations and the developed
countries that have actively supported the signing of
the recent agreements, can take a leading role in
convening this conference.

Institutional reforms
Capacity-building for the State institutions
163. Reconstructing and reforming the State
institutions of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
particularly the State’s capacity to secure its territory
and borders, is the counterpoint to the withdrawal of
the foreign troops. The main purpose should be to
enable the legitimate transitional government to control

30

the country’s natural resources and borders without
foreign intervention.
164. A fast-track programme is needed to retrain and
professionalize the entire national security apparatus,
including military and intelligence, law enforcement
and regulatory bodies, such as customs, revenue
authority, immigration and natural resources agencies.
This process will require extensive international aid
and careful monitoring of progress over a sustained
period. There is a need for multilateral and bilateral
donors, together with international organizations, to
coordinate their efforts, draw on best practices
developed during other post-conflict transitions and
encourage the participation of all sectors of Congolese
society.
165. The priority areas for reform and the
strengthening of national or central institutions would
include:
• Combating the widespread criminalization in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo
• Enhancing scrutiny and transparency
• Increasing accountability and ending the impunity
enjoyed by high-ranking officials and various
levels of civil servants
• Building regulatory capacity and controls
• Professionalizing institutions and their personnel,
including ensuring their independence and
neutrality
• Reforming customs and revenue administrations,
such as the Office des douanes et accises and the
Direction générale des recettes administratives,
judiciaires, domaniales et de participations
• Building the capacity of ministries and
specialized agencies related to natural resources
such as the Centre d’évaluation, d’expertise et de
certification des matières précieuses and the
Institut congolais pour la conservation de la
nature.
Promoting legitimate and accountable civil
administrations in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo
166. The Panel recommends that a comprehensive
economic and social development programme in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo be set up to

S/2002/1146

assist a transition to a legitimate civilian administration
with a capable security and law-enforcement apparatus.
Such a programme may be partially financed from the
substantial assistance commitments pledged by the
European Union, the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund for post-conflict reconstruction in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Good governance in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and its compliance with peace
agreements
167. The Panel regards the quick disbursal of
development assistance as essential to addressing the
pressing social and economic needs of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. However, it also recommends
that disbursal should be contingent on the adherence of
the Government to the peace agreements it has signed
with Rwanda and Uganda, its commitment to
democratization and its progress in curbing the illegal
exploitation of its natural resources.

series of measures be taken against the concerned
parties.
Role of Governments
170. The Governments of the countries where the
individuals, companies and financial institutions that
are systematically and actively involved in these
activities are based should assume their share of the
responsibility. The Governments have the power to
regulate and sanction those individuals and entities.
They could adapt their national legislation as needed to
effectively investigate and prosecute the illegal
traffickers. In addition, the OECD Guidelines offer a
mechanism for bringing violations of them by business
enterprises to the attention of home Governments, that
is, Governments of the countries where the enterprises
are registered. Governments with jurisdiction over
these enterprises are complicit themselves when they
do not take remedial measures.
Reducing official development assistance

Reform of natural resource sectors
168. Reforms of the mining and the forestry sectors
should include the review of all concessions and
contracts signed during both wars. The resolution
adopted during the inter-Congolese dialogue,
establishing a special commission to examine the
validity of economic and financial agreements, could
serve as the framework for this process. On the basis of
the Panel’s findings, this could also target all informal
agreements on the awarding of concessions and the
implementation of contracts. The international
community, including the World Bank, the
International Finance Corporation and UNDP, could
collaborate closely with this commission and provide
the support necessary for it to carry out its work in a
thorough and objective manner. This could include
expert advice and technical assistance, part of which
could be focused on raising long-term international
investment for the rehabilitation of the mining and
forestry sectors and sustainable revenue generation.

Financial and technical measures
169. In the event of non-compliance with the recently
signed agreements, and the continuing illicit and illegal
exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Panel recommends that a

171. The Panel’s exchange of views with bilateral and
multilateral organizations, as well as a review of
applicable agreements such as the Cotonou
Convention, indicates that there is ample justification
for donors to respond to a Security Council
resolution — which might be necessary — which
would propose certain reductions in official aid to
promote peace and good governance.
172. Measures should also be aimed at making aid
disbursements to Burundi, Rwanda, Uganda and
Zimbabwe conditional on their compliance with the
relevant agreements in the Lusaka peace process and
on verifiable measures taken to halt the illegal and
illicit exploitation of the resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo which can help to achieve
multiple
objectives.
Non-compliance
would
automatically trigger a review and reduction of
assistance programmes for those countries. It should be
stipulated that reductions of aid disbursements are to
be applied to institutional budget support, stabilization
lending or project lending and not sector-specific
allocations.
173. Implementation would proceed in three stages:
(a) A brief grace period to permit the
verification of the compliance of all the parties to the
conflict;

31

S/2002/1146

(b) An initial period when aid disbursements
are reduced by a modest percentage if the countries
involved have not met withdrawal targets;
(c) A subsequent period during which the aid is
proportionately reduced at regular increases at regular
intervals unless troop withdrawals and compliance with
the peace agreements meet the required standards.
Restrictions on business enterprises and
individuals
174. The Panel has compiled an extensive list of
business
enterprises
and
individuals
whose
involvement in the commercial activities of the three
elite networks active in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is well documented. At this time it is however,
focusing its recommendations regarding restrictive
measures on only a small number of enterprises (annex
I) and individuals (annex II) — many of them cited in
this report — as a result of the wealth of information
and documentary evidence gathered on them by the
Panel.
175. By contributing to the revenues of the elite
networks, directly or indirectly, those companies and
individuals contribute to the ongoing conflict and to
human rights abuses. More specifically, those business
enterprises are in violation of the OECD Guidelines for
Multinational Enterprises. Therefore, the Panel
recommends that the Security Council consider
imposing certain restrictions on a selected number of
business enterprises and individuals involved in
criminal and illicit exploitation that are identified in
this report. The list emphasizes the implication of
foreign enterprises as well as nationals of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in the economic
exploitation.
176. There could be a short grace period of four to five
months before the restrictions set out below are
applied, during which the targeted entities and
individuals would have the opportunity to prove that
they have ceased all involvement in the exploitation
activities. The restrictive measures could include:
(a) Travel bans
identified by the Panel;

on

selected

individuals

(b) Freezing of the personal assets of persons
involved in illegal exploitation;
(c) Barring selected companies and individuals
from accessing banking facilities and other financial

32

institutions and from receiving funding or establishing
a partnership or other commercial relations with
international financial institutions.
Adherence of business enterprises to the OECD
Guidelines
177. The Panel has drafted another list of business
enterprises (annex III) which, in the view of the Panel,
are in violation of the OECD Guidelines for
Multinational Enterprises. Countries which are
signatories to those Guidelines and other countries are
morally obliged to ensure that their business
enterprises adhere to and act on the Guidelines.
178. The OECD Guidelines outline a procedure for
bringing violations of the Guidelines to the attention of
the Governments of the States where the business
enterprises are registered. Home Governments have the
obligation to ensure that enterprises in their jurisdiction
do not abuse principles of conduct that they have
adopted as a matter of law. They are complicit when
they do not take remedial measures. The monitoring
body, as described below, will contribute to
implementing these procedures by verifying and
updating its list of business enterprises in violation of
the OECD Guidelines and transmitting evidence of
those violations to the OECD National Contact Points
in the home Governments of the enterprises.
Transit trade and regional organizations
179. To
promote
post-conflict
peace-building
programmes, the Panel recommends that the
international community support the following
confidence-building measures:
(a) Encouraging the East African Community,
composed of Kenya, Uganda and the United Republic
of Tanzania, to include Rwanda and Burundi in its
membership;
(b) Helping to re-establish historical and legal
trading patterns, for example by reopening the
Northern Corridor transit route to legal trade among the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi, Rwanda,
Uganda and Kenya;
(c) Assisting the relevant African regional trade
organizations to improve their customs and trade
monitoring mechanisms. These might include
juxtaposed border control facilities, harmonization of
controls to promote the system and use of certificates

S/2002/1146

of origin and destination, and assistance in developing
national legislation for monitoring financial flows
related to trade;
(d) Improving air traffic control services in the
Great Lakes region. The Technical Cooperation
Programme of ICAO can provide assistance to States in
the region that need to improve their air traffic control
service.

Protecting timber and forestry products
184. The Panel recommends that Member States
actively support the efforts by intergovernmental and
non-governmental
organizations
at
both
the
international and regional levels to halt illegal logging
and to develop an international definition of “conflict
timber”.
Trade in endangered species

Regulating commodity trade from conflict areas
180. Specialized industry organizations such as the
Tantalum Niobium International Study Centre, the
International Gold Council and the International Coffee
Federation could be requested, in cooperation with the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
to monitor trade in commodities from conflict areas.
This would result in a reliable body of data that
includes information relating to the evacuation of
commodities, transit routes through neighbouring
countries and information on end-users and their
operations. The data produced could be the basis of
industry policing of those individuals, companies and
financial institutions that trade in commodities from
conflict areas. The data could also serve in the event
that a moratorium is called for on the illegal trade in
commodities originating in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, such as coltan.
Kimberley Process
181. All Member States where trade in rough
diamonds is being carried out should join the
Kimberley Process. Universal participation will make
the Kimberley Process a more effective instrument.
182. Diamond-producing countries should apply
internal controls from extraction to exportation.
Consideration should be given to establishing a set of
internationally agreed upon standards for this process.
A specialized enforcement organization within each
member country needs to be formed that has the
authority, knowledge and specialized training
necessary to ensure the effectiveness of the Kimberley
Process.
183. A permanently staffed secretariat should be
created with the responsibility of coordinating the
implementation of the Kimberley Process.

185. Trade involving endangered species of wild fauna
and flora taken from protected areas of the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo is another activity
in which elements of the criminal networks are
engaged. Member States are asked to support the Task
Force established under the Lusaka Agreement on
Cooperative Enforcement Operations Directed at
Illegal Trade in Wild Fauna and Flora by
(a) strengthening their national legislation to reinforce
the powers of investigation and prosecution of the Task
Force’s personnel and (b) ensuring that their National
Bureaus, established under that Agreement, intensify
their investigations into the criminal traffic in
endangered species of wild animals and plants as
outlined by CITES.

Monitoring process
186. There is a need for a monitoring process that
continues to scrutinize the situation in the Great Lakes
region to ensure that exploitation activities are
significantly curbed. A monitoring body, which the
Security Council may consider establishing, could
report to the Security Council on a regular basis on its
findings, including recommendations about further
action to halt activities that violate the Council’s
decisions. The Panel’s expertise could be helpful in this
regard.
187. The monitoring body could report to the Security
Council on any State or company that might be
involved in the illegal exploitation of natural resources.
The monitoring body could recommend to the Council
that major multilateral institutions and bilateral donors
review and reduce the financial assistance programmes
of any State found to be involved in these illegal
activities. It could recommend to the Council that any
company found to be implicated in the illegal economic
exploitation be added to or kept on the list of those
enterprises subject to financial and travel restrictions.

33

S/2002/1146

In addition, the monitoring body could collaborate
closely with national officials, including from the
Central Bank of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Office des douanes et accises (customs
administration) and the Direction générale des recettes
administratives, judiciaires, domaniales et de
participations (revenue administration), the Ministry of
Mines and Hyrdocarbons, the State mining enterprises
and private mining and mineral companies, in order to
update information on how capacity-building and
reforms are affecting the exploitation activities. In
carrying out these tasks, the monitoring body could
coordinate with the international financial institutions,
the African Union, and the Economic Commission for
Africa.
188. The Panel would also recommend that the
monitoring body, with the adequate expertise and
resources, track the following:
(a) Possible reductions in the level of illegal
exploitation;
(b) The implementation of possible travel bans
and the freezing of assets;
(c) Ongoing investigations into the illicit
commerce in minerals, timber and endangered species
of fauna and flora. The monitoring body could also
collaborate further on some of these investigations;
(d) The sectors of the economy that have been
affected by the exploitation activities;
(e) The impact on the humanitarian situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region;
(f) The reduction in violent conflict and the
maintenance of civil order in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as well as the viability of local
administrations and institutions related to the mandate
of the monitoring body which might be adopted by the
Council.
(Signed) Mahmoud Kassem
Chairman
(Signed) Jim Freedman
(Signed) Mel Holt
(Signed) Bruno Schiemsky
(Signed) Moustapha Tall
(Signed) Patrick Smith

34

S/2002/1146

Annex I
Companies on which the Panel recommends the placing of
financial restrictions
Name

Address

Business

Principal officers

1

AHMAD DIAMOND
CORPORATION

ANTWERP
BELGIUM

Diamond
trading

Mr. AHMAD Imad

2

ASA DIAM

ANTWERP
BELGIUM

Diamond
trading

Mr. AHMAD Ali Said

3

BUKAVU AVIATION
TRANSPORT

DRC

Airline
company

Mr. BOUT Victor

4

BUSINESS AIR
SERVICE

DRC

Airline
company

Mr. BOUT Victor

5

COMIEX-CONGO

KINSHASA
DRC

6

CONGO HOLDING
DEVELOPMENT
COMPANY

DRC

7

8

9

CONMET

COSLEG

EAGLE WINGS
RESOURCES
INTERNATIONAL

Mr. KABASELE
TSHINEU Frederic
Trading and
exploitation of
natural
resources DRC

Mr. Félicien
RUCHACHA
BIKUMU

UGANDA and
DRC

Coltan trading

Mr. Salim Saleh

ZIM and DRC

Joint-venture
COMIEX and
OSLEG

Mr. KABASELE
TSHINEU Frédéric

Exploitation
coltan from
the DRC

Mr. Alfred RWIGEMA

PO BOX 6355
Kigali, Rwanda

Comment

Mrs. Gertrude
KITEMBO

Mr. and Mrs.
PISKUNOV

ZVINAVASHE Gava
MUSUNGWA Vitalis

Mr. Anthony
MARINUS

Tel:
+250.51.17.25

Mr. Ronald S.
SMIERCIAK
10

ENTERPRISE
GENERAL MALTA
FORREST

Exploitation
Cobalt,
Copper in
DRC

Mr. George FORREST

1

S/2002/1146

Name

11

EXACO

12

GREAT LAKES
GENERAL TRADE

Address

Business

Principal officers

Comment

Maj Dan MUNYUZA

Tel/Fax:
+250.78.792

Exploitation
Cobalt,
Copper in the
DRC
BP 3737
KIGALI,
RWANDA

Mineral
trading

Mr. E. GATETE
Mr. Steven K.
AKHIMANZI

13

GREAT LAKES
METALS

14

GROUP GEORGE
FORREST

15

MINERALS BUSINESS
COMPANY

Kigali, Rwanda

Boulevard Du
30 Juin,
Immeuble exSCIBE,
Kinshasa, DRC

Mineral
trading
Exploitation
Cobalt and
Copper

Mr. George FORREST

Mineral
trading

Mr. KABASELE
TSHINEU Frederic
Lt General
ZVINAVASHE Gava
Musungwa Vitalis
Mr. Charles
DAURAMANZI

16

OKAPI AIR

Uganda

Airline
company

Mr. BOUT Victor

ODESSA AIR
17

OPERATION
SOVEREIGN
LEGITIMACY (OSLEG)
Pvt Ltd

Harare,
Zimbabwe

Commercial
interests ZIM
in DRC

Lt General
ZVINAVASHE Gava
Musungwa Vitalis

18

ORYX NATURAL
RESOURCES

DRC

Diamond
exploitation in
the DRC

Mr. AL-SHANFARI
Thamer Said Ahmed

19

RWANDA ALLIED
PARTNERS

Kigali, Rwanda

Mineral
trading

Mr. Hadji OMARI

20

RWANDA METALS

Kigali, Rwanda

Mineral
trading

21

SARACEN UGANDA
Ltd

Uganda

Security
Company

Mr. Simba MANASE

Lt General (Rtd) Salim
Saleh
Mr. Heckie HORN

2

S/2002/1146

22

Name

Address

Business

Principal officers

SIERRA GEM
DIAMONDS

ANTWERP
BELGIUM

Diamond
trading

Mr. AHMAD Said Ali

Comment

Mr. AHMAD Hassan
Mr. AHMAD Nazem

23

TANDAN GROUP

24

Holding

Mr. Niko SHEFER

THORNTREE
INDUSTRIES (Pvt) Ltd

Provides
capital to
MBC

Mr. Niko SHEFER

25

TREMALT Ltd

Exploitation
cobalt and
copper

Mr. John Arnold
BREDENKAMP

26

TRINITY INVESTMENT
GROUP

DRC and
UGANDA

Exploitation
resources and
tax fraud

Mr. NGOLA Sam

TRIPLE A DIAMONDS

ANTWERP
BELGIUM

Diamond
trading

Mr. AHMAD Moussa
Ahmad

27

SOUTH
AFRICA

General KAZINI

Mr. AHMAD Ahmad
Ali
28

TRISTAR

Kigali, Rwanda

Holding FPR

29

VICTORIA GROUP

DRC and
UGANDA

Exploitation
resources and
tax fraud

Lt General (Rtd) Salim
Saleh
Mr. KHANAFER
Nahim

3

S/2002/1146

Annex II
Persons for whom the Panel recommends a travel ban and
financial restrictions
Last name

First name

Alias

Date of birth

1

AHMAD

Ali Said

01.03.1959

2

AHMAD

Ahmad Ali

01.01.1929

Passport
number

Designation

Businessman

3

AHMAD

Imad

4

AHMAD

Said Ali

09.04.1935

Businessman

5

AHMAD

Hassan

21.05.1957

Businessman

6

AHMAD

Moussa Ahmad

7

AHMAD

Nazem

05.01.1965

Businessman

8

AKHIMANZA

Steven K.

9

AL-SHANFARI

Thamer Said Ahmed

10

BOUT

Victor Anatoljevitch

11

BREDENKAMP

12

BURUNDI

John Arnold

Businessman

Businessman

BUTT,
BONT,
BUTTE,
BOUTOV,
SERGITOV
Vitali

03.01.1968

00000999
(Oman)

Chairman & Managing
Director ORYX Group and
ORYX Natural Resources

13.01.1967

21N0532664

or

29N0006765

Dealer and transporter of
weapons and minerals

???

21N0532664
21N0557148
44N3570350

11.08.1940

Businessman
Colonel UPDF

13

DAURAMANZI

Charles

Shareholder MBC

14

ENGOLA

Sam

Businessman

15

FORREST

George A.

Businessman

16

GATETE

Edward

Officer RPA; Operation
Congo Desk

17

HORN

Heckie

Manager Saracen Uganda
Ltd

18

KABANDA

Emmanuel

Officer RPA; Operation
Congo Desk

19

KABAREBE

James

Chief of Staff RPA; Former
Chief of Staff DRC; in
charge of Congo Desk

20

KABASELE
TSHINEU

Frédéric

Manager COMIEX,
representative of COSLEG

21

KALUME
NUMBI

Denis

General, shareholder SENGA
SENGA

22

KARIM

Peter

Officer UPDF

23

KATUMBA
MWANKE

Augustin

Minister of Presidency, DRC

4

S/2002/1146

Alias

Date of birth

Passport
number

Last name

First name

Designation

24

KAZADI
NYEMBWE

Didier

Director Agence National de
Renseignements DRC

25

KAZINI

James

Chief of Staff, Maj. General
UPDF

26

KHANAFER

Nahim

Businessman

27

KIBASSA
MALIBA

28

KITEMBO

Gertrude

Businesswoman

29

KONGOLO

Mwenze

Minister DRC, shareholder
SENGA SENGA

30

MANASE SIMBA

31

MAWAPANGA

Mwana Nanga

Ambassador DRC in Harare

32

MAYOMBO

Nobel

Chief Military Intelligence
(CMI) in Uganda

33

MNANGAGWA
DAMBUDZO

34

MOYO

Politician, former Minister of
Mines, shareholder SENGA
SENGA

Businessman

Emmerson

Speaker of Parliament
ZIMBABWE

Mike

Wing Commander ZDF

35

MOYO

Sibusio

36

MUAMBA NOZI

Richard

Bd-Gen (Rtd) ZDF

37

MUNYUZA

Dan

38

MWENZE
KONGOLO

39

NUMBI
KALUME

Denis

Minister of Planning and
Reconstruction DRC

40

NZIZA

Jack

Officer RPA

41

OKOTO
LOLAKOMBE

Jean-Charles

PDG MIBA

42

OMARI HADJI

Businessman

43

OTAFIRE
KAHINDA

Colonel UPDF

44

MARINUS

45

PISKUNOV

Anatol

Businessman

46

PISKUNOVA

Valentina

Businesswoman

47

RUCHACHA
BIKUMU

Felicien

Businessman

48

RUPRAH

Sanjivan

49

RWIGEMA

Alfred

50

SALIM SALEH

Congolese diamond trader;
Counterfeiter

MWAMBA
NOZY

Colonel RPA; In charge of
security DRC (96-98)
Minister National Security,
DRC

Anthony

Manager Eagle Wings

Samir Nasr

09.08.1966

D-001829-00

Businessman

Medhi Khan
Manager Eagle Wings
AKANDWA
NAHO Caleb

Lt General (Ret.) UPDF

5

S/2002/1146

Passport
number

Last name

First name

Alias

Date of birth

51

SHEFER

Niko

Nico

25.12.1950

52

SMIERCIAK

Ronald S.

Manager Eagle Wings

53

YUMBA MONGA

54

ZVINAVASHE
GAVA
MUSUNGWA

Vitalis

Lt General ZDF, Rep. of
COSLEG, shareholder MBC

6

7616225
(Israel)
6651101
(Israel)

Designation

Businessman

Manager GECAMINES

S/2002/1146

Annex III
Business enterprises considered by the Panel to
be in violation of the OECD Guidelines for
Multinational Enterprises
Name of company

Business

Country

Country signatory of
OECD Guidelines

1

AFRICAN TRADING
CORPORATION Sarl

Trading of natural resources
from DRC

SOUTH AFRICA

NO

2

AFRIMEX

Coltan trading

UK

YES

3

AHMAD DIAMOND
CORPORATION

Diamond trading

BELGIUM

YES

4

A.H. PONG & Sons

Import-Export

SOUTH AFRICA

NO

5

A. KNIGHT
INTERNATIONAL Ltd

Assaying

UK

YES

6

A & M MINERALS and
METALS Ltd

Trading minerals

UK

YES

7

ALEX STEWART (Assayers)
Ltd

Assaying

UK

YES

8

AMALGAMATED METAL
CORPORATION Plc

Trading coltan

UK

YES

9

AMERICA MINERAL FIELDS
(AMFI)

Mining

USA

YES

10

ANGLO AMERICAN Plc

Mining

UK

YES

11

ANGLOVAAL MINING Ltd

Mining

SOUTH AFRICA

NO

12

ARCTIC INVESTMENT

Investment

UK

YES

13

ASA DIAM

Diamond trading

BELGIUM

YES

14

ASA INTERNATIONAL

BELGIUM

YES

15

ASHANTI GOLDFIELDS

Mining

GHANA

NO

16

AVIENT AIR

Private military company

ZIMBABWE

NO

17

BANRO CORPORATION

Mining

SOUTH AFRICA

NO

18

BARCLAYS BANK

Banking

UK

YES

19

BAYER A.G.

Chemical industry

GERMANY

YES

20

B.B.L.

Banking

BELGIUM

YES

21

BELGOLAISE

Banking

BELGIUM

YES

7

S/2002/1146

Name of company

Business

Country

Country signatory of
OECD Guidelines

22

CABOT CORPORATION

Tantalum processing

USA

YES

23

CARSON PRODUCTS

Commercialization of resources
of the DRC

SOUTH AFRICA

NO

24

CHEMIE PHARMACIE
HOLLAND

Financial and logistical support
to EWRI

NETHERLANDS

YES

25

COGECOM

Coltan trading

BELGIUM

YES

26

C. STEINWEG NV

Freight Forwarders

BELGIUM

YES

27

DARA FOREST

Timber exploitation

THAILAND

NO

28

DAS AIR

Airline company

UK

YES

29

DE BEERS

Diamond mining and trading

UK

YES

30

DIAGEM BVBA

Diamond trading

BELGIUM

YES

31

EAGLE WINGS RESOURCES
INTERNATIONAL

Exploitation coltan from the
DRC

USA

YES

32

ECHOGEM

Diamond trading

BELGIUM

YES

33

EGIMEX

BELGIUM

YES

34

ENTREPRISE GENERALE
MALTA FORREST

Construction, Mining, Trading

DRC

NO

35

EUROMET

Coltan trading

UK

YES

36

FINCONCORD SA

Coltan trading from DRC

SWITZERLAND

YES

37

FINMINING

Coltan trading from DRC

SAINT KITTS

NO

38

FIRST QUANTUM
MINERALS

Mining

CANADA

YES

39

FLASHES OF COLOR

Diamond trading

USA

YES

40

FORTIS

Banking

BELGIUM

YES

41

GEORGE FORREST
INTERNATIONAL AFRIQUE

Management

DRC

NO

42

HARAMBEE MINING
CORPORATION

Mining

CANADA

YES

43

H.C. STARCK GmbH & Co
KG

Processing coltan

GERMANY

YES

44

IBRYV AND ASSOCIATES
LLC

Diamond trading

SWITZERLAND

YES

8

S/2002/1146

Name of company

Business

Country

Country signatory of
OECD Guidelines

45

INTERNATIONAL
PANORAMA RESOURCES
Corp

Mining

CANADA

YES

46

ISCOR

Mining

SOUTH AFRICA

NO

47

JEWEL IMPEX Bvba

Diamond trading

BELGIUM

YES

48

KABABANKOLA MINING
COMPANY

Mining

ZIMBABWE

NO

49

KEMET ELECTRONICS
CORPORATION

Capacitor manufacture

USA

YES

50

KHA International AG

Minerals trading and
exploitation

GERMANY

YES

51

KINROSS GOLD
CORPORATION

Mining

USA

YES

52

K&N

Project development

BELGIUM

YES

53

KOMAL GEMS NV

Diamond trading

BELGIUM

YES

54

LUNDIN GROUP

Mining

BERMUDA

NO

55

MALAYSIAN SMELTING
CORPORATION

Coltan processing

MALAYSIA

NO

56

MASINGIRO GmbH

Minerals trading

GERMANY

YES

57

MELKIOR RESOURCES Inc

Mining

CANADA

YES

58

MERCANTILLE CC

Trading in natural resources
from DRC

SOUTH AFRICA

NO

59

MINERAL AFRIKA Limited

Trading in natural resources
from DRC

UK

YES

60

NAC KAZATOMPROM

Tantalum processing

KAZAKHSTAN

NO

61

NAMI GEMS

Diamond trader

BELGIUM

YES

62

NINGXIA NON-FERROUS
METALS SMELTER

Tantalum processing

CHINA

NO

63

OM GROUP Inc

Mining

USA

YES (USA)

FINLAND

YES (FINLAND)

ZIMBABWE

NO

64

OPERATION SOVEREIGN
LEGITIMACY (OSLEG) Pvt
Ltd

Commercial interests
ZIMBABWE in the DRC

9

S/2002/1146

Name of company

Business

Country

Country signatory of
OECD Guidelines

65

ORION MINING Inc

Mining

SOUTH AFRICA

NO

66

PACIFIC ORES METALS
AND CHEMICALS Ltd

Coltan trading

HONG KONG

NO

67

RAREMET Ltd

Coltan trading from DRC

SAINT KITTS

NO

68

SARACEN

Security company

SOUTH AFRICA

NO

69

SDV TRANSINTRA

Transport

FRANCE

YES

70

SIERRA GEM DIAMONDS

Diamond trading

BELGIUM

YES

71

SLC GERMANY GmbH

Coltan transport

GERMANY

YES

72

SOGEM

Coltan trading

BELGIUM

YES

73

SPECIALITY METALS
COMPANY SA

Coltan trading

BELGIUM

YES

74

STANDARD CHARTERED
BANK

Banking

U.A.E.

NO

75

SWANEPOEL

Construction

SOUTH AFRICA

NO

76

TENKE MINING
CORPORATION

Mining

CANADA

YES

77

THORNTREE INDUSTRIES
(Pvt) Ltd

Provides capital to MBC

ZIMBABWE

NO

78

TRACK STAR TRADING 151
(Pty) Ltd

Exploitation and trading
minerals DRC

SOUTH AFRICA

NO

79

TRADEMET SA

Coltan trading

BELGIUM

YES

80

TREMALT Ltd

Mining

British Virgin
Islands

NO

81

TRINITECH
INTERNATIONAL Inc

Coltan trading and exploitation

USA

YES

82

TRIPLE A DIAMONDS

Diamond trading

BELGIUM

YES

83

UMICORE

International Metals and
Materials Group

BELGIUM

YES

84

VISHAY SPRAGUE

Capacitor manufacture

USA and
ISRAEL

YES (USA)

SOUTH AFRICA

NO

85

10

ZINCOR

Mining

NO (ISRAEL)

S/2002/1146

Annex IV
Countries visited and representatives of Governments and
organizations interviewed
The Panel wishes to express its deep appreciation to the Government officials,
diplomats, United Nations agencies, donor institutions, non-governmental
organizations, civil society groups, journalists, commercial operators and others
with whom it met and who have assisted in making possible the present report.
The Panel also wishes to extend special thanks to the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In addition, the
Panel would like to thank the United Nations Office in Burundi and the UNDP
offices in Bangui, Brazzaville, Bujumbura, Kampala, Kigali, Kinshasa, Pretoria and
Yaounde for their assistance and support.
Austria
International organizations
United Nations Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention
Belgium
Government officials
Inter-Ministerial Ad Hoc Working Group on the Illegal Exploitation of the
Natural Resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Parliamentary Inquiry Commission on the Illegal Exploitation of the Natural
Resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
State representatives
European Union Commission
Others
Arslanian Frères
International Peace Information Service
Sibeca
Sogem mineral trading company (division of Umicore)
Tantalum Niobium International Study Center
Vrije Universiteit Brussel
Burundi
Government officials
Minister of Defence
Minister of Energy and Mines

11

S/2002/1146

Minister of Finance
Minister of Foreign Affairs
Department of Customs (Ministry of Finance)
State representatives
Embassy of Belgium
Embassy of France
International organizations
Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Burundi
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
UNDP
UNHCR
UNICEF
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in Burundi
Others
Affimet
ASYST mineral trading company
Comptoir minier des exploitations du Burundi (COMEBU)
HAMZA mineral trading company
Central African Republic
Government officials
Ministry of Economy
Ministry of Equipment, Transport and Settlement
Ministry of Finance and Budget
Minister of Mines, Energy and Hydraulics
Minister of Trade and Industry
Department of Customs
State representatives
Embassy of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Embassy of France
European Union

12

S/2002/1146

International organizations
Representative of the Secretary-General in the Central African Republic
ASECNA
UNHCR
UNDP
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Government officials
Minister of Defence
Minister of Foreign Affairs
Minister of Land Affairs, Environment and Tourism
Minister of Planning and Reconstruction
Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs
Vice-Minister of Mines
Deputy Chief of Staff of the FAC
Governor of the Central Bank
Governor of Equateur Province
Governor of Katanga
Governor of Mbuji Mayi
Vice-Governor, in charge of the Economy, Finance and Development, Equateur
Province
Centre d’évaluation, d’expertise et de certification
Comité interministériel de “Small Scale Mining”
Générale des carrières et des mines (Gécamines)
Office national des transports
Régie des voies aériennes
Société minière de Bakwanga (MIBA)
State representatives
Ambassador of Angola
Ambassador of Belgium
Ambassador of Canada
Ambassador of Germany
Ambassador of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Ambassador of the United States of America

13

S/2002/1146

Belgian Consul
Embassy of Denmark
Embassy of France
European Union
International organizations
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo
European Commission’s Humanitarian Aid Office (ECHO)
FAO
GTZ
MONUC
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
UNDP
UNHCR
UNICEF
World Bank
World Food Programme
World Health Organization
MLC
President
Secretary-General
RCD-Goma
Vice President
Commissioner of the Interior
Governor of Kalemie
Department of Mines and Energy
Vice-Governor of Kisangani
Customs officials
RCD-K/ML
Second Vice-President
Minister of Interior
Acting Chief of Staff for the APC
Governor of Bunia

14

S/2002/1146

Governor of Ituri Province
Mayor of Butembo
Others
Action contre la faim
ADETE
Agro Action Allemand
Associazione per la Cooperazione Internationale e l’Ainto Umanitario
Anglican Church
Ashanti Goldfield
Association africaine des droits de l’homme (ASADHO)
Banque internationale de commerce
BEP Productique (BEPROD)
Conseil african et malgache pour l’enseignement supérieur (CAMES)
Caritas
Centre d’information et d’animation missionnaire (CIAM)
Centre d’etudes national sur le développement populaire (CENADEP)
Centre de formation, recherches en conservation forestière
Centre national d’appui au développement et à la participation populaire
(CENADEP)
Church of Christ of the Congo
Comité provincial des diamantaires (CPD)
Commissions diocésaines Justice et Paix (CDPJ)
Conseil apostolique des laïques catholiques au Congo (CALCC)
Conference on Central Africa Moist Forest Ecosystems participants
Confédération de petites et moyennes enterprises du Congo (COPEMECO)
COSLEG (joint venture of COMIEX Congo and OSLEG)
Dara Forêt
Exploitation forestière, sciérie raffinage de la papaine (ENRA)
Fédération des entreprises du Congo (FEC — Kinshasa, Kisangani, Mbandaka,
Beni, Goma, Gémena, Bukavu)
Fédération nationale des parents d’élèves du Congo (FNPEC)
Fédération des ONG laïques à vocation économique au Congo (FOLECO)
Forces novatrices pour l’union et la solidarité (FONUS)
Groupe de recherches et d’échanges technologiques (in Kabinda)

15

S/2002/1146

Groupe Lotus
Groupe musulman des droits de l’homme
GST (Gécamines labour union)
Héritiers de la justice
International Human Rights Law Group
International Rescue Committee
Inter Press Service (IPS)
JAMS
Journalistes en danger
Justice et Paix
Ligue des avocats pour les droits de l’homme
Kababankola Mining Company
Kotinne Plantation
Jardin botanique d’Eala
Maintenance, Assistance, Technique and Design
Mayi-Mayi representatives
Médecins sans Frontières (of Belgium and France)
Mennonite Church
Mouvement nationale congolais Lumumba (MNCL)
Mouvement des pionniers de l’indépendence
Mouvement populaire de la révolution (MPR)
National Commission of Experts on the illegal exploitation of the natural
resources and other forms of wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
National Congolese Railway Society (SNCC)
National Council of Development NGOs (CNONGD)
Nganga Plantation
Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC)
Organisation concertée des ecologistes et amis de la nature (OCEAN)
OKIMO
Oxfam
Parti démocrate et social chrétien (PDSC )
Parti lumumbiste unifié (PALU)
Pharmakina
Pole Institute

16

S/2002/1146

Promotion de la femme rural (PROFER)
Programme d’appui aux femmes victimes des conflits et des catastrophes
Radio Okapi
Regional Committee of Development NGOs (CRONGD)
Religious community representatives
Radio Télé Debout Kasaï (RTDK)
Save the Children
Sengamines
Shenimed Coltan Comptoir
Syndicat des exploitants alluvionnaires du diamant (APLOKA)
SOCEBO
Société civile du Congo (SOCICO)
Société de renforcement de communauté de base (SERACOB)
Solidarités
TOFEN-CONGO
TRAFCO Freight Company
UDPS representatives
UPDF Sector Commander in Bunia
UPDF Battalion Commander in Butembo
UPDF Colonel Peter Karim
Union des banques congolaises
Voix du handicape pour les droits de l’homme (VHDH)
Wildlife Conservation Society
France
Government officials
Ministry of Economy and Finance
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Others
Air France Cargo
Germany
Government officials
Ministry of Foreign Affairs

17

S/2002/1146

Others
H. C. Starck
Karl-Heinz Albers Mining and Minerals Processing
Kenya
Government officials
Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation
Ministry of Defence
Ministry of Finance
Ministry of Trade and Industry
Ministry of Transport and Communications
Kenya Revenue Authority
State representatives
Ambassador of Belgium
High Commissioner of the Republic of South Africa
Ambassador of Rwanda
High Commissioner of Uganda
Belgian Ministry of Defence
German Embassy
Belgian Parliamentary Inquiry Commission
Embassy of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Democratic Republic of the Congo National Parks representatives
Institut congolais de conservation de la nature (Ministry of Environment,
Democratic Republic of the Congo)
International organizations
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region
Special Adviser to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo
World Customs Organization
World Wildlife Fund
Others
Association of Cargo Airliners
Congolese Commission of National Experts
Dian Fossey Gorilla Fund

18

S/2002/1146

International Crisis Group
Kababankola Mining Company/Tremalt Ltd.
Kencargo
Lusaka Agreement Task Force
Martin Air
Oryx Natural Resources
Oxfam
World Vision
Republic of the Congo
Government officials
Minister of Environment
Ministry of Transport
Department of Customs (Ministry of Finance)
State representatives
Embassy of Belgium
Embassy of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
European Union
International organizations
UNDP
Rwanda
Government officials
Special Envoy of the President for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Burundi
Office of the President of Rwanda
Minister of Foreign Affairs
Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Tourism
Customs Commission
State representatives
Ambassador of Belgium
Ambassador of France
Ambassador of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Ambassador of the United States of America
European Union

19

S/2002/1146

International organizations
MONUC
UNICEF
World Bank
Others
President of RCD-Goma
Eagle Wings Resources
SDV Transintra
SOGERMI mineral trading company
South Africa
Government officials
Acting Director-General for Foreign Affairs
Department of Foreign Affairs
Department of Defence
Department of Home Affairs
Department of Minerals and Energy
Financial Intelligence Centre
National Intelligence Agency
National Intelligence Coordinating Committee
National Prosecuting Authority
National Treasury
Secretariat for Safety and Security
South African Diamond Board
South African Police
South African Revenue Service
State representatives
Ambassador of Belgium
Ambassador of France
Ambassador of the United States
High Commission of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland

20

S/2002/1146

Others
Banro
Bateman Minerals and Metals
Centre for the Study of Economic Crime
Cobalt Metals Company
Compliance Institute
De Beers Group
DiamondWorks
Executive Outcomes
Fluxmans Attorneys
Grove Family Trust
International Institute of Security Studies
Kimberley Process Secretariat
Money Laundering Forum
Overseas Security Services
PricewaterhouseCoopers Forensic Services Division
Rand Afrikaans University
Rand Merchant Bank
SaferAfrica
STK Consulting
Tandan Holdings
Trans Hex
Ware Associates
University of South Africa at Pretoria
University of Witwatersrand/South African Institute for International Affairs
Uganda
Government officials
First Deputy Prime Minister
Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs
Minister of Defence
Chief of Staff of UPDF
Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry
Bank of Uganda

21

S/2002/1146

Department of Geological Survey and Mines
Uganda Bureau of Statistics
Uganda Civil Aviation Authority
Uganda Coffee Development Authority
Uganda Revenue Authority
State representatives
Ambassador of Belgium
Ambassador of Denmark
Ambassador of France
High Commissioner of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland
Ambassador of the United States of America
Head of the Delegation of the European Union
International organizations
UNDP
UNICEF
World Bank
Others
Amnesty International
Judicial Commission of Inquiry
Saracen Uganda Ltd.
Uganda Debt Network
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Government officials
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
United States of America
Government officials
Department of Justice
State representatives
Belgian Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs
Permanent Representatives to the United Nations, Security Council members
and other Member States

22

S/2002/1146

International organizations
International Monetary Fund
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict
UNDP
Forum on Forests
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
World Bank
Others
Human Rights Watch
Oxfam
Winston Strawn and Partners
Zambia
Others
Non-governmental organizations
Zimbabwe
Government officials
Ministry of Mines
State representatives
British High Commission
Others
Renaissance Bank
Dozer Parts

23

S/2002/1146

Annex V
Abbreviations

24

ADB

African Development Bank

ANC

Armée nationale congolaise (army of RCD-G movement)

APC

Armée patriotique congolaise (army of the RCD-ML rebel group

ASECNA

Agence pour la sécurité de la navigation aérienne en Afrique et à
Madagascar

CIDA

Canadian International Development Agency

CITES

Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild
Fauna and Flora

coltan

columbo-tantalite

COMIEX

Compagnie mixte d’import-export

COSLEG

COMIEX-OSLEG joint venture

FAC

Forces armées congolaises

ex-FAR

former Forces armées rwandaises

GATT

General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade

Gécamines

Générale des carrières et des mines

GTZ

Deutsche Gesellschafte für Technische Zusammenarbeit (German
Government agency for technical cooperation)

ICAO

International Civil Aviation Organization

IMF

International Monetary Fund

KMC

Kababankola Mining Company

MIBA

Société minière de Bakwanga

MLC

Mouvement de libération congolais

MONUC

United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo

OECD

Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development

OKIMO

Office des Mines de Kilo-Moto

OSLEG

Operation Sovereign Legitimacy

RCD

Rassemblement congolais pour la démocratie (Rally for Congolese
Democracy)

RCD-Congo

Rassemblement congolais pour la démocratie (newly formed rebel
group made up of MLC and RCD-Goma dissidents)

RCD-Goma

Rassemblement congolais pour la démocratie, based in Goma

RCD-K/ML

Rassemblement congolais pour la démocratie — Mouvement de
libération, initially based in Kisangani, now headquartered in Bunia

S/2002/1146

RCD-N

Rassemblement congolais pour la démocratie-National

RPA

Rwandan Patriotic Army

SADC

Southern African Development Community

SIDA

Swedish International Development Agency

SOMIGL

Société minière des Grands Lacs

SOCEBO

Société congolaise d’exploitation du bois

UDPS

Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social

UNDP

United Nations Development Programme

UNHCR

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

UNICEF

United Nations Children’s Fund

UPDF

Uganda People’s Defence Forces

USAID

United States Agency for International Development

WCO

World Customs Organization

ZDF

Zimbabwe Defence Forces

25
