FORTIETH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW

11 JUNE

1985

YORK

CONTENTS

PiI&Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2584)
of the agenda

1

.*....*....................**.....**

1

. . . . . . ..*.................*........*.**........

The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17213);
(b)

Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council

(S/17222);
(c)

Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation
of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia (S/17242) e..,.. *...,..,,.,*...**...,....*,,..............

WPV.2584

I

l

4

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . , ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records ofthe Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2584th MEETING
Held
President: Mr. Errol MAHABER

in New York on Tuesday,

(Trinidad and Tobago).

2. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2583rd meeting, I invite the Acting President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia and the other
members of the delegation to take a place at the Council
table.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Akyol (Acting President of the United Nations Council for Namibia) and the
other members of the delegation took a place at the Council
table.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2584)

1, Adoption

11 June 1985, at 10.30 a.m.

3. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2583rd meeting, I invite Mr. Nujoma to take a
place at the Council table.

of the agenda

2. The situation in Namibia:
(a)
Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17213);
(b) Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of Mozambique to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17222);
(c) Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of Namibia (S/17242)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nujoma took a
place at the Council table.

4. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2583rd meeting, I invite the representatives of
Algeria, Angola, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Cameroon, Canada, Cuba, Democratic Yemen, Ethiopia, the German
Democratic Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany,
Ghana, Guyana, Indonesia, Jamaica, Kuwait, Mexico,
Morocco, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Panama, South
Africa, the Sudan, Turkey, Uganda, the United Republic
of Tanzania, Yugoslavia and Zambia to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

The meeting was called to order at 11.20 a.m.
Adoption. of the agenda

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bessaieh (Algeria),
Mr. de Figueiredo (Angola), Mr. Wasiuddin (Bangladesh),
Mr. Tshering (Bhutan), Mr, Engo (Cameroon), Mr. Lewis
(Canada), Mr. Mabnierca (Cuba), Mr. Al-Ashtal (Democratic Yemen), Mr. Dinka (Ethiopia), Mr. Ott (German
Democratic Republic), Mr. Lautenschlager (Federal Repub
lit of Germany), Mr. Asamoah (Ghana), Mr. Karran (Guyana), Mr. Alatas (Indonesia), Mr. Barnett (Jamaica), Mr.
Abulhassan (Kuwait) Mr. Mufioz Ledo (Mexico)), Mr. Alaoui
(Morocco), Mr. Icaza Gallard (Nicaragua), Mr. Gambari
(Nigeria), Mr. Shah Nawaz (Pakistan), Mr. Kam (Panama),
Mr. von Schirnding (South Africa), Mr. Birido (Sudan), Mr.
Tiirkmen (Turkey), Mr. Otunnu (Uganda), Mr, Mkapa
(United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia) and
Mr. Lusaka (Zambia) took the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber.

The agenda was adopted

The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/17213);
(f~) Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17222);
(c) Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 435
(1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia (S/17242)

I. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2583rd meeting, I invite the representative of
Liberia to take a place at the Council table.

5, The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Afghanistan, Kenya, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriha, Malaysia, Poland, Sri Lanka and the Syrian Arab Republic in
which they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity with the

At the invitation of the President, Mrs. Osode (Liberia)
took a place at the Council table.

1
I, /

“3

10. This year marks the fortieth anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations and the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
On this solemn occasion, it is of special significance for
the Council to consider the issue of the independence of
Namibia, the largest remaining colony in the world. All
justice-upholding countries are now more aware of their
heavy responsibilities in seeking a settlement for this
important and pressing issue.

usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure,
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zalif (Afghanistan), Mr. Kiilu (Kenya), Mr. Azzarouk (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr, Zain (Malaysia), Mr. Nowak (Poland), Mr.
Wgewardane (Sri Lanka) and Mr. Al-Atassi (Syrian Arab
Republic) took the places reservedfor them at the side of the
Council chamber.

11. In accordance with the Charter and the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, the settlement of the Namibian question
should be based on the following two principles: termination of South Africa’s military occupation and colonial
rule of Namibia and the attainment of national selfdetermination by the Namibian people through free elections. It is precisely in keeping with those two principles
that the Chinese delegation has actively supported the
Secretary-General’s efforts in consulting with the parties
concerned and the United Nations plan approved by the
Council in its resolution 435 (1978), namely, the realization of Namibian independence through a cease-fire in
Namibia, complete withdrawal of South African troops
and free elections under United Nations supervision. We
have consistently held that these principles form’the basis
for a political settlement of the Namibian question.

6. Mr. LING Qing (China) (interpretation from Chinese): Mr. President, we are very glad to see the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, an outstanding representative of the
Republic of Trinidad and Tobago, assuming the high
office of President of the Council for the first time. I wish
to extend to you our warmest congratulations. I am convinced that with your wisdom, talent and rich experience
in diplomacy you will surely be able to guide this Council
in the accomplishment of its tasks for the month of June.
7. I wish also to take this opportunity to convey our
respect and thanks to your predecessors, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and the representative of Thailand, for
their excellent performance in discharging the heavy
duties of the Council last month.

12. The course of events, however, in the past two years
has further proved that South Africa is solely responsible
for the failure to implement the relevant Council resolutions. The South African authorities have not only clung
to the linkage of the two unrelated issues of Namibian
independence and Cuban troop withdrawal from
Angola, making it their pretext for delaying the implementation of the resolutions, but also intensified their
efforts to prop up pro-South African forces in Namibia
and declared the setting up of an “interim government”
based on a “multi-party conference”. They have even
planned an inauguration for the puppet rCgime on 17
June in Windhoek. This once again reveals the true intention of South Africa to bypass the United Nations,
exclude SWAP0 and impose a fait accompli of its own
making in Namibia on the international community.

8. Owing to the obstruction and sabotage by the South
African authorities, the solemn resolutions adopted by
the Council on the issue of Namibia-resolution
435
(1978) in particular-have
yet to be implemented. The
Council was seized of this issue twice in 1983 and adopted
resolutions which condemned the aforementioned actions
of the South African authorities, rejected South Africa’s
insistence on linking the independence of Namibia to
irrelevant issues and decided that, should South Africa
continue to obstruct implementation of resolution 435
(1978), the Council would consider the enforcement of
appropriate measures provided by the Charter of the
United Nations. Two years have elapsed since then. The
South African authorities have not only refused to carry
out the said resolutions, but have gone so far as to step up
their new schemes of bypassing the United Nations with
the so-called internal settlement in Namibia and to continue their sabotage activities against military and economic facilities of other countries in southern Africa, thus
posing a serious threat to the peace and security of the
whole region. It is therefore absolutely essential for the
Council to be holding these urgent meetings to consider
the question of Namibia.

13. Such acts of the South African authorities have
aroused the indignation of more and more countries of
the world. The international community has strongly
condemned South Africa’s obstinate stand of rejecting
resolution 435 (1978). The Governments of many countries have issued statements in which they strongly condemn South Africa for trying to set up a so-called interim
government in Namibia. The President issued a statement on 3 May on behalf of the Council members in this
connection [S/17I51], declaring that the actions and
measures taken unilaterally by South Africa were null
and void. The meeting of the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) held last March,
the Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries held in April, the
extraordinary session of the Special Committee on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peo-

9. The African and non-aligned countries attach great
importance to these urgent meetings, as has been demonstrated by the presence of many ministers from those
countries and President Nujoma of the South West Africa
People’s Organization (SWAPO). Their participation will
certainly contribute a great deal to this meeting. The Chinese delegation wishes to extend its warm welcome to the
ministers and President Nujoma.
2

p& of last April and the extraordinary plenary meetings
of the United Nations Council for Namibia that have just
concluded have all adopted important documents that
strongly condemn South Africa.

condemn the policy of apartheid pursued by the South
African authorities, their illegal occupation of Namibia
and their activities of subversion and sabotage against the
front-line States. China will, as always, resolutely support
the struggle for independence of the Namibian people
under the leadership of SWAPO, the struggle of the frontline States to safeguard their sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity, and the struggle of the South
African people for racial equality and democracy. China
will render them political support and material assistance.
We are convinced that, led by SWAPO, the Namibian
people will further close their ranks, persist in their struggle and eventually win the independence and liberation of
Namibia.

14. On the other hand, the Namibian people, under the
leadership of SWAPO, have won widespread international sympathy and support in their struggle for independence. The front-line States have all along provided
powerful backing for the Namibian people, and they have
made significant contributions to their struggle. The great
majority of African and third world countries have stood
firmly on the side of the Namibian people and given all
kinds of support and assistance to SWAPO. Many Western countries with political vision have also provided
moral support and material assistance to the Namibian
people. In addition, various international or regional
organizations,
as well as non-governmental
organizations, have done a large amount of work in support of the
Namibian people’s struggle, The forces fighting for the
independence of Namibia are growing and expanding
steadily.

22. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the Minister
for@o&zign. Affairs iof Cuba, Mr. Isidoro Malmierca. I
welcome him and invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
23. Mr. MALMIERCA
(Cuba) (interpretation porn
Spanish): As one who comes from Latin America and the
Caribbean, at this moment so crucial for our peoples, I
should like, Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption
of the presidency for this month. Your presence at the
helm of the Council will doubtless provide additional
proof of your commitment to the peoples and to just and
noble causes.

15. Early realization of Namibian independence is the
urgent demand and strong desire of the Namibian people as
well as all the peace-loving and justice-upholding people of
the world. The Chinese delegation is of the view that the
Council should promptly take the following actions.

24. I should also like to thank the representative of
Thailand, for his dedicated work as President of the
Council last month.

16. First, it should demand that South Africa immediately stop its engineering of the “interim government”
and unconditionally
carry out resolution 435 (1978);
should South Africa continue to delay its implementation,
the Council should consider the imposition of comprehensive mandatory sanctions against it in compliance with
the Charter.

25. At the outset I should like to express the acknowledgement of the Government of Cuba of the stalwart work
of the Secretary-General to promote implementation of
the decisions of the Security Council and the United
Nations, which should enable the people of Namibia to
achieve independence.

17. Secondly, it should demand that all members of the
Council, the permanent members in particular, truly discharge their responsibilities and make genuine efforts to
achieve implementation of its resolutions. It should point
out that it is in contravention of the United Nations resolutions either to insist on linking the independence of Namibia with irrelevant issues or to advocate and conduct
constructive engagement with South Africa.

26. Yesterday [2583rd meeting], in various statements
before the Council, we heard a narration of various
events characterizing the shame felt about the attitude of
the racist rtgime of Pretoria in rejecting and flouting
decisions of the international community aimed at ensuring Namibian independence.

18. Thirdly, it should entrust the Secretary-General with
urging the South African authorities promptly to enter
into negotiations with SWAP0 on the implementation of
resolution 435 (1978) and request him to report to the
Security Council.

27. In order to complete that historic narration we
think it would be useful to draw attention to the fact that
this year, as we celebrate the commemoration of the 100
years that have elapsed since the Berlin Conference,
where the colonialist partition of the African continent
took place and the colonial domination of Namibia
began-now,
100 years later, the illegal occupation of its
territory is being perpetuated by the Pretoria regime.

19. Fourthly, it should call on all countries to exert
greater political and economic pressure on South Africa
through strict arms and oil embargoes.
20. Fifthly, it should appeal to all countries to provide
greater support and assistance to SWAP0 and to the
front-line States.

28. 1 must confess not to know whether 77ze Guilzrless
Book oJ’ Records contains the world’s record for cynicism;
if so, it needs to be updated, because the speech made
yesterday afternoon by the racist representative undoubtedly set a new record for cynicism. But that does not
matter, for we all know that a single drop of truth is

21. I wish to reiterate here that the Chinese Government
and people consistently and fjrrnly oppose and strongly
3

enough to swamp a sea of lies. And yesterday afternoon
the Council heard a torrent oftruth, when the representatives of peoples numbering nearly 1 billion unanimously
condemned the racist rCgime of South Africa, the illegal
occupiers of Namibia.

34. In its area of domination, the racist rCgime shares
interests and profits with 630 transnational corporations
based in Britain, 494 in the United States, 132 in West
Germany and 85 in France. Fifty per cent of investment
in South Africa belongs to foreign capital, which control
87 per cent of the private-sector production capacity of
the country. The most important mineral resources in the
world are concentrated in southern Africa, from the equator to the Cape of Good Hope, particularly resources
with both civilian and military applications. Thus, it is not
necessary to dig very deep in order to understand the
nature of the interests and commitments uniting imperialism and the Pretoria rCgime, manifested in so-called constructive engagement, which is being used to establish
United States-actually
imperialist-hegemony
in the
region.

29. The Council is meeting again to denounce the situation in southern Africa, specifically the situation in Namibia, which is the result of the provocative actions of
the odious apartheid rCgime. Between 1978 and 1985 the
Council has held more than 130 meetings to consider the
problems of the southern tip of Africa. At many of those
meetings the representatives of the United States did not
vote; nine times they abstained on draft resolutions on
Namibia or related conflicts; and on five occasions they
vetoed draft resolutions. It is a lengthy history which
reveals the disdain of the racist rCgime of South Africa
for the decisions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly, as well as the loyalty of its imperialist allies.

35. The objectives of the South African racists too are
clear: to consolidate the apartheid rCgime and to legalize
and perpetuate their illegal occupation of Namibia and
extend their political, economic and, if possible, military
domination to all African States south of the equator. In
order to achieve this, and doing the bidding of their
partner in these manoeuvres, they perpetuate terror in
South Africa against the black people; they pursue the
combatants of the African National Congress of South
Africa (ANC); they attempt by all means to thwart the
action and relations of other peoples and Governments
in solidarity with SWAPO, which is struggling for the
independence of Namibia; and they attempt to destabilize and destroy the front-line States and to establish in
their place rCgimes allied with apartheid, as exemplified
by their support for counter-revolutionary
bands in
Angola and Mozambique. Continuing the illegal occupation of Namibia is a basic, decisive factor in the joint
strategy of Pretoria and the Pentagon.

30. At its last five sessions, held between 1981 and 1985,
the General Assembly adopted 31 resolutions relating to
the question of Namibia. In no case did the United States
vote in favour of adoption, In 31 cases, the United States
never voted in favour: it abstained 27 times and voted
against 4 times.
31. It is easy to identify the most stubborn enemies of
the independence of the Namibian people, the most steadfast allies of the racist regime of Pretoria, and the supporters of the odious system of apartheid. The United States
imperialists and the South African racists walk hand in
hand, in what they euphemistically call constructive
engagement. They are on one side; on the other, along
with the Namibian patriots, are all of us, the entire international community.

36. Just over two months ago, on the occasion of the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the founding of SWAPO, an
Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating
Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries on the question of Namibia was held at New Delhi to consider and state its
views on the problem of Namibia.

32. The Council is meeting at the request of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, because the situation in
south-west Africa, which itself was already dangerous,
has now been exacerbated by the racist rigime of Pretoria,
which, protected, as usual, by its counterparts in Washington, has taken the ominous unilateral decision to establish
an interim government in Namibia, in open defiance of
repeated international agreements designed to prohibit
such manoeuvres.

37. We participants-Ministers
for Foreign Affairs and
participants-were still on our way to New Delhi or had
only just arrived when we heard the news of the decision
of the South African Government to create an “interim
government” in Namibia, a monster which the Pretoria
regime had been fashioning for months. That was no new
decision. Some years ago, and for a similar purpose, the
South African Government had established the so-called
Democratic Turnhalle Alliance, which was outlawed by
the international community in the United Nations
which declared the attempt to be null and void. The
Alliance died a natural death upon its rejection by the
international community.

33. The interests and objectives of imperialism are fundamentally similar and related, though not identical, to
those of uparrheid. Imperialist support for the racists is
intended not so much to support aparrheid, but rather to
defend the strategic military advantages gained by imperialism because of the important geographical location of
the region. That location guarantees, among other things,
control of nqvigation in the South Atlantic and continued
exploitation of the region’s natural resources, in particular
minerals such as uranium which make a crucial contribution to the development of its military industries and its
ability to destabilize independent, democratic antiimperialist Governments in the area. The following confirms those assertions.

38. Countless resolutions of the United Nations and its
various bodies systematically denounce, condemn and
reject South Africa’s illegal occupation of Namibia. On
27 October 1966, in its resolution 2145 (XXI), the General Assembly unequivocally ended South Africa’s Man4

date over the Territory of South West Africa. Twelve
later, in its resolution 435 (1978), the Security
Council reaffirmed the legal responsibility of the United
Nations over Namibia and reiterated that

GDP, it employs only 10 per cent of the labour force.
Commercial agriculture provides a lucrative income
for some 5,000 white farmers who produce more than
95 per cent of the marketed agricultural output. Subsistence agriculture constitutes virtually the only economic activity set aside for the indigenous population
and its share of total marketed agricultural output is
only 2.5 per cent. Overall, the agricultural sector contributes about 14 per cent to the GDP and 20 per cent
to exports. . . . The collapse of the fishing industry has
drastically reduced the sector’s contributions to the
country’s GDP. It has also resulted in the loss of
several thousand jobs in the industry and has made
Namibia’s employment problem more severe.“’

years

“its objective is the withdrawal of South Africa’s illegal administration from Namibia and the transfer of
power to the people of Namibia with the assistance of
the United Nations in accordance with Security Council resolution 385 (1976)“.
39. Since then, seven difficult years have passed, in
which attempts to implement the United Nations plan
for Namibia have invariably stumbled over the various
obstacles erected by the South African Government.

43. The same report of the Council indicated the difficulty in obtaining statistics regarding the economy of Namibia since South Africa combines figures on the
Territory with those on South Africa. It states:

40. That was the case regarding the establishment of a
demilitarized zone of 50 kilometres on either side of the
Namibia-Angola
border; it was the case in the lengthy
discussion in 1980 and 1981 of the electoral system to be
employed; and it was the case of the most recent manoeuvre, the so-called linkage which seeks to connect the beginning of the independence process for Namibia with the
withdrawal of Cuban internationalist forces from Angola.

“Figures that are released are carefully selected to give
the impression that Namibia is an economically unviable Territory which is heavily dependent on South
Africa.“*

41. On 17 November last, the Angolan Governmentdetermined to find a solution to the tension in the southern
part of the continent and in view of the new deadlock
caused by the rejection of “linkage” by the front-line
States, by Africa in general, and by the international
community-put
forward a well-thought-out, rational,
just proposal as the basis for negotiations within the
United Nations framework on this complex problem. In
spite of the thoughtf~ll position of the Government of
Angola, the Pretoria riggime responded hastily and raised
new conditions, verging on insolence. No Government
faced with such difficult conditions-and
certainly not the
People’s Republic of Angola-could
accept anything like
this without losing its dignity and sovereignty.

44. Over 60 per cent of Namibia’s gross domestic product is appropriated as company profits, which shamefully deprives the country of the payment of taxes which
would augment its financial resources.
45. Approximately 90 per cent of goods exported consist of minerals, in the exploitation of which large ecdnomic and financial firms and institutions well known
throughout the world participate, and these have their
headquarters in South Africa, They operate under licences granted by Pretoria; their investments were attracted
by the huge earnings made possible by the abundant and
cheap slave labour guaranteed by the apartheid system
imposed on Namibia.

42. One must ask why South Africa, in the period of
approximately 20 years since the termination of its Mandate over the Territory, has continued to maintain illegally
its occupation of Namibia, thereby aggravating the differences the hateful system of apartheid already has with the
international community. We might repeat what was
stated in the report submitted by the United Nations
Council for Namibia to the General Assembly at its thirtyninth session:

46, The Namibian financial services are based principally in South Africa although the majority of foreign
banks have a particularly close relationship with the
South African Department of Defence. However, the Namibian economy has also experienced some imbalances
because of the internal crisis of the capitalistic system.
That has been demonstrated by the lack of growth and
the paucity of investments, both private and public,
resulting from the Territory’s uncertain political future.
Over the past two years there have been cuts in employment; in 1983 there were 75,000 unemployed. To these
must be added some 100,000 persons-in other words,
almost half the non-white labour force who are migratory workers on short-term contracts, mainly from the
northern part of the country. That does not take into
account the employment discrimination and other obstacles erected against the black majority by the apartheid
system. The instability of this labour force has an adverse
impact on the productive process and the development of
skills, already slowed by the limited educational system
available to the black population.

“Namibia is endowed with abundant natural wealth,
including uranium, gem diamonds, copper, lead, zinc,
manganese and other metals, as well as agricultural and
fishery products. The Territory’s human and natural
resources, however. are exclusively controlled by the
illegal South African rCgime and other foreign, economic, financial and other interests which exploit and
plunder Namibia’s resources.
“The breakdown of Namibia’s gross domestic product (GDP) by sector reveals the Territory’s unbalanced and precarious economic structure. Although
mining constitutes almost half of the Territory’s total
5

47. In order to maintain its hegemony in Namibia,
South Africa maintains an army of more than 100,000
men, in addition to special units that regularly make
incursions into the territory of Namibia on the pretext of
“hot pursuit”.

to postpone and to avoid true independence
for Namibia by raising the various pretexts that were first
raised many years ago when Angola was still under the
colonial domination of Portugal-when it was white Portuguese troops who were on Namibia’s border.

48. The policy of the “Namibianization”
of the war,
which began with the establishment of the so-called
South West Africa Territorial Force, has brought
Namibia into South Africa’s strategy of total militarization. Compulsory military service has been extended to
all blacks between the ages of 18 and 25. This has been
protested by the population, and as a result hundreds of
young men have fled the Territory and joined SWAPO.

52. In recent years they have tried to link the beginning
of the process leading to Namibia’s independence with the
withdrawal of the Cuban internationalist forces from
Angola. Although those attempts have been categorically
rejected by the international community, it is worth recalling that the Cuban combatants went to Angola, at the
request of the people and Government of Angola, to
fight, together with the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola, against the invasion of the racist army and
other acts of aggression aimed at smothering the newborn
People’s Republic of Angola. Their presence in Angola is
not connected with Namibia. It is a matter entirely within
the sovereignty of Angola and Cuba.

attempted

49. Much could be said about exploitation in Namibia,
the flouting of basic human rights and the unsanitary
overcrowding in the “traditional”
territories or “homelands”, the so-called bantustans, where thousands of
black workers have been obliged to reside, separated
from their families. That is the source of the vast profits
reaped by the big consortiums and transnational corporations operating in that country.

53. Cuba’s position is well known; it has been clearly
expressed in the statements of 4 February 19823 and 19
March 1984 [S/16427, annex], in our support for the
Angolan platform presented by President dos Santos to
the Secretary-General in his letter of 17 November 1984
[see S/16838], in my recent statement as Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba condemning Pretoria’s decision to
install a puppet Government in Namibia, and in our support for the decisions of the Organization and other international bodies-in particular, those of the Movement of
Non-Aligned CoLintries.

50. Cuba, as is well known, provides every support to
the people of Namibia in their efforts to achieve independence and also to prepare them to undertake the future
reconstruction of the country and to combat the terrible
inheritance of colonial domination which has lasted for
more than 100 years, preventing them from becoming
masters of their own land and fate. For that reason we
have provided opportunities for more than 1,000 Namibians to study in our country. Those schools were
visited some years ago by the then Secretary-General,
Mr. Waldheim,
and more recently by the present
Secretary-General, Mr. Ptrez de Cutllar. On that occasion, when he spoke to the Namibian students, the
Secretary-General said that he hoped that Namibia
would be the 160th State Member of the United Nations.
At that time President Fidel Castro reiterated Cuba’s
confidence in the achievement of independence by Namibia, which in the near future surely will become an
additional member of the family of independent States in
the Organization.

54. We are taking part in these meetings of the Security
Council, meetings that the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries requested, to demand that urgent measures be
taken to permit the implementation
of resolution 435
(1978~the only basis for a peaceful resolution of the
Namibian question- measures such as the imposition of
mandatory sanctions against South Africa, under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
55. The Council must reject the establishment in Namibia of a puppet Government imposed by South Africa,
which is trying by that means to present fairs accomplis
to delay or impede the independence of the Territory and
to deny the legitimate rights of the Namibian people..
Those events are a new challenge by the racist rCgime that
the international community cannot permit,

5 1. That visit to the Namibian students on 29 May virtually coincided with one of South Africa’s terrorist actions,
in which it violated the most fundamental norms of international law, carrying out a commando operation, led by
South African officers, to destroy the petroleum installations in the northern Angolan province of Cabinda. That
new act of aggression against the sovereignty of Angola
occurred at a time when the United States was attempting
to act as mediator between Angola and South Africa in
negotiations designed to speed up the implementation of
Council resolution 435 (1978) on the independence of Namibia, The attempt was paralysed by the intransigence of
the South African racists and their allies, who for eight
years have been resisting the implementation of that resolution and now want to establish a so-called interim
government composed of groups that would be subject to
South Africa’s dictates, ignoring SWAPO, the sole. legitimate representative of the Namibian people. They have

56. Essential conditions for bringing about a climate of
peace and security in South West Africa arc the indcpen-

dence of Namibia, the complete and unconditional withdrawal of South African troops from Angola. the ending
01’ aid for the counter-rcvolutionnry

LJNITA

(National
bands and
;Igrccments
will be

Union for the Total Independence OF Angola)
an

international

guarantee

that

rcspccted. Only if those conditions were met could
AI@:I
:lnd Cuba consider the possibility ol‘rccit~ing
the
n~iiiiber

of illtcrnationalist

Cub;ln

I’orccs in Angola.

57. However, if Pretoria and Washington persist in
impeding a just and peaceful solution to the conflict
through the mechanisms we have created over the years,
6

there will be no alternative to providing massive moral
and material support to SWAP0 to enable it to intensify
the struggle against its oppressors, because, as wassaid by
our national hero, Jest Marti, a bitter enemy of imperialism, which he knew well:

The young Namibians

“You are not going to permit it”, said President
Fidel Castro, “and neither are the South African
people.”

“A war for the independence of a people and the
honour of humiliated men is a sacred war, and the
creation of a free people that wins the war is a service
to mankind as a whole.”

Later he added:
“There will be no solution in southern Africa without resolution 435 (1978) and without the independence of Namibia. And Angola is so much in
agreement with this-and I do not doubt in the slightest that this is Angola’s position-that so long as resolution 435 (1978) is not implemented and so long as
Namibia is not independent, or at least while all the
concrete, necessary steps are not being taken for the
implementation
of the resolution and the genuine,
effective attainment of its independence, not a single
Cuban soldier will be withdrawn from Angola. If there
is a need for more soldiers, we shall send more, because
when confronted with each act of aggression by imperialism and racists, we have always reacted by strengthening Angola.”

Those words of Josi Marti retain today, with regard to
the conflict that we are meeting to consider, all their reason, truth and topicality.
58. JosC Mar&-whose name is being blemished today
by those against whom those words were directed,
through its use as the title of a provocative radio broadcast created to attack, ineffectively, of course, the Cuban
revolution-dedicated
his life to the struggle for the independence, freedom and sovereignty of all the peoples
oppressed by imperialist domination, and made clear the
justice of the struggle to ensure that those elementary
human rights should be exercised in every case where they
had been violated. Those words of Marti are absolutely
valid today and completely applicable to the situation in
Namibia and throughout southern Africa, wherever the
rights of a people have been violated.

President Fidel Castro concluded as follows:
“We shall stay there until Namibia is independent,
and the friends of Africa and Namibia will support you
until you attain independence.

59. That is why on 29 May, before the SecretaryGeneral and the Namibian students in Cuba, President
Fidel Castro declared:

“Nobody can say for certain whether you will be the
160th Member State of the United Nations or whether
one of those little islands that the colonialists hoid,
scattered around .the world, will gain independence and
take the number 160. I would not dare say what it will
be-perhaps number 162, 163 or 164-but I do dare to
say that you will be independent.”

“As you know, the United Nations has been making
a great effort to speed the independence of Namibia.
The Secretary-General has expressed here his hope that
it will become the 160th Member State of the United
Nations. But what is the United States doing?

60. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Pakistan, whom I invite to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

“While it is having talks with Angola and while there
are contacts and negotiations, in which the Yankees
say that they are intermediaries, mediators, full of good
faith and good will-despite the fact that they are the
very people who organized and supported Savimbi, as
well as the South Africans-it is trying treacherously to
destroy the basic, vital economic resources of Angola.
What can one expect of Fascists? What can one expect
of racists? What can one expect of oppressors?

61. Mr. Shah NAWAZ (Pakistan): I begin by expressing
my gratitude to the members of the Council for according
me the opportunity of participating in this important series of meetings, which has been convened to consider the
question of Namibia.

“Angola has been seeking, with our support and cooperation, a peace formula, which would have to be
preceded by the implementation
of Security Council
resolution 435 (1978) and Namibia’s independence.
What arc the South Africans doing now? They are
trying to organize bantustans in Namibia. I ask, do
bantustans in Namibia have any future?”
The young Namibians
tro asked again:

repeated: never!

62. I should also like to extend my felicitations to you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for the month of June. The relations between Pakistan
and Trinidad and Tobago have traditionally been close
and cordial. We share a common approach in the pursuit
of international peace and progress and a common concern over major international issues and problems. I am
confident that your great experience and diplomatic skill,
and your special qualities as a distinguished statesman
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of your country, will
prove to be an asset to the Council as it deals with the
important issue before it and enable it to take appropriate
decisions to ensure the early independence of Namibia.

answered no! President Fidel Cas-

“Are the Namibian people going to permit the establishment thcrc or bantustans?”
7

63. I also take this opportunity to convey our deep
appreciation to the Minibter for Foreign Affairs of Thailand for the admirable manner and great distinction with
which he presided over the proceedings of the Council,
and to the representative of Thailand, for providing
excellent guidance and leadership to the Council during
the month of May.

talks SWAP0 proposed that the two sides agree on a joint
declaration to be conveyed to the Security Council, calling upon the latter to initiate the process of implementation of the United Nations plan for the independence of
Namibia, starting with an immediate cease-fire and cessation of hostilities. The South African representatives
rejected the proposal and refused to discuss the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) without a firm commitment on the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola.

64. The Council last met to consider the question of
Namibia in October 1983, when it undertook a comprehensive examination of the situation in the Territory and
adopted resolution 539 (1983). By thjt resolution, the
Council condemned South Africa for its continued illegal
occupation of Namibia and for obstructing the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) which, it declared,
was the only basis for a peaceful settlement of the Namibian problem. Furthermore, by that resolution, the
Council unequivocally rejected linking the independence
of Namibia to extraneous issues incompatible with resolution 435 (1978), such as the presence of Cuban troops
in Angola.

69. The year-long, strenuous diplomatic
efforts by
SWAP0 and by some African States have revealed more
than ever before the intransigence of Pretoria over the
question of implementation of the United Nations plan,
as well as its refusal to co-operate with the SecretaryGeneral. In blatant defiance of resolution 539 (1983),
South Africa continues to hold the independence of Namibia hostage to the extraneous issue of the presence of
Cuban troops in Angola. In paragraph 45 of his report of
6 June, the- Secretary-General has concluded, ink alia:
“As members of the Security Council are aware, in
my report to the Council on 29 August 1983 [S/15943],
I stated that in regard to the implementation
of Security Council resolution 435 (1978), virtually all outstanding issues had been resolved as far as the United
Nations Transition Assistance Group was concerned.
However, I also made clear in that report that the position of South Africa regarding the issue of the withdrawal of Cuban troops as a pre-condition for the
implementation of resolution 435 (1978) still made it
impossible to launch the United Nations plan. There
has been no change in the position of South Africa in
regard to this particular issue.”

65. Since the adoption of resolution 539 (1983) one and
a half years ago, the Secretary-General, the front-line
States and SWAP0 have made strenuous efforts to
secure the early independence of Namibia through the
implementation
of resolution 435 (1978). All those
efforts remain infructuous, while the situation inside
occupied Namibia continues to deteriorate.
66. In exercise of the mandate entrusted to him by the
Council in resolution 539 (1983), the Secretary-General
held consultations with the representatives of the South
African Government. His talks, as detailed in his report
of 29 December 1983 [S/162377 and his recent report of 6
June 1985 [S/172&], underlined once again South Africa’s stubborn refusal to proceed with the implementation
of resolution 435 (1978).

70. Even if the Cuban troops were to be withdrawn,
there is no assurance that South Africa will loosen its
stranglehold on Namibia. The actions by Pretoria in the
past one and a half years are a clear testimony to its
design to keep Namibia permanently under its control.

67. Demonstrating a continuing sense of responsibility,
restraint and statesmanship, the front-line States and
SWAP0 engaged in diplomatic moves throughout 1984 to
secure South Africa’s co-operation in the implementation
of the United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia. When South Africa called for political talks between
all the concerned parties on the future of Namibia, SWAP0
agreed to participate in such a conference, which washeld at
Lusaka in May of last year under the joint chairmanship of
President Kenneth Kaunda of Zambia and the South African Administrator-Genera1 for Namibia. Again, motivated
by its good faith in negotiations and cognizant of its responsibility to work for the early independence of Namibia,
SWAP0 agreed to the presence at that conference of the
representatives of the so-called “Multi-Party Conference”,
a political coalition wholly contrived and sponsored by
South Africa in an attempt to set up a rival to SWAP0 in
the occupied Territory.

71. Throughout
last year Pretoria made feverish
attempts to put together a surrogate political entity and to
create a facade of “internal rule” for the Territory. Simultaneously, it has intensified its repression in the Territory
and is pursuing a systematic policy of terrorizing the local
population by using military and paramilitary security
forces.
72. Pretoria, in a politically bankrupt move, attempted
last April to put together the political coalition of the
“Multi-Party
Conference” and launched a new scheme
of “interim self-government “* in total disregard of the
United Nations plan embodied in resolution 435 (1978).
Pretoria has now announced its decision to install a
puppet rCgime in Namibia on 17 June, a move that has
already been strongly denounced by the extraordinary
plenary session of the United Nations Council for
Namibia held last week at Vienna.

68. The Lusaka conference ended without results when
the “Multi-Party
Conference”, a proxy of South Africa,
refused to join SWAP0 in supporting resolution 435
(1978). SWAPO, undeterred, agreed to yet another meeting with South African representatives, which took place
in July of last year in the Cape Verde islands. At those

73. The Secretary-General has noted in his report of 6
June that the prevailing difficulties have been compounded and given a new dimension by the recent deci8

sion of South Africa to install a puppet administration in
Namibia. This new illegality being perpetrated by South
Africa in Namibia must be opposed with the utmost
vigour and with all available resources, because it not
only represents an affront to the United Nations and to
the international community but is a devious political
move to deprive the people of Namibia of their legitimate
right to self-determination. Pretoria’s political machinations are accompanied by a new campaign of repression
and intimidation
to coerce the people of Namibia to
accept its diktat. There are constant reports and shocking
accounts of units of the notorious South African Special
Task Force harassing, intimidating and beating up innocent civilians, as well as desecrating churches and other
places of worship.

and all other coins minted in South Africa; sixth, strict
observance of the sports and cultural boycott of South
Africa; and, seventh, ratification and implementation of
the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid [General Assembly resolution 3068 (XXVII4 of 30 November 19731.
78. The Ministers also called for the strict enforcement
of the mandatory arms embargo imposed against South
Africa by Council resolution 418 (1977), as well as the
scrupulous observance by all States of the subsequent
resolution 558 (1984).
79. Pakistan strongly endorses the interim measures
recommended by the Co-ordinating Bureau of NonAligned Countries, and firmly believes that nothing short
of the imposition of mandatory sanctions under Chapter
VII of the Charter would force South Africa to comply
with resolution 435 (1978). The Council must fulfil its
obligation to the people of Namibia by doing all within its
power to implement its plan, thus ending the dark chapter
of colonialism in Namibia and the tragic sufferings of the
Namibian people.

74. Since last October the South African occupation
army in Namibia has imposed compulsory military conscription on all Namibian males between the ages of 17
and 55, forcing them to serve in the occupying colonial
army. Those who refuse are subjected to prosecution.
Clearly, the Pretoria regime intends to use Namibians
against Namibians.
75. The South African campaign of repression and its
schemes to divide the Namibian people are doomed to
failure and can never succeed in undermining the heroic
struggle for national liberation being waged under the
leadership of SWAPO. Similarly, Pretoria’s political
manoeuvres or terrorism will not deflect the African
States from helping the Namibian people and SWAP0 in
their noble cause, which enjoys the unreserved support of
freedom-loving peoples throughout the world.

80. The five Western States which authored the United
Nations plan, as well as those having influence with South
Africa, bear a special responsibility to co-operate with the
Council for the attainment of this objective. Their continued tolerance of South Africa’s present behaviour
would only serve to prolong the denial of freedom to the
Namibian people and aggravate the danger to peace and
security in the entire southern African region,
81. The year 1985 marks the fortieth anniversary of the
United Nations and its promise of peace, freedom and
progress for the peoples of the world. The Council debate
on Namibia this year is also a poignant reminder of the
fact that the question of Namibia remains unresolved,
although it has been on the agenda of the Organization
for the entire 40 years of its existence. Namibia’s independence is long overdue. The Council must now prescribe a
concrete plan of action based on a specified time frame
for the implementation of its resolution 435 (1978).

76. The latest expression of the international community’s solidarity with the cause of Namibia’s independence
was the Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New
Delhi last April specifically for the purpose of evaluating
the situation relating to Namibia and for considering ways
and means by which the non-aligned countries could help
the freedom struggle of the Namibian people. Indeed, this
series of Council meetings attended by high-level delegations, led by Ministers for Foreign Affairs in many cases,
has been convened in compliance with the decision taken
at that ministerial meeting.

82. The year 1985 also marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of SWAPO, the sole authentic national liberation
movement of the Namibian people. The courage, sagacity
and patience with which Mr. Sam Nujoma, the President
of SWAPO, has guided the struggle of the Namibian
people deserve our special tribute and respect. The
Government and the people of Pakistan salute the heroism of SWAP0 and the people of Namibia and commit
their unswerving support to the cause of Namibia’s
independence.

77. After careful consideration of the situation, ministers
of the non-aligned countries meeting at New Delhi called
upon the Security Council to give effect to its resolutions
on Namibia, particularly resolution 435 (1978), and recommended the imposition of mandatory sanctions against
South Africa under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations. Pending such action, the Bureau’s Programme of Action [S/17184, annex, parus. 48-64] has
recommended the following voluntary measures to be
implemented by all Member States against South Africa:
first, severance of diplomatic relations; second, observance
of an oil embargo; third, disinvestment of existing interests, prohibition of new investments and application of
disincentives to this end; fourth, withholding of overflight
and landing facilities to aircraft and docking rights to
ocean vessels; fifth, prohibition of the sale of krugerrands

83. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Ghana, Mr. Obed Asamoah, I welcome him and invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
84. Mr. ASAMOAH (Ghana): I have come before the
Council today to add my voice, as the representative of
Ghana, to those of my colleagues of the Organization of
9

African Unity (OAU) and the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries on the continued illegal colonization of the Territory of Namibia. But I wish also, if I may, to discharge
this solemn responsibility on behalf of the Liberation
Committee of the OAU, which I am privileged to serve as
its current Chairman.

90. Secondly, an incontrovertible truth about the whole
question of Namibia is that the United Nations, more
than any other organization, Government or individual,
continues to bear a solemn responsibility for the Territory by virtue of its powers under the Charter. Any
further doubts cast on this responsibility would not only
damage the course of peace, equity and justice in the
Territory but also could further damage the credibility,
resolve and political will of the United Nations, to which
all countries and peoples continue to look for.a new and
more equitable world order. Under the Charter, it is the
Council that possesses the powers to ensure the effective
discharge of the United Nations mandate in respect of
the Territory and this is what has impelled us to come to
the Council at this time, to seek freedom and justice for
Namibia, even though the problem has been considered
in many other forums with varying degrees of success.

85. Before 1 delve into the heart of the matter, however,
allow me to express to you, Sir, the pleasure and satisfaction of the Ghana Government and my own at your
assumption of the presidency of the Council. The country
which you represent-Trinidad
and Tobago-is
not only
historically related to Ghana, but our two countries have
also enjoyed very close diplomatic, ethnic and cultural ties
for many years. But more than that, I wish to recognize in
particular your achievements both as an outstanding politician and as a negotiator-qualities
that are essential for
success, In more ways than one, the Council-indeed
the
whole international community-is
advantaged to have
you preside over this important debate.

91. Thirdly, it would serve the Council well to bear in
mind yet another fact in the matter, and that is that the
situation in the Territory has deteriorated since the Council was last seized of the problem, with grave consequences for domestic and international peace and security.
South Africa is bent on an internal settlement that ignores
the concerns of the United Nations and the entire international community. Men, women and children continue to
perish unnecessarily as a result of the violence unleashed
on the people of Namibia by the Pretoria rtgime.

86. May I take this opportunity also to greet and thank
most sincerely all members of the Council for making it
possible for me to deliver this statement today on behalf
of my Government and the peoples of Africa.
87. The question of Namibia’s independence has been
with the United Nations, and especially the Security
Council, for over 20 years, But what distinguishes this
debate from all other previous ones is the fact that, owing
to recent developments in the Territory, almost the whole
world-certainly
the overwhelming majority of the international community-is
looking to the Council to bring
the Territory to independence immediately.

92. Fourthly, we should recognize that the decolonization of Namibia, in accordance with the plan approved in
resolution 435 (1978), has continued to elude us because
of the insincerity of the Pretoria rCgime. In its dealings
with the United Nations and the people of Namibia that
r&gime has shown an unmistakable propensity to prevaricate, thus preventing meaningful action that would bring
about independence in the Territory, We have all witnessed recently, for example, the claim of the Pretoria
rtgime to have withdrawn
all its forces from Angola
while at the same time furtively despatching its agents
into that country for the dastardly purpose of committing sabotage. Certainly, such ambivalence hurts the
image of a rCgime that claims to be seriously involved in
the search for a settlement of the Namibian question.

88. To clear the air for the decisive action that the
Council is now called upon to take, it would be useful to
bear in mind a few facts that are germane to the consideration of the matter in the Council-facts
that time and a
multiplicity of events have tended to obscure lately.
89. First, in our opinion, whatever action is taken now
or in the future in respect of Namibia should be based on
the undisputed understanding that South Africa’s continued presence in the Territory is illegal and an impediment to the enjoyment of freedom by Namibians. Some
of the parties involved lately in the search for solutions to
the Namibian impasse have helped the Pretoria rCgime
by perhaps not highlighting this fact sufficiently, thus
even making the rCgime feel that it is being hounded
unjustly. With due respect to the Governments involved,
their favoured treatment of the Pretoria rCgime constitutes a shift from United Nations policy and the earlier
pronouncements
of the Council. Indeed, the United
Nations has requested the Pretoria rtgime to vacate the
Territory of Namibia immediately, so as to enable Namibians to enjoy their rights under the Charter of the
United Nations in larger freedom. Past resolutions of the
Council and the General Assembly and decisions of the
,, International Court of Justice all affirm this view, and it
should remain a basis for decisions in the Council now
and in the future.

93. In our opinion, the facts I have just outlined should
be basic to the Council’s consideration of this vexed question, in order to evolve a solution that will not only ensure
movement in the Council’s efforts in the matter but also
assist the exercise of the right political will in favour of the
principles enshrined in the Charter.
94. If we are agreed on the legitimacy of the struggle of
the people of Namibia for independence and on the
responsibility of the United Nations since the adoption of
General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI) in 1966, then
why has it taken so long to bring the Territory to independence? The primary reason is that the Governments of the
Western world, especially, have lacked the political will to
do for Namibia and Namibians what they have lost no
time in doing for other parts of the world and under less
oppressive and threatening situations. It is not necessary
to elaborate on the reasons for this discriminatory tieat10

ment because they are obvious. The records show the
representatives of these Governments to have used one
constitutional argument after another to protect the Pretoria rtgime during past debates on Namibia in the Council. The intransigence and defiance of the racist regime
was given a shot in the arm when the most influential
friends of that rkgime persuaded us all to suspend agreed
action in the United Nations in order to facilitate a chance
for negotiations with the Pretoria rCgime to be undertaken by them for the independence of the Territory. In
the end much time was lost while the contact group
groped for a solution,
95. Constructive engagement, as the so-called policy of
persuasion was christened, has turned out to be a waste
of everybody’s time. Its inventors are the only ones
impressed by its functioning. In its true form it is at best
an initiative that bought time for illegitimacy a,nd oppression and enabled the racist rtgime to defy the United
Nations. Under such circumstances, we have no choice
but to continue to condemn the policy of constructive
engagement because it is ineffectual and frustrates the
wishes of the international community.
‘96. Along with the very unconstructive constructive
engagement policy has been the “linkage” of the independence of Namibia to the presence of Cuban troops in
the neighbouring Republic of Angola. For our part, we
have never agreed with this position since it-undermines
the sovereignty of Angola, a Member State of the United
Nations. It is no longer a secret that the linkage of the
two issues was not really the brainchild of the Pretoria
rbgime but rather of others who had their own ideological axes to grind, and therefore the Council should
decline any further involvement with it. We are more
than convinced that it is extraneous to the need for the
rapid decolonization of Namibia, and the Council should
no longer provide the platform for either a direct or indirect peddling of this theory to the detriment of the
oppressed people of Namibia.
97. In any case, this policy should be considered somewhat outdated because the Angolan Government has
made its position on troop withdrawals from its Territory quite clear by offering a very sensible and practical
formula for the purpose. There is therefore no reason
why anyone should still cling on to the discredited Iinkage theory. I wish at this juncture to express our full
support for the Government of Angola for its understanding, co-operative spirit and political maturity in the
matter, and I hope that others will learn from its constructive attitude.
98. The patience and tolerance of the United Nations,
especially the Security Council, has been overtaxed in the
last three years especially through the parallel actions
initiated on the Namibian conflict by some parties outside the United Nations. Today the international community has nothing to show for those initiatives, about
which most Member States have expressed doubts from
their very inception. It is now time to return to the plans
meticulously formulated and agreed to by the Council,
plans which neither time nor innovations have eroded. I

am referring to resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978)
which are still the only viable and peaceful bases of SdVing the Namibian dilemma. May I remind the members
of the Council that the plan approved in resolution 435
(1978) is the only procedure accepted by all parties concerned as the best means of attaining Namibian freedom
and independence. We urge the Council therefore to
exercise whatever modicum of authority it has in such
matters to set in train the plan approved in resolution 435
(1978). Any further experiments with new theories can
only condone illegality and compound human suffering.
99. In deciding on the next course of action, we urge the
Council to take the pertinent comments of the SecretaryGeneral in his report into serious consideration since they
address the obstacles to progress. In his concluding
remarks, the Secretary-General identifies three reasons
for the present impasse. The first is that: “the position of
South Africa regarding the issue of the withdrawal of
Cuban troops as a pre-condition for the implementation
of resolution 435 (1978) still made it impossible to launch
the United Nations plan” [S/17242, para. 44. The second
reason is that the Pretoria rCgime has failed: “to communicate to the Secretary-General its choice of the electoral
system, in order to facilitate the immediate and unconditional implementation of the United Nations plan”(ibicl.,
para. 46). The third stumbling-block, according to the
Secretary-General, has been: “the recent decision of
South Africa to establish an interim government in Namibia” (ibid., para. 47). In our opinion, these are areas in
which the Pretoria rCgime is unlikely to change its
attitude.
100. We are aware that the Council has in the past tried
other means of persuading the Pretoria rCgime to end its
illegal occupation of Namibia and its defiance of the
United Nations, but it is now abundantly clear to all that
the racist rCgime cannot be trusted to bring the Territory
immediately to independence. In the circumstances, the
Council should have no alternative but to resort to othet
measures under the Charter to achieve its goal. For too
long have we appeared before the Council to request the
imposition of comprehensive mandatory sanctions against
South Africa only to find our pleas ignored.
101. As the Council is no doubt aware, many Governments, parliaments, non-governmental organizations and
companies in many parts of the Western world have
begun making their own decisions in favour of sanctions.
In our view the image of the Council would be badly
tarnished, and the authority of the United Nations damaged, if it were to be seen to contemplate sanctions only
after all others had introduced them in one form or
another. Sanctions are the last pacific means of saving
Namibia and southern Africa from being involved in
further violent racial conflict. If comprehensive sanctions
would be difficult to police and implement immediately,
the Council could at least agree on selective but effective
economic sanctions.
102. I could hardly let this occasion slip by without paying our sincerest tribute to the Secretary-General and his
team of experts who have served us so well and continue

to soldier on in the pursuit of resolution of the Namibia
problem in spite of tremendous odds, We are aware of the
frustrations
that he has encountered up till now, and we
wish to renew our confidence and support in the efforts
that he undoubtedly continues to pursue.

odious policy of the racists. The esteemed representative
of SWAPO, its President, Sam Nujoma, has impressively
analysed the situation and has on the basis of numerous
facts furnished proof of the criminal policy of South
Africa. That policy, which more than ever before constitutes a threat to international peace and security, can be
pursued only because the apartheid regime knows only
too well that imperialism’s most reactionary circles are at
its side.

103. In conclusion let me paraphrase our contributions
to this historic debate. The events of the last few years
convince ~1s that we should eschew rhetoric and embark
on action-oriented procedures based on the Charter. To
do this, we urge the Council to regain the leadership role
in the matter, which it is in danger of losing to certain
countries. We wish respectfully to recall that the United
Nations was created 40 years ago as an answer to the dire
need for peace. Its focus has not changed over the years,
and therefore its highest body should not give the mistaken impression that the threat to and violation of peace
in Namibia is not of sufficient concern for it to act decisively. As colonialism, the illegal occupation of a territory, defiance of the Council, the cost in human lives and
racism are the undisputed ingredients of the Namibian
problem, the Council cannot remain neutral or indecisive. To do so would be indirectly to condone injustice.
This debate is being followed by the whole world, and we
hope the international community will not be disappointed in the Council’s capacity to uphold freedom, justice and human life.

109. As an impudent challenge to all forces committed
to the struggle for Namibia’s independence, the regime in
Pretoria has started a new attempt to create “facts”,
“facts”
clearly aimed at circumventing
the United
Nations and the pursuit of neo-colonialist interests. In
other words, they intend to keep Namibia within the
claws of the South African rulers and to turn it into a
puppet State. The term “internal settlements” is only a
synonym for maintenance of the existing relations of
exploitation, for the further misuse of the Territory of
Namibia as a starting-point
for South African acts of
aggression, for destabilization and State terrorism against
neighbouring countries, Alarming, in this context, is the
growing militarization of the illegally occupied Territory.
110. My country, the German Democratic Republic,
resoiutely rejects the manoeuvres of the racists because
they are directed against United Nations decisions,
against progress, peace and security, not only in the
region of southern Africa.

104. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the German Democratic Republic. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

111, The latest action of South Africa is the last link in
the chain of attempts to exclude SWAP0 from the process of solving the question of Namibia. All that is accompanied by unjustified accusations and slander against the
liberation organization and by attacks against the United
Nations because of its support for the only legitimate representative of the Namibian people.

105. Mr. OTT (German Democratic Republic): Allow
me at the very outset to state that the delegation of the
German Democratic Republic extends to you, Sir, its
congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency
for the month of June. We are confident that your rich
diplomatic experience will greatly contribute to the successful work
of the Council and to bringing this
extremely important series of meetings to a fruitful
conclusion,

112. In the 25 years of its existence, SWAP0 has gained
respect and recognition from the progressive international
public. It has shown the highest possible flexibility in the
political and diplomatic spheres and demonstrated steadfastness in the required armed struggle.

106. Our appreciation goes also to your predecessor,
the representative of Thailand, for his wise guidance of
the Council in the month of May.

113. Circumvention of the liberation organization renders a just settlement of the question of Namibia impossible. The Socialist Unity .Party of Germany and the
Government and the people of the German Democratic
Republic will continue to stand firmly by SWAP0 in its
battle to secure genuine independence and self-determination for the Namibian people. Our solidarity with and
support for SWAP0 as the sole authentic representative
of the Namibian people serves the elimination of a hotbed
of conflict and the safeguarding of peace. We regard solidarity with SWAP0 as well as with the ANC and the
front-line States as an important contribution to the struggle against the apartheid
regime.

107. My delegation would like to thank you and the
members of the Council for giving me the opportunity to
explain the position of the German Democratic Republic
on the situation in Namibia. We regard the convening of
these meetings on the request of the Co-ordinating
Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries and of the Group of
African States as highly imperative. The world has
become witness to the increasing murderous terror of the
South African racist rtgime inside the country, to continued acts of aggression and sabotage against neigh:bouring States and especially to aggravation of the
k,ampaign of terror against the Namibian people.

114. There is clear agreement among States that resolution 435 (1978) forms the basis for settlement of the question of Namibia. Since its adoption in 1978, however, we
have repeatedly been witness to massive activities aimed

8. We have followed with great interest the course of
Is debate. Many speakers have rightly pointed to the
gravated situation in southern Africa caused by the
12

117. Consistent fulfilment of the responsibility of the
United Nations for resolving the question of Namibia must
be accompanied by the simultaneous rejection of all
attempts to encourage South Africa’s aggressive policies
and to pursue selfish interests through the policy of socalled constructive engagement.

at undermining that resolution. Flagrant disregard of the
provisions of that resolution has been possible only
because the racists are absolutely sure of support from
their imperialist allies, notably the United States of America, support that is determined by global strategic and
economic interests. Verbal condemnations and halfhearted measures in connection with the defiant behaviour of South Africa cannot deceive anybody about that
fact.

118. This year, 1985, we are observing a number of
important anniversaries, including the fortieth anniversary
of the United Nations, the founding of which was a direct
result of the victory of the anti-Hitler coalition. At the
same time, that victory over fascism and nazism opened up
the road to the liquidation of colonialism and to the selfdetermination of peoples. That struggle received decisive
impetus through the historic Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
Impressive proof of this is furnished by today’s free and
independent States of Africa, Latin America and Asia. The
twenty-fifth anniversary of General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV) must cause us to do everything to make 1985 a
decisive year on the road to a free atid independent Namibia.

115. The truth is that Pretoria has always had its hands
free for manoeuvring. Once before, it made the attempt
at such an internal settlement in Namibia, but the socalled Democratic Turnhalle Alliance installed at that
time met with inglorious failure. Then with “linkage”
another artificial obstacle was raised to the implementation of resolution 435 (1978). And now, in view of the
overwhelming rejection of that “linkage” and in view of
the growing mass movement in South Africa and of international action for the liquidation
of apartheid, the
racists are resorting to new red herrings to counteract the
crisis in their own system and to break the anti-apartheid
front, or at least to weaken it. Empty promises of
reforms inside the country are intended to serve that aim,
as, with regard to Namibia, is the latest idea of a socalled interim government composed of the “Multi-Party
Conference”. Our answer to this is unambiguous: no
solution to the Namibian problem is possible with
puppets and collaborators. Any sucli attempt will be
doomed to failure. But it is our duty not to allow things
to take their own course. What is imperative now is coordination ofjoint international action through the Security Council. The time for merely paying lip-service and
for a pretense of optimism is long past.

119. Let me conclude by quoting from the message sent
by the Head of State of the German Democratic Republic, Erich Honecker, to the OAU on the occasion of
Africa Liberation Day:
“Africa Liberation Day is an occasion for me to
affirm that the German Democratic Republic attaches
great importance to unity of action among the African
States and National liberations movements within the
Organization of African Unity in the struggle for the
preservation and safeguarding of international peace,
the strengthening of national independence and the settlement of the question of Namibia, as well as against
colonialism, neo-colonialism, racial discrimination and
apartheid. The German Democratic Republic will continue its solidarity and support in this just struggle.”

116. We advocate the United Nations shouldering its
responsibility, on the basis of its plan for Namibia. The
COIAO~
of the Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the
Co-ordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries on the
question of Namibia, and the final document unanimously adopted there [S/17184, annex], show the way in
which that plan can be implemented. The German Democratic Republic supports the demand of the non-aligned
countries for increasing international pressure on South
Africa, including the imposition of sanctions in accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations, since these are an effective means of forcing the
racists to respect the will of the international public.

The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

NOTES

1 Official

Records of the General Assembly,
Thirty-ninth
paras. 250 and 251.
Supplement
No. 24, (A/39/24),
2 Ibid., para. 252.
1982.
’ NV/82/4
of 12 February

13

Session.
