A/73/902–S/2019/493

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
14 June 2019
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventy-third session
Agenda item 40
The situation in Afghanistan

Security Council
Seventy-fourth year

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 68/11
and Security Council resolution 2460 (2019), in which the Secretary-General was
requested to report every three months on developments in Afghanistan.
2.
The report provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in
Afghanistan, including political, humanitarian, development and human rights
efforts, since the issuance of the previous report, dated 28 February 2019 ( A/73/777–
S/2019/193).

II. Relevant developments
3.
Developments in the peace and electoral processes continued to dominate the
political environment. The electoral management bodies finalized the results of the
October 2018 parliamentary elections after months of delay, and a new parliament
was inaugurated for the first time since 2011. New commissioners were appointed to
the Independent Election Commission and Electoral Complaints Commission, and
both Commissions began preparations for the 2019 presidential election, the date of
which was postponed to 28 September. The Government held a large consultative
meeting aimed at forging a national consensus on peace, and a planned intra -Afghan
dialogue, intended to include both Government and Taliban representatives, was
postponed following disputes over participants. The Government accelerate d its
anti-corruption efforts and took steps with regard to justice sector reforms. The
security situation remained volatile, as both the Government and the Taliban
announced new offensive operations. The overall number of civilian casualties
decreased significantly, driven mainly by a drop in suicide attacks, while civilian
casualties from aerial and search operations and non-suicide improvised explosive
devices continued to rise. The humanitarian situation remained serious, with

19-09080 (E)

170619

*1909080*

A/73/902
S/2019/493

continuing high levels of displacement caused by both conflict and natural disasters,
alongside major returnee flows from the Islamic Republic of Iran.

A.

Political developments
4.
The political environment remained fluid, as developments accelerated in both
the peace and electoral processes. Following the dismissal of all former electoral
commissioners in February, on 3 March, following consultation with presidential
candidates, political parties and civil society organizations, the President of
Afghanistan, Ashraf Ghani, appointed seven new Commissioners to the Independent
Election Commission and five to the Electoral Complaints Commission, as well as
new heads of secretariats for both Commissions. On 5 March, the Independent
Election Commission elected Hawa Alam Nuristani and the Electoral Complaints
Commission elected Zuhra Bayan Shinwari as their respective chairs, marking the
first time women headed both electoral bodies. On 24 April, Mr. Ghani signed a
decree appointing two non-voting international commissioners to each Commission,
as envisaged under the February amendments to the Election Law. On 6 May, the
Office of the Attorney General announced that it had petitioned the Supr eme Court
regarding the criminal cases against the former election commissioners and other
electoral officials.
5.
Meanwhile, the electoral management bodies continued technical preparations
for the presidential election. On 23 April, the Electoral Complai nts Commission
announced that it had completed the vetting process for the presidential elections,
with no complaints received against any of the 18 candidates on the preliminary list.
The Independent Election Commission published the list of final candida tes on
25 April.
6.
Controversy over the use of electoral technology continued through much of the
reporting period, causing further delays in electoral preparations. Consistent with the
amended Election Law, the Independent Election Commission dedicate d significant
time to exploring the use of technology. In support of those efforts, the UNAMA
donor-supported Election Support Group facilitated the visit of a senior technology
expert to advise on possible options that would allow for enhanced use of tech nology
and timely elections. The assessment, shared with the Commission on 24 April,
concluded that 18 to 24 months would be required for the proper implementation of
biometric voter registration, and outlined three options for consideration. On 25 April,
the Commission decided to undertake full biometric voter registration of all voters.
After further consultations with political parties, presidential candidates and civil
society, and in the light of the compressed timeline, the Commission decided on
13 May that it would instead pursue a paper-based voter registration “top-up” exercise
with biometric voter verification and electronic results transmission for the 2019
elections. On 18 May, Commissioner Aurangzeb announced that the start of the top -up
voter registration process, planned to last 15 days at 458 voter registration centres,
had been postponed from 16 May to 8 June.
7.
The reconstitution of the electoral management bodies, the new provisions in
the amended Election Law and the delays in finalizing the parliamentary election
results led to the further postponement of presidential elections. On 20 March, the
Independent Election Commission announced that the date for the presidential and
provincial council elections, and for the postponed parliamenta ry election in Ghazni
Province, would be postponed from 20 July to 28 September. District council
elections, initially slated to take place alongside the October 2018 parliamentary
elections and later deferred, were not mentioned. The announcement triggere d mixed
reactions from presidential candidates and the political opposition, some of whom
revisited calls for the establishment of an interim administration. While some civil

2/16

19-09080

A/73/902
S/2019/493

society organizations welcomed the additional time for electoral preparations,
presidential candidates and political parties criticized the lack of consultation over
the new date. Subsequently, on 29 May, the Commission decided to hold only the
presidential election on 28 September, and postponed elections for provincial councils
and Ghazni Province’s parliamentary seats to a later date.
8.
On 18 April, a group of 11 presidential candidates, including former National
Security Adviser Hanif Atmar and former Director of the National Directorate for
Security Rahmatullah Nabil, announced the formation of the Council of Presidential
Candidates and their intention to explore interim government arrangements as at
22 May, which they perceived as the expiry of the constitutional term of the
presidency. In response to a request for a ruling by the Office of the President, the
High Council of the Supreme Court issued a judgment on 21 April ruling that the
extension of the terms of the President and Vice-Presidents until the election of a new
President was in accordance with the Constitution, citing the 2009 precedent and the
need for stability and national unity. The decision was criticized by the Council of
Presidential Candidates and other opposition figures, including the former Governor
of Balkh, Atta Mohammed Noor, who described the ruling as i llegal and politically
motivated. At a 20 May press conference and in statements by its members, the
Council warned of possible future civil disobedience if its proposals were not
considered. As at 23 May, no demonstration had been reported.
9.
Mr. Ghani made a series of senior security appointments during the reporting
period, including two deputy ministers for defence, provincial chiefs of police in 17
provinces and three new deputies in the Office of the National Security Council.
While the President stated that those appointments aimed at advancing his reform
agenda, opposition figures expressed concerns about the perceived politicization of
the security sector ahead of the presidential elections.
10. In parallel, the Independent Election Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission continued finalizing the October 2018 parliamentary elections,
following contentious counting processes in many provinces. After consultations with
stakeholders, the Electoral Complaints Commission invalidated all recou nts for Kabul
Province on 25 April and began a review of original results forms. Final results were
released on 14 May, with four changes to the preliminary list. With that
announcement, the final certified results of the Wolesi Jirga elections were releas ed
for all 35 participating electoral constituencies, more than six months after the
elections. Several unsuccessful candidates and supporters protested the results, and
some called for the establishment of a special court to adjudicate the matter. On
26 April, the new Parliament was inaugurated with representatives from all
constituencies except Kabul and Ghazni provinces. Kabul Province representatives
were sworn in on 15 May.
11. Against that backdrop, domestic and international actors continued their e fforts
towards a negotiated peace settlement. On 7 April, the Government announced the
formation of a leadership council for peace and reconciliation, comprising 37 people,
to create a politically inclusive advisory team for negotiations with the Taliban, and
the creation of a negotiating team of 22 people. Both entities included opposition
politicians and female representatives. On 29 April, the Government convened a
consultative loya jirga on peace in Kabul. Bringing together more than 3,000
delegates from across the country, including some ex officio representatives such as
parliamentarians and members of provincial councils, the five -day jirga (“assembly”)
was aimed at developing the parameters for talks with the Taliban. Chief Executive
Abdullah Abdullah, as well as major opposition politicians, including presidential
candidates, boycotted the event, claiming that it was intended to bolster President
Ghani’s re-election campaign. Amid tight security arrangements, the event was
conducted without any security incidents. The jirga released a communiqué calling
19-09080

3/16

A/73/902
S/2019/493

for, among other things, a ceasefire, talks without pre conditions, a Taliban office to
be opened in Afghanistan, a responsible withdrawal of international forces, the
formation of an inclusive negotiating team, continued support from the international
community and the preservation of human rights, particularly women ’s rights. In his
closing speech, Mr. Ghani repeated that he was willing to call for a ceasefire if the
Taliban reciprocated, and offered to release 175 Taliban prisoners as a confidencebuilding measure. After calling for a boycott of the event on 28 April, the Taliban
rejected the jirga outcome and the call for a ceasefire in a statement on 3 May.
12. Afghan women made progress in their efforts to achieve meaningful
participation in the peace process. Following a six-month consultation with 15,000
Afghan women across 34 provinces, on 28 February, the Office of the First Lady, with
support from the High Peace Council, the Ministry of Wome n’s Affairs and the
Afghan Women’s Network and other civil society organizations, convened a national
conference of Afghan women for peace. At the conference, Afghan women submitted
a 15-point declaration to President Ghani, who undertook to have its provi sions
considered at the consultative loya jirga and peace talks. Women comprised around
30 per cent of participants at the consultative loya jirga, chaired 13 of its 50
committees and were elected as two of the five deputy heads of the assembly.
13. In mid-April, domestic and international stakeholders attempted to organize an
intra-Afghan dialogue in Doha with Afghanistan-based politicians and civil society
actors, Government officials participating in their private capacity and the Taliban.
However, preparations for the meeting unravelled amid disputes over the list of
participants. On 18 April, the Center for Conflict and Humanitarian Studies of the
Doha Institute for Graduate Studies, which was to host the conference, announced
that the talks had been postponed. In subsequent separate public statements, the
Afghan Government and the Taliban justified the decision, referring to disagreement
on their respective conditions for the talks. Nonetheless, on 28 May, a delegation of
24 Afghan political figures, including former President Karzai, alongside 14 Taliban
representatives, attended a meeting in Moscow marking 100 years of diplomatic
relations between Afghanistan and the Russian Federation. The Taliban delegation
was led by Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar, who had been appointed as the Head of the
Taliban Political Commission and a Deputy Leader of the movement in January 2019.
After meeting again on 29 May, the two sides issued a joint statement reporting
progress on some issues but acknowledging the need for further discussions.
14. The United States Special Representative for Afghanistan Reconciliation,
Zalmay Khalilzad, held talks with the Taliban in Doha from 25 February to 12 March,
and again from 1 to 9 May. The talks continued to focus on the withdrawal of
international troops and on guarantees that Afghanistan would not become a base for
transnational terrorism. Trilateral consultations were held by Chinese Special Envoy
Deng Xijun, Russian Presidential Representative Zamir Kabulov and Mr. Khalilzad
in Washington, D.C., on 21 and 22 March, and in Moscow on 25 April. Following the
latter meeting, a joint statement was issued stating support for an inclusive Afghan led, Afghan-owned peace process. On 26 March, the High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Federica Mogherini, visited
Kabul, where she reiterated the readiness of the European Union to support the
Afghan peace process. Peace efforts were discussed at a meeting in London on
23 April between Mr. Khalilzad and representatives of France, Germany, Italy,
Norway, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the European
Union.
15. Under its good offices mandate, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) continued to engage with the Taliban Political Commission
on issues related to the peace process, protection of civilians and humanitarian access.
My Special Representative met with Mullah Baradar and other members of the
4/16

19-09080

A/73/902
S/2019/493

Taliban negotiating team on 25 April to discuss progress towards intra-Afghan
dialogue, as well as protection of civilians and humanitarian issues. At the local level,
UNAMA continued working with communities and subnational government
authorities in support of local peace and conflict resolution efforts and im plementing
local peace initiatives through its field offices. In Nangarhar Province, UNAMA
facilitated a peace jirga between two tribes in Sherzad District that concluded with
the adoption of a resolution regulating water distribution. For the first time, women
played an active role in the jirga itself.

B.

Security
16. The security situation remained volatile, with a consistently high number of
security incidents. Between 8 February and 9 May 2019, the United Nations recorded
a total of 5,249 security-related incidents, a 7 per cent decrease compared with the
same period in 2018. The southern region saw the highest number of incidents,
followed by the eastern and western regions; together those regions accounted for 71
per cent of all incidents. On 12 April, the Taliban announced the start of its annual
spring offensive, Operation Al-Fath, with the stated focus of ending foreign
occupation and “establishing an Islamic system”. Reported security incidents
countrywide increased in the days after the Taliban’s announcement.
17. Established trends remain unchanged, with 3,207 armed clashes dominating the
security incident profile, representing 61 per cent of all incidents. That represents a
10 per cent decrease in armed clashes compared with the same period in 2018,
possibly attributable to the harsh winter. Incidents relating to the use of improvised
explosive devices remained the second highest category of incidents but decreased
slightly by 3 per cent. Suicide attacks decreased by 72 per cent, ref lecting ongoing
interdiction efforts and increased security measures by Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces, particularly in the cities of Kabul and Jalalabad. Afghan and
international military air forces maintained a high tempo of air strikes, wit h 305
recorded during the period, a 12 per cent increase compared with the same period in
2018.
18. On 2 April, the Government approved the Ministry of Defence ’s Operation
Khalid. Security forces’ operations focused on the southern region; Nangarhar in the
east; Farah in the west; Kunduz, Takhar and Baghlan in the north -east; Ghazni in the
south-east; and Balkh in the north. Improving security along major roads remained a
challenge. Air strikes continue to underpin Afghan and international military efforts .
Air strikes in Helmand and Ghazni provinces made up 56 per cent of the total number
during the period.
19. Following the start of Operation Al-Fath by the Taliban, the most active conflict
areas countrywide were in Helmand, Farah and Ghazni provinces. Th e Taliban
succeeded in temporarily capturing at least three district administrative centres,
Arghanj Khwah in Badakhshan, Ab-e Kamari in Badghis and Shamulzayi in Zabul. A
Taliban offensive in Bala Murghab District, Badghis Province, resulted in four weeks
of fighting and the reported killing of 62 and the capture of 56 Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces elements. Although there were no significant threats to
provincial capitals, on 21 March a joint Afghan and international military operation
in the outskirts of the city of Kunduz resulted in intense clashes and the deaths of
2 international and 10 Afghan soldiers.
20. The number of high-profile attacks substantially decreased, with 8 suicide
attacks reported during the period compared with 26 dur ing the same period last year.
Two occurred in the city of Kabul, compared with 10 during the same period last year:
a complex attack on 20 April against the Ministry of Communications and

19-09080

5/16

A/73/902
S/2019/493

Information Technology, claimed by the Islamic State of Iraq and th e LevantKhorasan Province (ISIL-KP); and a complex attack on 8 May against an international
non-governmental organization, Counterpart International, claimed by the Taliban.
The drop was accompanied by greater targeting of Afghan security facilities as
opposed to civilian targets. In Washer District, Helmand Province, on 1 March, a
Taliban suicide attacker detonated an explosive device inside Camp Shorabak, and
was followed by 27 attackers who breached the camp ’s defences. The ensuing armed
clashes lasted 37 hours before Afghan security forces secured the base. Subsequently,
the Taliban issued a statement claiming that the base had been used to launch night
raids against civilians. In Sherzad District, Nangarhar Province, on 12 April, the
Taliban launched a large-scale complex attack against the district administration
centre.
21. ISIL-KP remained resilient, despite Afghan and international military forces
maintaining a high tempo of operations against its strongholds in Nangarhar and
Kunar provinces. Despite significant territorial losses in late 2018, ISIL-KP has
launched several offensives against Taliban-held areas in both provinces since
January 2019, with some battlefield gains reported in Kunar Province. During the
reporting period, 113 incidents were attributed to ISIL-KP, compared with 145 during
the same period last year. In addition, ISIL-KP claimed two suicide attacks during the
reporting period compared with nine during the same period last year, one against a
construction company located near Jalalabad Airport on 6 March, and the
aforementioned attack in Kabul on 20 April.
22. There were 11 incidents involving United Nations personnel during the
reporting period, including 4 incidents of intimidation and 4 criminal -related
incidents, but no armed clashes.

C.

Regional cooperation
23. Regional engagement intensified with regard to Afghan peace and development
efforts. On 21 February, President Ghani met with the President of Turkmenistan,
Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedov, in Turkmenistan to discuss bilateral relations, regional
connectivity projects and the role of the region in the peace process. On 17 and
18 March, Mr. Ghani visited the United Arab Emirates to discuss trade and
investments, development and humanitarian assistance and peace initiati ves. The
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, Salahuddin Rabbani, visited Indonesia
on 15 March to discuss the implementation of agreements between the two countries
and peace efforts. Indonesian officials reiterated their readiness to host direct talks
between the Afghan Government and the Taliban. On 30 April, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, Retno Marsudi, met with the Taliban in Doha in a further
effort to encourage direct talks.
24. Afghanistan and Pakistan continued to engage on bilateral issues and Afghan
peace efforts, although relations between the two countries were somewhat tense. On
25 March, Pakistani media reported comments by the Prime Minister of Pakistan,
Imran Khan, suggesting that the Afghan Government was a “hurdle” in the peace
process and that establishing an interim administration would help advance peace
efforts. The Government of Afghanistan recalled its Ambassador to Pakistan over the
remarks. On 25 April, in a statement on Afghanistan, the Prime Minister condem ned
the violent offensives, asserted that Pakistan had committed its diplomatic and
security capital to the success of the Afghan peace process and pledged that Pakistan
would no longer be party to any internal conflict in Afghanistan. On 5 May, during a
telephone call between the two leaders, President Ghani accepted an invitation from
the Prime Minister to visit Pakistan.

6/16

19-09080

A/73/902
S/2019/493

25. Cooperation continued to develop between Afghanistan and Uzbekistan, whose
engagement on peace-related efforts increased during the reporting period. On
6 March, the National Security Adviser of Afghanistan, Hamdullah Mohib, visited
Tashkent, where the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uzbekistan, Abdulaziz Kamilov,
briefed Mr. Mohib on his recent engagements with the Taliban and other relevant
interlocutors. On 31 March, President Ghani met in Kabul with Mr. Kamilov, who
voiced the readiness of Uzbekistan to host peace talks. Bilateral Afghan -Uzbek
relations were strengthened through visits between authorities in the border provinces
of Balkh (Afghanistan) and Surxondaryo (Uzbekistan), aimed at fostering cross border trade and investments.
26. Engagement also continued through multilateral forums. The first Heart of Asia Istanbul Process meeting of ambassadors of 2019 took place in the city of Kabul on
27 February. Participants reviewed ongoing activities as part of a stocktaking exercise
of confidence-building measures under the Process, and welcomed the offer of
Uzbekistan to host the eighth Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan in November 2019. For the first time since its inception, a meeting of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization-Afghanistan Contact Group (held in Bishkek on
19 April), was co-chaired by Afghanistan. Participants discussed cooperation with
Afghanistan as well as progress on the Afghan peace process and reviewed the
Contact Group’s draft road map for further action.

III. Human rights
27. On 24 April, UNAMA released its report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict for the first quarter of 2019. 1 The Mission documented 1,773 civilian
casualties (581 deaths and 1,192 injured) from 1 January to 31 March 2019, a 23 per
cent reduction compared with the same period in 2018. The reduction was mainly
driven by a 76 per cent reduction in civilian casualties from suicide and complex
attacks. UNAMA attributed 54 per cent of civilian casualties to anti -government
elements (39 per cent to the Taliban, 12 per cent to ISIL-KP and 3 per cent to
undetermined groups). Some 34 per cent were attributed to pro-government forces
(17 per cent to Afghan National Defence and Security Forces, 13 per cent to
international military forces, 2 per cent to pro-government militias and 2 per cent to
multiple pro-government forces), and 12 per cent were the result of unattributed
crossfire during ground engagements between anti-government elements and
pro-government forces and other incidents. The majority of civilian casualties were
attributed to anti-government elements; however, pro-government forces were
responsible for more civilian deaths than anti-government elements during the first
quarter of 2019.
28. Ground engagements caused 616 civilian casualties (134 deaths and 482
injured), comprising 35 per cent of all casualties. The use of suicide and non -suicide
improvised explosive devices resulted in 500 civilian casualties (76 deaths and 424
injured), accounting for 28 per cent of all civilian casualties. Civilian casualties from
non-suicide improvised explosive devices increased by 21 per cent. UNAMA
documented 228 civilian casualties (145 deaths and 83 injured) from aerial
operations, comprising 13 per cent of all civilian casualties, and 102 civilian
casualties (72 deaths and 30 injured) from search operations, accounting for 6 per
cent of all civilian casualties. UNAMA documented 582 child casualties (150 deaths
and 432 injured). On 8 May, in a complex attack against the non -governmental
organization Counterpart International premises in Kabul, 8 civilians were killed and
27 were injured. The Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack.
__________________
1

19-09080

See https://unama.unmissions.org/protection-of-civilians-reports.
7/16

A/73/902
S/2019/493

29. Between 1 January and 31 March, the country task force on monitoring and
reporting on grave violations against children in armed conflict verified 18 incidents
targeting schools and related personnel (14 incidents against educa tion facilities and
4 against education-related personnel), compared with 69 incidents during the
previous reporting period, during which the Taliban targeted schools used as polling
centres for the October 2018 parliamentary elections. The task force attr ibuted 12
incidents to anti-government elements (11 to the Taliban and 1 to ISIL-KP), 5 to
pro-government forces (2 to the Afghan National Army, 1 to international military
forces, 1 jointly to the Afghan National Army and international military forces, an d 1
jointly to the Afghan National Army, the Afghan National Police and a
pro-government militia group) and 1 incident jointly to the Afghan National Army
and the Taliban.
30. The country task force verified two incidents of abduction of children involving
4 boys (one by the Taliban involving 3 boys and one by the Afghan National Police
involving 1 boy), compared with five incidents in the previous reporting period
involving 11 boys. The task force also verified two incidents of recruitment and use
of children involving four boys (one incident by the Taliban involving three boys, and
one by the Afghan National Police involving one boy). Moreover, the task force
verified two incidents of sexual violence against boys by pro -government forces (both
by the Afghan National Police, involving two boys). On 5 May, the Government of
Afghanistan launched the Law on Protection of Child Rights, following the passage
of a bill into law through a presidential decree signed on 5 March.
31. UNAMA verified 26 incidents affecting health-care and related personnel (16
incidents against health-care facilities and 10 incidents against health-care
personnel), compared with 12 such incidents verified in the previous reporting period.
The task force attributed 18 incidents to anti-government elements (17 to the Taliban
and 1 to an undetermined armed group), including 6 incidents resulting in the closure
of 88 medical facilities and the abduction of three medical personnel by the Taliban,
and 7 incidents to pro-government forces (2 to the Afghan National Army, 1 each to
the Afghan local police, the National Directorate for Security and international
military forces, and 2 to undetermined pro-government forces). One incident was
attributed jointly to pro-government forces and armed opposition groups.
32. On 12 April, the Pre-Trial Chamber II of the International Criminal Court
unanimously rejected the request to proceed with an investigation for alleged crimes
against humanity and war crimes in Afghanistan submitted by the Prosecutor on
20 November 2017. The judges decided that an investigation into the situation in
Afghanistan at the present stage would not serve the interests of justice.
33. On 17 April, UNAMA and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights (OHCHR) released a joint public report on the treatment of
conflict-related detainees and the elimination of torture, covering the period from
1 January 2017 to 31 December 2018. 2 Of the 618 conflict-related detainees
interviewed, nearly 32 per cent gave credible accounts of having experienced torture
and other forms of inhuman or degrading treatment while in the custody of the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces. Although UNAMA has documented a
reduction in the number of cases of torture since 2016, it notes its ongoing concerns
about the use of torture and ill-treatment of conflict-related detainees, mostly in
detention facilities run by the National Directorate for Security and the Afghan
National Police. The report also documented violations and challenges in
implementing key procedural safeguards, such as access to lawyers, and a continued
lack of accountability for perpetrators.
__________________
2

8/16

See www.ohchr.org/Documents/Countries/AF/PreventingTortureReportApril2019.pdf .
19-09080

A/73/902
S/2019/493

34. The Government took further steps with regard to the promotion and protection
of women’s rights. On 4 March, the Cabinet’s Gender Committee signed a
memorandum of understanding with relevant ministries regarding the implementation
of the policy on women’s inheritance and property ownership and approved, in
principle, two policies: one on the protection of women in wa r and emergency
situations and one on increasing women’s participation in elections. On 7 April, the
Ministry of Justice presented a draft Family Law to the Cabinet ’s Legislative
Committee. On 17 April, the Prevention of Violence and Public Awareness Worki ng
Group, which includes Government, United Nations and civil society organizations,
endorsed the proposal of the Ministry of Women’s Affairs for women’s protection
centres.
35. Between 4 and 14 March, UNAMA organized eight events to celebrate
International Women’s Day. The events, including round table and panel discussions,
raised awareness of women and girls’ rights issues such as access to education and
sports and the elimination of crimes of violence against women and girls, including
underage and forced marriage, sexual assault and the custom of ba’ad, wherein girls
are bartered to resolve interfamily disputes. On 14 March, the United Nations marked
International Women’s Day in Kabul with a “One United Nations” public event that
highlighted Afghan women role models in various professional sectors.
36. The Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission held public hearings
across 33 provinces in March and April as part of its National Inquiry on the Role of
Women in Peace and Security in Afghanistan. UNAMA attended hearings in Kabul,
Bamyan, Herat, Helmand and Kandahar provinces, where it advocated for the
promotion of human and women’s rights in peace and security efforts. Participants
stated that human rights values were non-negotiable, that women must be present at
all stages of the peace process and that peace should not undermine justice for the
victims of the conflict.
37. Journalists and media workers continued to face conflict -related violence.
During the reporting period, UNAMA documented three incidents that resulted in the
killing of one journalist, the injuring of another and threats against a female journalist
by anti-government elements. Furthermore, five journalists and human rights
defenders, including one woman, were beaten, arrested or threatened, four of those
by pro-government forces and officials. UNAMA also organized nine events (totalling
399 participants, including 94 women) on the role of journalists and human rights
defenders, informal justice and human rights, peacebuilding and women ’s role in the
peace process, and mainstreaming human rights principles.

IV. Coordination of development assistance
38. The Government and key development partners continued efforts to implement
the commitments made at the Geneva Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan, held in
November 2018. Consultations on the socioeconomic requirements for peace, in line
with paragraph 15 of the Joint Communiqué that resulted from the Conference,
continued in Kabul, and on 13 April, at an event held in the margins of the World
Bank’s annual Spring Meeting in Washington, D.C., participants, including the
Minister for Finance of Afghanistan, expressed support for the initiative and called
for broader consultations to help guide coherent and realistic development planning
in alignment with the Government’s development agenda.
39. The Government took further steps towards the implementation of its
subnational governance policy entitled “Citizen-centred governance: a road map for
subnational reform”. On 19 February, President Ghani issued a presidential order on
district governance aimed at improving delegation of authority and paving the way
19-09080

9/16

A/73/902
S/2019/493

for a more equitable allocation of resources to district administrations. On 5 March,
Mr. Ghani approved a law on local councils through a legislative decree. The law
clarifies the roles and responsibilities of provincial, district and village councils, and
aims to facilitate local council oversight and promote public participation in the
design and implementation of local government development programmes.
40. The Government continued to make progress in public administration reforms.
On 4 February, the Cabinet approved a revised policy to increase the number of
women in the Civil Service, which set new targets for 2019. On 2 April, the
Independent Administrative Reform and Civil Service Commission released its
annual report for 2018, which discussed significant achievements, including
reduction in recruitment time of civil servants from around 180 days in 2017 to 45
days in 2018, and the implementation of a human resource managemen t information
system, launched on 17 February 2019. The system aims to register an estimated
424,000 civil servants in a centralized electronic employee database, including
biometrically, to improve human resource planning and reduce the occurrence of
“ghost” employees.
41. Implementation of the Access to Information Law also continued. On 28 April,
the Access to Information Commission began following up on the November 2018
Geneva Ministerial Conference commitments with the Council of Ministers, the High
Council for Rule of Law and Anti-Corruption, the National Procurement Authority
and the Civil Society Working Committee. The Commission provided technical
guidance to government entities with regard to creating information banks and
developed regulations on access to information and the processing of public
complaints.
42. On 20 May, UNAMA published its third annual anti-corruption report, entitled
“Afghanistan’s fight against corruption: groundwork for peace and prosperity”. 3 The
report documented the gradual implementation of reform steps, including legislative
changes such as the establishment of a dedicated Anti-Corruption Justice Centre, the
adoption of a law protecting whistle-blowers and a revision of the Access to
Information Law. It highlighted the need to further improve the institutional set-up of
anti-corruption bodies and recommended safeguards to ensure the independence of
the envisaged Anti-Corruption Commission. Progress was noted with regard to
enforcing compliance with the registration of assets of public officials and the
continuation of reform measures in the civil service and judiciary and the Office of
the Attorney General. The report commended the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre for
its ability to effectively apply the better-defined corruption offences in the 2017 Penal
Code, but highlighted that the ability of Afghanistan to execute arrest warrants
remained weak, which resulted in more than 20 per cent of defendants before the
Centre being tried in absentia and their sentences going unenf orced. The report also
described the Attorney General’s ongoing efforts to address corruption allegations in
the 2018 electoral process.
43. In the second quarter of 2019, the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre significantly
increased its output (following a decline in the second half of 2018). By 20 May, the
Centre’s Primary Court had issued judgments in 57 cases involving 223 accused, its
Appeals Court had decided 52 cases involving 173 accused, and the Supreme Court
had issued 36 judgments involving 117 accused in appeals against the Centre’s
decisions. However, the Centre’s activities remained constrained by the inability of
law enforcement organs to execute arrest warrants and summonses. Of the list of 127
arrest warrants and summonses pending execution prior to 28 November 2018, only
17 warrants and 44 summonses had been executed as of the time of writing. Of the
__________________
3

10/16

See https://unama.unmissions.org/sites/default/files/afghanistan_fight_against_corruption_
groundwork_for_peace_and_prosperity-20_may_2019-english.pdf.
19-09080

A/73/902
S/2019/493

17 executed arrest warrants, 11 suspects turned themselves in voluntarily and
6 warrants were executed by force. In total, only 1 person on the list of 127 has been
tried and is serving his sentence. On 19 March, the Centre reported that another 82
summonses and 46 warrants had been issued, bringing the total number of unexecuted
orders to 194. Separately, a former Minister, whom the Centre ’s Primary Court had
tried and convicted in absentia twice for crimes committed when he was Deputy
Minister, was arrested on 8 April and incarcerated pending appeal. Also notable was
the first-ever trial and conviction, albeit in absentia, of two sitting members of the
National Assembly and several former deputy ministers in May.
44. Justice reforms continued to advance slowly. The Ministry of Justice could not
finalize its reforms of the Department of Legal Services ( Huquq) and the Department
of Government Cases (Qaza-e-Dawlat) as required by the country’s anti-corruption
strategy, nor did it conclude efforts to develop a law codifying the complementarity
between the formal and the informal justice sectors during the reporting period. From
22 April to 4 May, UNAMA provided the Attorney General with an expert assessment
on strengthening the capacity of its international crimes directorate, to improve
implementation of the 2018 Penal Code. Subsequently, on 6 March, the Supreme
Court issued a circular directing judges to outline the basis and reasoning for their
sentencing decisions in an evidence-based manner, following the Mission’s
recommendations on the basis of a countrywide survey on the implementation of the
improved sentencing regime under the new Penal Code.

V. Humanitarian assistance and refugees
45. Levels of displacement remained high as a result of the conflict, the ongoing
impact of the 2018 drought and natural disasters. That was compounded by chronic
poverty and a lack of basic services and livelihood opportunities. Between 1 January
and 16 May, 110,000 people were newly displaced by the conflict. More than half (58
per cent) were children under the age of 18. Conflict -related displacements in 2019
decreased by 28 per cent compared with the same period in 2018, but many displaced
families had no immediate prospect of returning to their areas of origin.
46. Clashes between the Taliban and ISIL-KP displaced 24,900 people from Chapa
Darra District, Kunar Province, in March. Those left behind (believed to be half of
the local population) were reportedly barred from leaving the area, violating their
freedom of movement; unconfirmed reports indicate that militants occupied the
homes of those who fled. That was followed by the displacement of at least 9,016
people from Khogyani and Sherzad districts in Nangarhar Province, also due to
intra-insurgent clashes. Verification of internally displaced persons in those areas is
under way and the number may increase as a result. The Government and
humanitarian organizations have provided initial assistance, including food, cash,
basic relief items and services to displaced persons in both locations, but those
displaced are unlikely to return to their places of origin unless security conditions
improve.
47. Displaced persons living in temporary settlements continued to face difficult
conditions. In Herat Province, there was a 321 per cent increase in cases of acute
watery diarrhoea between 1 February and 15 April, compared with the same period
last year, along with 98 cases of measles reported among those living in displacement
sites. In response, the Government and humanitarian partners scaled up disease
surveillance and response activities and vaccination campaigns.
48. Between 21 January and 30 April 2019, 140,381 undocumented persons and
refugee returnees arrived in Afghanistan, including 7,372 undocumented returnees
from Pakistan, 127,510 from the Islamic Republic of Iran and 3,850 from European
19-09080

11/16

A/73/902
S/2019/493

States and Turkey (of whom 460 returned voluntarily while 3,390 were deported).
During the same period, 1,154 registered refugees returned from Pakistan, 461 from
the Islamic Republic of Iran and 34 from other countries. The number of registered
refugees returning to Afghanistan was 64 per cent lower than during the same period
in 2018 (which was 4,214 from Pakistan, 322 from the Islamic Republic of Iran and
61 from other countries). Between 1 January and 30 April 2019, 149,894
undocumented Afghans returned from the Islamic Republic of Iran, a 34 per cent
decrease compared with the same time period in 2018 (227,890). On 30 March 2019,
the Government of Pakistan extended its Afghan Citizen Cards programme for some
327,000 Afghan nationals residing in Pakistan until 30 April 2019. A fghanistan and
Pakistan agreed to the return of 50,000 card holders during 2019. In February, the
Government of Pakistan began issuing new cards after a one-year hiatus, issuing more
than 150,000 new cards for a new total of 470,000.
49. From 15 February to 31 March, 46,457 trauma cases received treatment, a 23
per cent increase over the same period in 2018. The need for trauma care was
particularly high in Nangarhar, Kandahar, and Helmand provinces, where clashes
have taken a heavy toll and access to care has been reduced. During the reporting
period, 15 partners from the health cluster provided consultations to 54,253 people,
59 per cent of whom were women and girls.
50. Precipitation in the country was high yet erratic during the reporting period. The
impact of the drought is still widely felt: the main planting season was compromised
by the drought because seed was unavailable. The main harvest, expected in May and
June, is likely to result in serious shortfalls of staple crops, the precise extent of whi ch
will be measured in the coming weeks. As at 31 March, the humanitarian community
had reached 4.3 million people with lifesaving assistance as part of the drought
response which started in late 2018. The majority of those reached (3.9 million) were
in drought-affected rural areas. Despite some families leaving informal sites in
Badghis Province to return to their villages, a considerable number of people are
expected to remain displaced in the coming months, due to conflict in their places of
origin or because they missed the opportunity to plant crops. The United Nations and
humanitarian partners will soon curtail their assistance to the drought -induced
displaced persons near the cities of Herat and Qala-e Naw, and focus relief efforts on
areas of origin. Seasonal floods caused by heavy rainfall affected 265,355 people in
17 provinces, destroying or damaging more than 35,000 houses in March and April.
Farah, Kandahar and Badghis were the most affected provinces. The majority of those
affected received emergency humanitarian assistance, although some access
challenges were reported in Helmand and Farah provinces. Annual seasonal floods,
while largely predictable, cause major financial and infrastructure damages in
addition to humanitarian needs.
51. Six cases of polio have been recorded so far in 2019, all in the southern region,
where polio vaccination campaigns have faced challenges related to access and a ban
on house-to-house vaccination has remained in place since April 2018. In April 2019,
those bans were extended to all polio eradication activities, at the risk of
compromising the gains made in polio eradication. Notably, since May 2018, five out
of six confirmed cases have been reported in areas with compromised access. A
nationwide immunization campaign started in April 2019, targeting 9.9 million
children across 29 provinces, and approximately 450,000 children remain
inaccessible due to the aforementioned bans, largely in the southern, eastern and
central regions of Afghanistan.
52. During the reporting period, the United Nations and partners remobilized female
deminers in Bamyan, in an effort to declare Bamyan the first province to be “landmine
free”. From February to April 2019, the United Nations and its partners cleared
1.3 km2 of contaminated land considered to be highly impacted by explosive hazards,
12/16

19-09080

A/73/902
S/2019/493

benefiting 14 communities. Responding to the protection concerns of returnees from
Pakistan and the Islamic Republic of Iran, 149,445 people received United Nations funded risk education across the country during the reporting period.
53. In March, responding to the threats posed by explosive hazards due to
intra-insurgency fighting, the United Nations and partners provided explosive hazard
risk education sessions to more than 2,000 displaced persons as part of the internally
displaced persons response in Chapa Darra District in Kunar Province. In March, the
Directorate of Mine Action Coordination of Afghanistan drafted national standards
for the clearance of abandoned improvised mines, the first international humanitarian
standard of its kind.
54. Constraints on humanitarian access continued, with a total of 134 ac cess-related
incidents affecting the United Nations and humanitarian partners between 28 January
and 22 April, including the killing of 5 aid workers, while an additional 15 aid workers
were injured and another 15 were abducted. The trend towards deliberat e attacks on
health facilities and health workers and the forced closure of health facilities
continued: almost 50 per cent of access constraints affected health facilities, services
or personnel.
55. The 2019 component of the 2018–2021 humanitarian response plan identifies
6.3 million people in need of humanitarian assistance. The plan aims to reach up to
4.5 million people and calls for a budget of $611.8 million. According to the Financial
Tracking Service, $126.3 million in humanitarian funding had bee n received as at
23 May 2019, or 20.6 per cent of the total funding required for the humanitarian
response in 2019.

VI. Counter-narcotics
56. The Government, supported by international partners, continued its counter narcotics operations. From 15 February to 15 May, law enforcement authorities
conducted a total of 1,130 counter-narcotic operations, leading to the seizure of
1,236 kg of heroin, 946 kg of morphine, 4,533 kg of opium, 73,948 kg of hashish,
351 kg of methamphetamine, 27,419 tablets of 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine
(MDMA), 62,454 kg of solid precursor chemicals, 10,726 litres of liquid precursor
chemicals and 127 kg of poppy seeds. In total, 11 heroin manufacturing laboratories
were dismantled. The operations led to the arrest of 1,338 suspects and the related
seizure of 170 vehicles, 224 weapons and 5 radios. Two officers of the Afghan
Counter-Narcotics Police were killed and 38 wounded while carrying out operations.
57. From 15 to 17 April, officers of the Afghan Counter-Narcotics Police Mobile
Detection Team trained counterparts in Uzbekistan on risk analysis, search techniques
and drug identification. Supported by the United Nations, the training was the first of
its kind delivered by the Team outside Afghanistan. The Afghan Governm ent also
continued its efforts to mainstream women’s economic empowerment in alternative
livelihood sectors. Ten women-led small and medium enterprises participated in a
jobs and fair exhibition held to celebrate International Women ’s Day on 8 March in
Kabul, where over 80 companies and organizations exhibited alternative development
products.

VII. Mission support
58. As at 15 May, the Mission’s vacancy rates were 8 per cent for international staff,
6 per cent for National Professional Officers and 4 per cent for national staff,
compared with the approved rates of 7 per cent, 5 per cent and 3 per cent, respectively.
19-09080

13/16

A/73/902
S/2019/493

The proportion of female staff remained very low, at 34 per cent for international
staff, 40 per cent for United Nations Volunteers, 12 per cent for National Professional
Officers and 8 per cent for national staff. In an effort to improve the gender ratio
among national staff, the Mission launched a National United Nations Volunteer
programme aimed at establishing a pool of qualified female candidates for possible
future recruitment to national staff positions. Between 1 January and 15 May,
UNAMA conducted 239 road and 22 air missions, as well as 1,385 reverse outreach
missions, during which district representatives visited UNAMA field offic es.

VIII. Observations
59. A year after the unprecedented 2018 Eid al-Fitr unilateral ceasefires, hopes that
violence would abate have not yet been fulfilled. I deeply regret both the continued
fighting despite ongoing talks between the United States of America and the Taliban,
and the postponement of the intra-Afghan dialogue. Those setbacks constitute a
reminder that progress towards peace is not a linear process, though the unacceptable
toll in lives and the lost chances for future prosperity increase with each day. With a
renewed sense of urgency, I call for the beginning of direct talks between the
Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban and support ongoing efforts towards a
dialogue inclusive of all national constituencies. The United Nations stands ready to
assist with efforts towards the peaceful resolution of the confli ct.
60. To be lasting, peace must be based on a broad consensus. Women must have full
participation in the peace process, and the human rights of all must be guaranteed.
The social gains of the past years must be preserved and built upon. Already, Afghans
gathering in different forums have expressed their hopes for the results of an
intra-Afghan dialogue. Those include a rapid reduction in violence; the preservation
of civil, political and socioeconomic gains, including for women, minorities and other
vulnerable groups; a guarantee of fundamental freedoms and equal protection under
the law; and participation in national and local-level governance. Though sometimes
arduous, the process of building national consensus requires sustained efforts to
broaden participation and strengthen the groundwork for community acceptance of
an eventual settlement.
61. The continued violence against journalists and media workers in Afghanistan
remains alarming and compromises Afghans’ rights to freedom of expression and to
information that underpins an inclusive society. All parties to the conflict must respec t
national and international standards for the protection of journalists, media workers
and human rights defenders, and take measures to promote civil society spaces. I
welcome the continued efforts by the Government to promote and protect women ’s
rights and women’s participation in the peace process, and the development of a
second phase of the National Action Plan for the Women of Afghanistan.
62. At the 2018 Geneva Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan, there was a strong
message that peace, State-building and reform-driven development are mutually
reinforcing and indispensable. Those elements are crucial to achieving the levels of
growth that can generate opportunities for the growing population of the country and
reinforce a potential peace settlement. The active engagement of the Government of
Afghanistan with regional partners and its commitment to regional connectivity as a
foundation for economic growth is highly encouraging. I call on all neighbours of
Afghanistan to seize those opportunities for cooperation and do their part to build a
prosperous and peaceful future.
63. I welcome the finalization of the results from the long -delayed 2018 legislative
elections and the inauguration of a new parliament for the first time since 2011.
However, the last-minute introduction of untested biometric technology, a protracted
14/16

19-09080

A/73/902
S/2019/493

counting process and controversies over results caused serious damage to the
credibility of the electoral management bodies and eroded public confidence in the
electoral process. Given the importance of credible elections for the legitimacy of the
political system, it is my expectation that Afghan electoral stakeholders, including the
Government, political leaders and parties and observer groups, as well as the
Independent Election Commission and the Electoral Complaints Commission, will
integrate the lessons learned from the parliamentary vote into preparations for the
upcoming presidential election scheduled for 28 September.
64. Delivering inclusive and credible elections will be a formi dable challenge.
Electoral timelines are extremely tight; meeting them will require realistic and timely
decision-making as well as unity of purpose to address the manifold technical and
security challenges. In parallel, all stakeholders must work cohesive ly to rebuild trust
in the electoral process. Afghan citizens have already expressed their commitment to
the democratic exercise of their political rights, having put their lives at risk to vote
in past elections. At this critical juncture, I emphasize onc e again that elections are a
shared responsibility of all stakeholders. Leaders from the Government and the
opposition, political parties and candidates are urged to contribute to an enabling
environment for electoral preparations, campaigning and polling; to refrain from
political interference with the decisions and operations of electoral management
bodies; and to engage constructively on elections-related reform and implementation
efforts.
65. Armed conflict continues to take a high toll on the lives of Afghan civilians. The
continued targeting of civilians by anti-government elements, mainly through the use
of improvised explosive devices, combined with the record number of civilian deaths
attributed to air strikes and search operations by pro -government forces, underscores
the violence confronting the people of Afghanistan, and particularly children. I urge
all parties to the conflict to respect their obligations under international humanitarian
law and human rights law and to take immediate measures to prevent civilian
casualties, including during the forthcoming voter registration process and elections.
There can be no justification for the recent Taliban attack against Counterpart
International, an international non-governmental organization focused on
democratization, civic engagement and support to civil society.
66. Restrictions to humanitarian access, the rise in attacks against health facilities
and personnel and continued restrictions on polio vaccination campaigns have
increased the vulnerability and suffering of those who are most in need. All parties to
the conflict must respect their international obligations related to humanitarian access
and the protection of health facilities and personnel.
67. I take note of the legislative and policy steps taken by the Government to address
the issue of torture and ill-treatment of conflict-related detainees, and of the overall
reduction in the percentage of conflict-related detainees reporting torture and/or
ill-treatment in Government-run detention facilities. However, accountability
measures fell short of relevant international standards, as nearly one in three detainees
still provided credible accounts of having been subject to ill -treatment and torture,
according to the latest report by UNAMA and OHCHR on the treatment of conflictrelated detainees. Efforts must be increased to ensure the effective implementation of
the policies to combat ill-treatment and torture.
68. Ensuring the integrity and accountability of government institutions is essential
to their performance and legitimacy. The Government has taken important steps to
advance its subnational governance, public administration and anti -corruption
agenda, including by strengthening mechanisms for corruption prosecutions. It
remains critical that the institutional set-up of anti-corruption bodies be consolidated
and that the new Anti-Corruption Commission operate independently and with
19-09080

15/16

A/73/902
S/2019/493

adequate resources, in line with the requirements of article 6 of the United Nations
Convention against Corruption. Strengthening the ability of the country’s law
enforcement entities to execute arrest warrants and summonses, and accelerating
justice reforms, should be prioritized. Those actions are essential to meet widespread
demands for more transparency as well as protection and equal treatment under the
law.
69. I thank the United Nations personnel in Afghanistan and my Special
Representative for Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan, Tadamichi Yamamoto, for their continue d dedication under
challenging conditions to fulfilling our commitments in support of the people of
Afghanistan.

16/16

19-09080
