S/PV.9286

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9286th meeting

Friday, 17 March 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Afonso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mozambique)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Mr. Boateng
Mrs. Shino
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-07879 (E)
*2307879*

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9286

The meeting was called to order at 3.55 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Denmark, Lithuania and Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I propose to invite
Ms. Daria Morozova to participate in this meeting.
Would any
this proposal?

member

like

to

comment

on

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): The United States requests a procedural vote
on the participation of Ms. Morozova as a proposed
briefer for this meeting. We regret having to call this
vote, given that the majority of Council members
already expressed serious concerns to the presidency
yesterday and today.
Let me be clear, the United States strongly supports
civil society briefers who can share their relevant
experience and expertise with the Council. The
perspectives of civil society participants are essential,
and they enrich this Council’s discussion.
However, we must note that a certain Council
member proposed the addition of Ms. Morozova as
“an ombudsperson of the Donetsk People’s Republic”.
Following the Russian Federation’s attempt last year to
illegally annex Ukraine’s internationally recognized
territory, the General Assembly overwhelmingly
adopted resolution ES-11/4. That resolution specifically
called on all States and international organizations to
not recognize any alteration of the status of the Donetsk
region of Ukraine and to refrain from any dealings
that might be interpreted as recognizing any such
altered status.
Consistent with that General Assembly resolution,
it is not appropriate for the Council to invite, in any
2/29

17/03/2023

capacity, someone who purports to be the ombudsperson
of the so-called Donetsk People’s Republic. The
invitation to that specific person is a blatant and
transparent attempt to have the Council appear to
legitimize the Russian Federation’s illegal attempt
at annexation and to implicitly extend recognition to
illegitimate authorities. Simply removing references to
their positions or titles does not alter that fact. Council
members can and should draw their own conclusions
about any attempts to draw reductionist parallels to
other incomparable situations.
We regret that a procedural vote is necessary. We
call on all Council members to act consistent with the
relevant General Assembly resolutions and not support
the proposed briefer’s participation in the meeting
today. The United States will not support any attempt
to legitimize the Russian Federation’s illegal attempted
annexation of another United Nations Member State’s
territory and will therefore vote “no”, and we urge
others to do the same.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We insist on the participation of the briefer
we have proposed to invite to today’s meeting. Our
delegation introduced the proposal to invite Ms. Daria
Morozova based on the sole consideration of giving
the Security Council an opportunity to receive firsthand information about the catastrophic humanitarian
situation in the region of Donbas, which is inextricably
linked to the humanitarian situation in Ukraine.
Since 2014, the residents of Donbas have been forced
to survive shelling by the Ukrainian armed forces,
enduring such deprivation in the absence of any reaction
whatsoever on the part of the international community.
Our Western colleagues have scrupulously sidestepped
that issue, in line with their policy to whitewash any
crimes by Kyiv, regardless of how heinous they may be.
The briefer we proposed is a native of Donbas who
has lived her entire life in that region and since 2014 has
been engaged in active humanitarian work, helping those
fellow countrymen and women who have suffered from
Kyiv’s aggression. She has been engaged in prisoner
exchanges and previously participated in the work of
the Trilateral Contact Group on the implementation
of the Minsk agreements, among other things. Her
experience and expertise are unique. Daria Morozova
engages with ordinary people in Donbas on a daily basis
and is willing to share her observations, which would
give the Council an overview of the real situation on
the ground. We believe that our briefer fully meets the
23-07879

17/03/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

criteria set out in rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure. We propose that she be heard in her
personal capacity as a humanitarian activist.
We call on the members of the Council to support the
proposal to invite Ms. Daria Morozova to participate as
a briefer in today’s meeting. Contrary to the assertions
made by Western delegations, members’ support will
in no way imply a recognition of any international legal
realities whatsoever — those issues are completely
unrelated. This is also a matter of freedom of speech.
At the moment, we are talking merely about the
invitation of a competent briefer to further advise the
Council on the humanitarian situation, in line with
rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
Otherwise, today’s meeting will become yet another
one-sided Western event that ignores the root causes of
the Ukraine crisis.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): The purpose of today’s
meeting is to draw the attention of the Security Council
to the dire humanitarian situation in Ukraine caused
by Russia’s aggression and flagrant transgression of
international law. Three General Assembly resolutions
(resolutions ES-11/1, ES-11/2 and ES-11/4), adopted
by an overwhelming majority of Member States, have
made it clear that the Russian Federation is in blatant
violation of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law and is responsible for the humanitarian
crisis in Ukraine and beyond, and that Russia should
withdraw from Ukraine and respect its sovereignty and
territorial integrity. The arrest warrant issued today
by the International Criminal Court against Russia’s
Commander-in-Chief only affirms that responsibility.
It is clear once again that with its attitude today,
the Russian Federation is trying to do what it does
best — divert the focus away from the issues at hand
and refrain from taking responsibility by creating a
smokescreen. That is yet another deplorable attempt to
misuse the Council for narrow interests other than the
raison d’être of this organ.
Furthermore, in extending such an invitation
Russia is rubbing salt into the wound by inviting
a representative of the so-called Donetsk people’s
republic in a desperate attempt to legitimize what can
never be legitimized — the invasion and annexation
by force of a territory of another sovereign country.
While reaffirming our unwavering commitment to
giving unhindered access to civil society briefers in the
work of the Council, we reiterate our position that the
Russian Federation’s attitude is a deviation from that

S/PV.9286

principle. To allow the participation of an illegal entity
in a Council meeting would set a dangerous precedent.
We therefore do not consider the briefer proposed by
the Russian Federation to be competent to the purpose
at hand, as stipulated in rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure. Albania therefore
opposes extending an invitation by the Council to the
additional briefer proposed by the Russian Federation,
and we kindly ask the other Member States of the
Council to do the same — vote “no”.
The President: In the light of the comments made
by Council members, I propose to put to the vote the
proposal, under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, to extend an invitation to Ms. Daria
Morozova to brief the Security Council under the agenda
item “Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine”.
I shall now put the proposal to the vote.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation): Could you
please, Mr. President, specify which word — “yes” or
“no” — means what?
The President: Those in favour of the proposal
to extend an invitation to Ms. Daria Morozova will
vote “yes”. Those against extending an invitation to
Ms. Daria Morozova will vote “no”. Those abstaining
will abstain. If that is clear, we shall proceed.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Brazil, China, Ghana, Russian Federation
Against:
Albania, Ecuador, France, Japan, Malta,
Switzerland, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Gabon, Mozambique, United Arab Emirates
The President: The proposal received 4 votes in
favour, 8 against and 3 abstentions. Having failed to
obtain the required number of votes, the proposal to
invite Ms. Daria Morozova to participate in the meeting
has been rejected.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.

23-078793/29

S/PV.9286

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

17/03/2023

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We deplore the fact that a number of
delegations today voted against our proposed briefer.
We see it as a display of egregious hypocrisy and double
standards when representatives of Donbas, which for
nine years has suffered thanks to the war unleashed on
it by Kyiv, are denied the right to address the Security
Council on far-fetched pretexts. It only confirms the
fact that these members do not consider the residents
of Donbas to be human beings and do not give a damn
about their suffering. Our Western colleagues are
afraid that if the voices of truth make themselves heard,
all their efforts to whitewash their clients in Kyiv will
be in vain. In attempting to avoid that they resort to
procedural tricks in a petty, unscrupulous game. To be
frank, it looks disgraceful.

called Donetsk republic, a territory of Ukraine that
has been illegally annexed by Russia, have absolutely
nothing in common. Regrettably, it is not the first
time we have heard such comparisons, but desperate
times call for desperate measures. Need I remind
our Russian colleagues that the International Court
of Justice issued an advisory opinion stating that the
Kosovo declaration of independence, adopted in 2008,
did not violate international law? That very same world
court issued another opinion in March last year, and we
know why. Need I remind our Russian colleagues that
Kosovo’s international recognition is well established,
including among many around this table, while the
so-called Donetsk and Luhansk peoples’ republics are
territories annexed by force and exist only in Russia’s
plans and dreams?

I want to underscore that we have never stooped
that low. We did not object when our Western colleagues
proposed a briefer for the meeting that we convened on
Russophobia (see S/PV.9280), even though his so-called
briefing was a pack of lies and traditional Western
narratives and the upshot was that he did not contribute
constructively to the discussion in any way. What has
happened today with Ms. Morozova is reason for us to
think about how we should consider our colleagues’
requests under rule 39 in future. Our United States
colleague said that hearing briefers from unrecognized
territories is unacceptable and constitutes a violation
of Council resolutions. However, in that case, inviting
representatives of Kosovo to the Council, for example,
constitutes is a clear violation of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). We will take our American
colleagues’ principled position on the matter into
consideration, because otherwise we will see yet more
double standards from the United States.

Finally, I do not need to remind our Russian
colleagues that Kosovo and Serbia come here together
and negotiate to find mutually agreed solutions to
common problems, not with bombs and war but with
words and dialogue. That is another big difference.
The President: The representative of the
Russian Federation has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): After listening to that passionate statement
by our Albanian colleague regarding the presence of
Serbia during meetings under resolution 1244 (1999), I
wish to state that we have nothing against that. However,
I would like to ask him a question, and perhaps he will
venture to respond to it here in this Chamber, which is
whether he views Kosovo as a territory recognized by
the United Nations.

We regret that the Council’s work has once again
been taken hostage by the unscrupulous conduct of
Western delegations openly seeking to advance their
own opportunistic interests.

The President: In accordance with rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite His
Excellency Mr. Olaf Skoog, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.

The President: The representative of Albania has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I will be very brief. I regret
having to take the floor again, but after hearing what
the Russian delegation had to say, I want to set the
record straight, because this is very important.

I give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.

Comparing two realities that have absolutely
nothing in common is an entirely artificial exercise.
The Republic of Kosovo and the prefabricated so4/29

begin

its

Mr. Griffiths: When I spoke to the Council about
the situation in Ukraine last month (see S/PV.9254),
I highlighted the humanitarian impact of the fullscale war since it began a year ago. I spoke then of
the death, destruction and hardship that the war has
inflicted and continues to inflict on the people of
23-07879

17/03/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9286

Ukraine. I shared facts about the resulting casualties;
the families bereaved; the homeless and the destitute,
with two out of every five people in Ukraine in need
of assistance to survive; and the people forced to flee,
including more than 8 million refugees displaced to
neighbouring countries.

everything possible to make sure that the Black Sea
Grain Initiative can continue. We continue to engage
closely with all parties. This week, foodstuffs have
continued to be transported out of Ukraine through the
maritime humanitarian corridors, under the oversight
of the Joint Coordination Centre in Istanbul.

Today, if you allow me, Mr. President, I want to
focus on the reverberations of this war around the
world, a world already reeling before the war began
in February last year from multiple shocks — hunger,
conflict, the coronavirus disease, the climate emergency
and the cost-of-living crisis. The war has had very
significant implications for global food insecurity. As
we all know, both the Russian Federation and Ukraine
are leading suppliers of key food commodities. In
addition, the Russian Federation is also a top exporter
of fertilizer. The world relies on those supplies and
has done so for many years — and so does the United
Nations in providing help for those in need. The World
Food Programme (WFP) sources much of the wheat
for the global humanitarian response each year from
Ukraine. Last February, when shipping operations were
suspended from Ukrainian ports in the Black Sea, the
ripple effects were immediate. By March, following
uninterrupted increases dating from the second half of
2020, global food prices had reached record highs. The
price of fertilizer has been impacted greatly and still
remains more than 200 times higher than it was in 2019.
In lower-income countries, some small farmers found
themselves priced out of the market.

With regard to the parallel memorandum of
understanding with the Russian Federation, my
colleague the Secretary-General of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, Rebeca
Grynspan Mayufis, and the Secretary-General of
the United Nations are together sparing no effort to
facilitate its full implementation. We have indeed made
meaningful progress. Impediments remain, however,
notably with regard to payment systems. There is more
to do, and our efforts to overcome those remaining
impediments will continue unabated. It is vital for
global food security that both of those agreements
continue and that they be fully implemented.

Reversing those trends, as we may all remember,
was a matter of urgency for the international
community — hence the Black Sea Grain Initiative and
the parallel memorandum of understanding between
the Russian Federation and the United Nations on the
facilitation in that second agreement of Russian food
and fertilizer exports. The signing of those agreements
was a critical step in the broader fight against global
food insecurity, especially in developing countries. As
a result, markets have been calmed and global food
prices have indeed continued to fall. Under the Black
Sea Grain Initiative, close to 25 million metric tons
of foodstuffs have been safely exported from Ukraine
without incident since August. The World Food
Programme has been able to transport more than half
a million metric tons of wheat to support humanitarian
operations in Afghanistan, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia
and Yemen. And right now, under the leadership of
our Secretary-General, the United Nations is doing

The world faces an unstable global economy.
Poverty is growing. And when we look at where we
want to be — the targets we set out in the Sustainable
Development Goals — it is very clear that we are a
long way off track. The scale of humanitarian needs,
as discussed frequently in this Chamber, has vastly
outpaced the resources available to meet those needs.
Globally, almost 347 million people in 69 countries need
humanitarian aid, a statistic so dire that it hardly bears
repetition. An unprecedented $54 billion is required
this year to meet those needs, and millions will suffer
if we fail to raise that amount. In 2022, Member States
made significant financial efforts to meet the growth
in needs as total humanitarian funding — thanks to
the generosity of many Member States — reached a
historic high of just under $39 billion. We cannot be
certain if that level of financing can be achieved again
this year, yet it is clear that we need even more support
than that — from Member States, from the public, from
a generous humankind — so that we can deliver on
our most sacred promise to protect the vulnerable and
provide a future for them and their families.
We also need closer collaboration between the
humanitarian and development communities and the
international financial institutions. Together, we must
seek sustainable solutions in order to provide the
basic services that can be relied on by families across
nations — sustainable solutions to the problems before
us, to those spiralling humanitarian needs to which I
have referred, to the debt crisis, and to the convergence

23-078795/29

S/PV.9286

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

of other problems on the horizon. To name just one
example, Somalia — of which we have often spoken in
this Chamber — faces the extraordinary, unprecedented
and tragic sixth consecutive failure of the rainy season.
More than ever, in this context, we need a political
solution to the war in Ukraine. The people of Ukraine
deserve peace, first and foremost. They deserve to turn
the page on this terrible war, as we all do.
The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
Before addressing the substantive topic of today’s
meeting, I would like to make it clear that Ecuador
voted against the proposal to include Ms. Morozova
as a third briefer, based on the original request of
the Russian Federation to have her participate in an
institutional capacity on behalf of a self-declared
people’s republic that my country does not and will
never recognize. Moreover, with its vote, Ecuador
facilitated the implementation of General Assembly
resolution ES-11/4, which was adopted at its eleventh
emergency special session, convened pursuant to
Security Council resolution 2623 (2022) of 27 February
2022. Ecuador’s vote is without prejudice to our position
of openness towards the inclusion of diverse speakers
from interested delegations, regardless of their origin
or political position and, of course, from whatever
territory under full or partial occupation.
I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for his briefing. I am also grateful for the
invaluable work of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and its team on the ground.
On 6 February, at the briefing on the humanitarian
situation in Ukraine (see S/PV.9254), Ecuador concluded
its statement by acknowledging the contribution of the
Black Sea Grain Initiative to alleviating the global
impacts of food insecurity. On that occasion, we
called on the Council to reiterate its support for the
work of the Secretary-General and to give it effective
expression. We believe that the Initiative’s renewal and
implementation should be automatic and unimpeded.
Today, 24 hours before the 120-day deadline for
the extension of the agreement, I would like to focus
on this central point, echoing Secretary-General
António Guterres, who considers the Grain Initiative
6/29

17/03/2023

to be a beacon of hope, possibility and relief. At the
17 March 2022 meeting (see S/PV.8998), exactly one
year ago, Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo warned of
the impacts that the conflict was already having on the
world and, most severely, on the poor, having disrupted
supply chains and driven the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) Food
Price Index to its highest levels. As host of the FAO
Regional Conference held in Quito in March last year,
Ecuador can confirm that, then and now, the impact of
this war — beyond the borders of the country under
attack — remains a major concern for Latin America
and the Caribbean.
While grain exports alone do not constitute food aid
operations, they continue to play a vital role in alleviating
food insecurity and, thus, in the humanitarian situation
in several regions of the world. Within this tragic war,
the implementation of the Grain Initiative has worked
to save millions of lives from hunger, particularly in
the most fragile areas, by stabilizing prices, as has
been repeatedly confirmed by the FAO and the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development.
To this we must add the impact it has in terms
of World Food Programme (WFP) operations, with
benefits for girls and boys in Afghanistan, Yemen,
Somalia and Ethiopia, to mention but a few examples.
That must not stop, and WFP’s capacities must not be
adversely affected. We know that in the coming days,
three WFP vessels are scheduled to pick up 80,000
metric tons of wheat, amid the uncertainty of the
agreement extension process — which is occurring
despite the fact that the agreement text implied more
room for automatic renewal.
We are only two months away from the fifth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 2417 (2018),
through which the Council urged all parties to ensure
the proper functioning of food systems and markets in
situations of armed conflict. In that same resolution,
the Council recalled the link between armed conflict
and food insecurity and urged all parties to protect
civilians and the assets necessary for food production
and distribution.
Ecuador therefore insists on the need to respect food
and water supply systems and recalls the prohibition
against attacking, destroying, removing or rendering
useless the assets that are indispensable to the survival
of the civilian population, including with regard to
agricultural assets and crops.
23-07879

17/03/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

We are not surprised, but we are concerned about
the findings published by the FAO in December on the
impact of this war on agriculture and rural livelihoods
in Ukraine, with tens of billions of dollars in losses
from households and the destruction of machinery,
equipment, storage facilities, crops, and agricultural
inputs and land. Ecuador deplores the fact that, thus
far in 2023, attacks on critical civilian infrastructure,
including energy, have continued in a recurrent manner.
Finally and preliminarily, I wish to express my
delegation’s grave concern about the contents of the
report of the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry on Ukraine, established by Human Rights
Council resolution 49/1, circulated yesterday, which
reflects the most cruel violations and abuses of human
rights and the most atrocious violations of international
humanitarian law. Ecuador will not tire of reiterating
that nothing exempts the parties to the conflict from
complying with their obligations under the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and the other core instruments of
international humanitarian law.
I conclude by recalling that yesterday marked
exactly one year since the International Court of Justice
ordered the Russian Federation to immediately suspend
military operations in Ukraine. We therefore insist that
the Court’s order be complied with.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
The Russian aggression against Ukraine is being
carried out in violation of the fundamental principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and of all treaties
protecting civilians. The General Assembly again
condemned that aggression in a clear and strong manner
on 23 February (see A/ES-11/PV.19).
For the past year, millions of Ukrainians have been
victims of the abuses committed by the Russian armed
forces and their Wagner supporters. They have killed,
injured thousands of civilians, tortured and raped,
forced millions from their homes, deported children and
deliberately targeted civilian infrastructure, including
schools, hospitals and energy facilities. The United
Nations has documented those massive violations of
international humanitarian and international human
rights law.
France notes the arrest warrant issued today by the
judges of the International Criminal Court, at the request
of the Prosecutor’s Office, against President Vladimir

S/PV.9286

Putin and Russian Commissioner for Children’s Rights
Maria Lvova-Belova. The Court believes there is
sufficient evidence to establish their involvement in the
deportation and transfer of Ukrainian children.
Russia sought to weaken the resistance of the
Ukrainian people, especially as the country entered
winter. Eighteen million people are now in need of
humanitarian assistance. Nevertheless, the Ukrainian
people continue to show admirable determination and
courage. To support them, we organized the “Solidarity
with the Ukrainian People” conference in Paris on
13 December, which raised more than €1 billion in
order to meet their urgent needs.
Russia must allow humanitarian actors access to the
civilian population, in accordance with international
humanitarian law. Those responsible for abuses must
be held accountable before the Ukrainian courts and
the International Criminal Court, whose investigations
we support.
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine is having
considerable negative repercussions on the world, for
which Russia alone bears responsibility. By attacking
Ukraine’s agricultural infrastructure and restricting
maritime exports, it seeks to exploit certain third
countries’ vulnerabilities to price fluctuations or to
grain supplies.
To limit the worsening of global food insecurity
and malnutrition due to Russia’s aggression against
Ukraine, the Secretary-General allowed the Black Sea
Grain Initiative to be concluded last July. This initiative
has produced the expected effects. As the SecretaryGeneral recalled last Monday, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations Food Price Index,
which had reached record levels in March 2022, has
decreased for 10 consecutive months. Since its signing,
the Black Sea Grain Initiative has resulted in the export
of more than 24 million tons of grain. Some 55 per cent
of these exports were destined for developing countries.
There should be no blackmail on extending the
Initiative. Ukrainian maritime grain exports must
continue unhindered in order to combat global food
insecurity. In this regard, we welcome the commitment
of the Secretary-General and the contribution
of Türkiye.
France will also continue to work with its European
partners to implement the solidarity corridors that
have enabled the export of more than 29 million tons

23-078797/29

S/PV.9286

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

of grain and other food products by land and sea. It
also welcomes Ukraine’s grain donations within the
framework of the “Grain from Ukraine” initiative, to
which we have contributed.
In the face of this aggression, which has had
unbearable consequences for the civilian population,
France’s humanitarian, as well as military and financial,
support to Ukraine will continue for as long as it is
needed. We will continue to make the necessary efforts,
alongside Ukraine, to achieve peace. That is what we
mean by our support for the peace plan presented by
President Zelenskyy at the Group of 20 summit, which
constitutes a path towards a just and lasting peace
in Ukraine.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to join others in thanking Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths for his informative briefing today. We support
his strong message on the ripple effects of this conflict
across the globe.
The war in Ukraine does not exist in a vacuum.
Food insecurity is just one way the conflict manifests
on the global stage, and it becomes a greater threat with
each passing moment. We are meeting in the Security
Council Chamber the day before the expiration of the
Black Sea Grain Initiative, one of the few successes
amid the tragedy of this conflict.
For the purposes of today’s discussion, I will focus
on the immediate humanitarian needs worldwide that
Martin Griffiths has just outlined. Let us remember
why the Initiative is so important, the good it has done,
and why we support its full renewal.
Looking back at the outset of the conflict last year,
a spike in food prices threatened to send tens of millions
into extreme poverty around the world. Within a week,
prices of wheat futures had jumped almost 60 per cent.
As the global humanitarian system struggles to respond
to the overwhelming need around the world, it is
forced to contend with the further strain of these price
rises — all of which is taking place against the backdrop
of an already stressed post-pandemic global economy.
But there is cause for some hope. The impact on
global markets has been cushioned by the Black Sea
Grain Initiative. The United Nations estimates that the
reduction of prices for staple foods, as a result of the
Black Sea Grain Initiative, has indirectly prevented
some 100 million people from falling into extreme
poverty. Some 24 million tons of grain and over 1,600
8/29

17/03/2023

secure-vessel voyages have made it through the Black
Sea thanks to the agreement, and 55 per cent of these
food exports are going to developing countries.
These movements represent more than simply the
grain being shipped. Injecting more food into the global
market brings food prices down. Therefore, even though
exports may not be going only to the poorest countries,
they are positively benefiting global market prices for
all, and they need to be preserved. Accordingly, we
strongly support the Secretary-General’s and Türkiye’s
continued engagement with Russia and Ukraine to
ensure the Initiative’s full renewal and address any
issues that impede its implementation. We also note
that relevant international humanitarian law obligations
with regard to civilian vessels remain in force, even if
the Black Sea Grain Initiative lapses.
The United Arab Emirates also urges the full
implementation of the memorandum of understanding
on Russian fertilizer and food products. We encourage
good faith efforts to address any ongoing issues related
to insurance, financial and logistical infrastructure,
and we stand ready to support this in any way.
Yet even if implemented in full, the contagion effect
of war will continue to affect agriculture. Blackouts
across Ukraine, financial constraints for Ukraine’s
farmers and once-fertile land that now sits fallow all
contribute to a new, more difficult, reality for food
production. In 2021, Ukraine saw record levels of grain
harvested. Within just one year, that was estimated to
drop more than 40 per cent, and areas available to grow
corn have fallen by 30 per cent since the outset of war.
Energy is another area that has been thrown into
turmoil as a result of the ripple effects of this conflict.
The United Arab Emirates remains committed to
working with the international community on this and
to be a responsible partner.
Even though the negative impacts of the war
extend far beyond this conflict, they cannot compare
to the dismal humanitarian situation on the ground.
The impact on children in Ukraine alone is horrifying.
Every day this conflict goes on, more children are
exposed to the risk of injury and death. We underline
the absolute importance of the protection of children in
armed conflict as an irrefutable obligation.
The United Arab Emirates is now working on the
delivery of a $100 million assistance package to Ukraine
to ease the suffering on the ground. But as we have said
23-07879

17/03/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

before in this Chamber, another year of this conflict
will mean another year of lives lost, of communities
destroyed and of global division.
Now firmly in its second year, the war is no longer
a tragedy of a time and place, but risks becoming a
protracted, immutable conflict with no end in sight.
The continued pursuit of a complete military victory
is a barrier to securing a just and lasting peace. We
welcome efforts by China, among others, to try to bring
the two sides together for mediated talks.
The Security Council must work to find solutions
to the ongoing conflict, and we all need to maintain
our focus on resolving conflicts in other countries
and regions that also remain in dire need, working
together as a Council on those contexts as well in the
coming period.
The ravages of war are giving rise to a humanitarian
crisis both within and beyond Ukrainian borders. We
therefore share a universal, clear and urgent interest in
bringing this war to a peaceful, just and enduring end.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Allow me first to comment on the vote at the beginning
of today’s meeting on the request for a briefer to
participate. My country would like to stress that, in
principle, we welcome the possibility for the Security
Council to invite briefers that it considers qualified under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure. We believe
that they can bring an important perspective to issues
within the Council’s competence. Today Switzerland
voted against the proposal to invite a proposed briefer
because we believe it is imperative to consider General
Assembly resolution ES-11/4 in making this decision.
In that resolution, all States are called upon to refrain
from any action or contact that could be interpreted
as recognizing a change in the status of the Ukrainian
regions declared annexed by Russia.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths
for his briefing and underline Switzerland’s appreciation
for his efforts, in particular those aimed at extending
the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
As has been said many times in this Chamber:
civilian persons and objects are not a target, and
international humanitarian law and human rights must
be respected. The humanitarian situation in Ukraine
continues to deteriorate. Switzerland is troubled by the
report and conclusions of the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine that were published

S/PV.9286

this week. We reiterate our support for the mandate and
the continuation of the work of the Commission.
We call on Russia to immediately begin to
de-escalate, cease all combat operations and withdraw
its troops without delay from all Ukrainian territory.
The humanitarian consequences of the war are being
felt throughout the world. Food and energy insecurity
has increased. That is particularly acute for people who
are suffering the consequences of armed conflict or
who live in extreme poverty. I would like to focus on
three points.
First, Switzerland condemns the continuing
strikes
on
civilian
infrastructure,
including
Russia’s indiscriminate attacks on Ukraine’s energy
infrastructure. Switzerland reiterates its call that
international humanitarian law must be fully respected.
Nothing can justify targeted attacks against civilian
persons and objects.
Secondly, Switzerland demands that humanitarian
workers be given unhindered access to the nearly
18 million people in need in Ukraine, including those
in the areas occupied by Russia.
Thirdly, we reiterate the fact that the Black Sea
Grain Initiative, along with the memorandum of
understanding on the export of Russian agricultural
products and fertilizers, is critical to global food
security. Facilitated by the Secretary-General and
Türkiye, the Initiative has allowed the export of
24 million tons of grain and more than 1,600 secure
vessel voyages through the Black Sea. The Food Price
Index of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations has been falling for the past 10 months,
after reaching record levels in March 2022.
The Initiative must continue. We call on all parties
to redouble their efforts to find a lasting solution to
alleviate the consequences of the war. We note the
importance of a long-term perspective that allows
for greater predictability. That is essential for the
Initiative’s planning and implementation. Switzerland
welcomes the good offices of the Secretary-General
in that regard and stands ready to provide its support,
particularly in its role as host State.
The international community continues to send
clear signals in support of solidarity and against
divisions, in support of dialogue and against violence
and in support of peace and against war. We all are
called on to contribute to a comprehensive, just and

23-078799/29

S/PV.9286

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

lasting peace in accordance with international law.
Until the Ukrainian population can enjoy such peace,
we will emphasize as often as necessary that civilian
people and objects are not a target.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths for his informative briefing.
Regrettably, Russia’s aggression against Ukraine,
in clear violation of international law, persists
despite the widespread calls to halt it on its one-year
anniversary last month. Russia’s unlawful aggression
has exacerbated the humanitarian situation in Ukraine
and in the world at large, which is deplorable.
The humanitarian crisis has worsened in 2023, with
222 million people in 53 countries unsure if they will
have access to food. Approximately 1 million individuals
in developing countries face extreme hunger. Russia’s
aggression against Ukraine has damaged the global
food supply and worsened the humanitarian situation.
In such times of precarious global food supplies,
the role of the Black Sea Grain Initiative has become
more critical than ever before. The Initiative has
enabled the export of 24 million metric tons of grain
from Ukrainian ports and more than 1,600 secure vessel
voyages through the Black Sea, with 55 per cent of food
exports going to developing countries. The Initiative
has been indispensable in decreasing the worldwide
cost of food and has provided vital assistance to those
who have been significantly affected by the war,
particularly in developing countries.
Japan commends the Secretary-General and his
team, including the relentless efforts of Mr. Griffiths,
along with those of Ms. Grynspan, to safeguard the
continuity and integrity of the Initiative by engaging
with the parties, including through the visit to Ukraine
and the meeting with the Russian Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs. Japan strongly supports an automatic
extension of the Black Sea Grain Initiative for the same
period and its further expansion and urges the parties
involved to collaborate in that regard.
Russia’s aggression has severely harmed Ukraine’s
agricultural sector, accounting for 10 per cent of its
gross domestic product and 25 per cent of exports. It
is vital to restore Ukraine’s agricultural production
capacity, not only for economic stability but also to
boost the global food supply. Last week, prioritizing
women and young farmers, Japan gave sunflower and
corn seeds to 400 smallholder farmers in Kharkiv,
10/29

17/03/2023

where agricultural production and farm income have
decreased owing to the war.
In addition to the $200 million already committed to
improve global food security after Russia’s aggression
last June, Japan decided to provide $50 million in foodrelated aid to countries in need in Asia, the Middle East
and Africa, and Ukraine.
The suffering in Ukraine and its ramifications
for global food security must come to an end. Japan
reaffirms its unwavering commitment to providing
the utmost support and standing in solidarity with the
people of Ukraine. For its part, Japan will continue to
actively pursue efforts to secure the global food supply,
thereby contributing to the maintenance of international
peace and security.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me thank UnderSecretary-General Griffiths for his update and for his
tireless efforts.
After 13 months of the continued “marry me or I
will kill you” approach of Russia in Ukraine, there is
little doubt that this war is a turning point in modern
history. It continues to challenge European security.
It has brought back nuclear sabre-rattling, and it has
disrupted the global economy, leaving energy and food
crises in its wake. But it has also been a moment of
awakening, reminding everyone that, for as long as
there are authoritarians around, peace should never be
taken for granted.
While the reality on the ground has revealed the
limits of this modern madness, persistent waves of deadly
missile strikes across Ukraine — the Russian death
signature — continue to destroy civilian infrastructure,
with no end in sight. They constitute crimes.
For months, we have heard here that Russia does not
attack civilians. But the reality — the hard and painful
reality — is completely different. More than 20,000
civilians have been killed or wounded; 14 million
people have been uprooted from their homes; 18 million
people require humanitarian assistance and protection;
and approximately 40 per cent of Ukrainians are unable
to afford or access enough food.
For months, we have heard here that Russia does
not commit crimes. The hard reality, which we know
and have denounced here, is now confirmed by the
report of the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry on Ukraine, an independent and impartial
expert body.
23-07879

17/03/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The Russian authorities have committed a wide
range of violations of international human rights law
and international humanitarian law in various regions
of Ukraine, many of which amount to war crimes.
Everything in the horrifying book of crimes is there:
attacks on civilians and energy-related infrastructure,
wilful killings, unlawful confinement, torture, rape and
other sexual violence, as well as the unlawful transfer
and deportation of children. Those facts show the depth
of depravity of the aggression — a total disregard for
civilians and the sanctity of human life.
The Ukrainian war poses one fundamental question
for all of us: what kind of world do we want to live
in? The current rules-based world order is the one that
emerged from the ashes of the Second World War, one
in which powerful autocratic regimes would no longer
be free to devour their neighbours, one in which more
democracies than ever have been able to flourish, and
one in which free markets and open trade have lifted
more people out of poverty than at any other time in the
history of the world.
It is that order that gave us almost 80 years without
wars of aggression capable of destabilizing the whole
world, wars such as the one that is happening now in
Ukraine. It is an order that is based on international
law and rules that are imposed by no one and agreed
to by free nations. It is an order that has ensured that
when there are transgressions there are consequences,
such as the arrest warrants issued today by the
International Criminal Court. The man who started
this war of choice — the man who is responsible for its
continuation and all the terrible consequences — is now
wanted by international justice. That is a first victory
for accountability. It is a first wakeup call — for all who
are fighting an unjust and illegal war in Ukraine — that
the impunity that has emboldened the perpetrators
during these long months of war has lasted far too long.
What happens in Ukraine today will concern all
of us tomorrow. That is why supporting Ukraine goes
beyond mere solidarity with people in need. It is an
urgent call for a world in peril. The Black Sea Grain
Initiative — a lifeline for dozens of countries around the
world — should be extended not with fixed deadlines
but indefinitely, because, as Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths clearly explained, the needs of hundreds of
millions of people for their daily food depend on it.
Every day of the war is making the world a more
and more dangerous place, without any reason and by

S/PV.9286

one man’s choice. It will therefore never be too late
for Russia to come to its senses, cease all hostilities
and unconditionally, completely and immediately
withdraw all its forces and military equipment from
the entire territory of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders. Russia can earn its respect back not
by committing more crimes but by returning to peace.
Until then, we will continue to stand with Ukraine and
its people in their just struggle to repel aggression and
restore their territory, independence and sovereignty.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Thanks to our former Western partners’
shameful and cowardly action preventing a briefer from
Donbas from speaking, today the Council will have to
listen to a statement by us that will be longer than usual.
Our discussions at the Security Council on the
humanitarian aspects of the Ukrainian crisis have
invariably followed the same script. The Western
countries emphasize the destruction of Ukraine’s
civilian infrastructure while ignoring the fact that
if the Kyiv regime had complied with the norms of
international humanitarian law, particularly those
regarding refraining from positioning heavy weapons
and air-defence systems in residential areas, civilians
would not have ended up in strike zones, since our army
exclusively targets energy and transport infrastructure
with high-precision strikes. We are doing that to degrade
Ukraine’s military potential, which the collective
West is doing everything in its power to strengthen by
resupplying it with weapons.
We have already held more than one meeting
in which the staggering profits that Western arms
corporations are making from supplying weapons
have been discussed. Of course they are not interested
in ending hostilities, and the politicians are slavishly
serving their interests. Only yesterday, when asked
about the Chinese peace plan for Ukraine, the United
States Defense Department spokesman John Kirby
said that a cessation of hostilities in Ukraine “would
be another continued violation of the Charter of the
United Nations”. But at the beginning of March,
Secretary Danilov of the National Security and Defence
Council of Ukraine complained that more and more
people in his country were advocating peace talks with
Russia. In other words, the Kyiv regime is upset that
Ukrainian citizens want peace with our country. As
they say, no comment is necessary. What is important
is ensuring that developing countries understand the
true goals of Kyiv and its Western partners as they once

23-0787911/29

S/PV.9286

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

again attempt to mobilize support for new anti-Russian
initiatives in the General Assembly. At the same time,
the Western countries continue to ignore the Armed
Forces of Ukraine’s systematic and deliberate shelling
of civilian objects in Donbas, which has gone on for
nine years. We therefore believe that in order to show
the full picture, our job today is to focus on what our
Western colleagues will not say.
Daria Morozova, our briefer today, the prospect
of whose statement so frightened our former Western
partners, had planned to provide a retrospective of
the devastating internal Ukrainian conflict and the
subsequent humanitarian crisis provoked by the
anti-constitutional coup d’état in Kyiv in February
2014. It would have been easier for her, as a native
of Donbas, to do, but she has asked us to share with
Council members some of the themes from the briefing
she prepared.
Mass peaceful protests in majority-Russianspeaking regions became a natural response to the new
authorities’ unconstitutional measures. People took to
the streets in the hope that they would be heard. All they
asked was to meet with Kyiv’s representatives. Instead,
in violation of article 17 of Ukraine’s Constitution,
which prohibits the use of its armed forces and illegal
armed groups to restrict the rights and freedoms of its
citizens, the Kyiv regime sent the army to suppress
the peaceful protests with its air assets, artillery and
massively lethal weapons. Its justification for its war
crimes was that it was conducting a so-called counterterrorism operation, a decree for which was signed on
14 April 2014 by a person who was illegally granted
constitutional presidential powers. However, during
the entire conflict in south-eastern Ukraine neither of
the Luhansk and Donetsk people’s republics had been
officially recognized as a terrorist organization, and
therefore did not fall under the international criteria
that would have designated them as such. As early as
2014 the International Committee of the Red Cross
recognized the conflict in Ukraine as an internal one,
that is, a civil war.
In addition to open hostilities, Kyiv began its brutal
repression of the civilian population by instituting
socioeconomic restrictions. The region was subjected
to an economic blockade. The disbursement of all social
benefits, including pensions, and banking services for
personal and business accounts was stopped. There was
a food blockade, with supply logistics for delivering
food, medicines and essential goods blocked, and a
12/29

17/03/2023

transport blockade. There was an information blockade,
with genuine information on what was happening
in Donbas replaced by nationalist propaganda on a
massive scale. On top of that, Ukraine terminated
the work of all Government bodies, agencies and
organizations in the region, depriving local residents
of basic Government services, social assistance and
the issuance of vital documents such as passports and
birth and death certificates, which meant that they were
completely unable to obtain confirmation of their status
as citizens.
In December 2014 and March 2017, the
socioeconomic restrictions regarding the region were
enacted into law, by which Kyiv legalized its measures
against its own population. Those steps have had
irreparable consequences. Since the beginning of the
conflict and as of 24 February 2022, 4,374 people,
including 91 children, had been killed as a result of
Ukraine’s armed aggression in the Donetsk people’s
republic. Almost 8,000 civilians had injuries of
varying degrees of severity, including 323 children,
at least 27 of whom were disabled as a result. By the
time the special operation began, fire from Ukrainian
armed groups had destroyed more than 23,000 private
homes and approximately 5,000 apartment buildings.
Some residential areas were wiped off the face of the
earth. Around 850 educational centres, 350 health-care
facilities and 800 housing and utility service facilities
that had supplied consumers in Donetsk with gas,
water, heat and electricity had been destroyed.
Between 2017 and 17 February 2022 alone,
more than 339,000 pieces of ammunition of various
calibres were fired into the territory of the Donetsk
People’s Republic. The international community did
not provide an objective response to the actions of the
representatives of Ukraine aimed at sabotaging the
Minsk process. Over the past few years, through the
fault of Kyiv, not a single clause of the Minsk Protocol or
the Minsk package of measures was implemented. The
official representative of the Donetsk People’s Republic
in the Trilateral Contact Group with responsibility for
humanitarian issues, Daria Morozova, has assured
us that the representatives of Kyiv did not focus on
implementing any agreements whatsoever. Moreover,
they sabotaged any progress that could have stopped
the bloodshed — and I would add in my own capacity
that their Western patrons encouraged them to do so.
Given the absence of peaceful objectives in the
negotiation process at the beginning of 2022, tensions
23-07879

17/03/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

grew along the line of contact, and there were blatant
provocations by Kyiv. In the week that preceded the
announcement of mass evacuations in Donbas alone, in
violation of the ceasefire agreements, Ukrainian armed
formations fired nearly 100 shells — which had been
prohibited under the Minsk agreements — into the
territory of the Donetsk People’s Republic. In addition,
Ukrainian soldiers received a direct order from Valery
Zaluzhny, Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces
of Ukraine, to open fire at will and at their own
discretion. The use of drones carrying improvised
explosive devices to launch strikes against civilians has
been established as a fact. On the eve of the special
military operation, Ukraine had begun reinforcing its
positions on the front, not only in terms of manpower
but also in terms of the accumulation of weapons of
mass destruction. Kyiv was preparing for a full-scale
military operation in Donbas, which it had planned to
launch in early March 2022. That had become clear from
the significant escalation and increase in the military
activity of Armed Forces of Ukraine in the zone.
Since the beginning of the special military
operation that was the result of the described events,
when the cities of Donbas were liberated, increasing
evidence of large-scale war crimes committed by the
Ukrainian authorities has emerged, and its volume
is increasing as the front line advances. Numerous
testimonies of civilians have been recorded, confirming
that the Ukrainian armed forces prevented civilians
from evacuating combat zones. People were used as
human shields, for example, in the cities of Mariupol,
Volnovakha and Soledar. When the Ukrainian
army retreated, it deliberately destroyed civilian
infrastructure facilities and residential buildings that
had survived the fighting.
In the year of the special military operation, more
than 15,500 instances of shelling by the Armed Forces
of Ukraine were recorded within the borders of the
Donetsk People’s Republic that had existed before the
special military operation was launched, more than
15,000 of which involved the use of heavy artillery.
The enemy fired more than 100,000 munitions of
various calibres into the Donetsk People’s Republic,
including 39 Tochka-U missiles, more than 220
HIMARS missiles, 250 BM-27 Uragan missiles,
13,000 122-millimetre multiple-launch rocket system
missiles and 21,500 155-millimetre shells. Since July
2022, the Armed Forces of Ukraine have employed
“lepestok” anti-personnel mines — known as

S/PV.9286

“butterfly mines” — against the civilian population of
the republic. Ukraine has planted those mines remotely
in densely populated residential areas of the Donetsk
People’s Republic, thereby injuring more than 90
civilians, including nine children; one of the victims
died in hospital as a result of his injuries, and many
others suffered traumatic limb amputations.
In its attempts to generate a humanitarian disaster
in the region, Kyiv has committed terrorist attacks and
provocations targeting key infrastructure in Donbas,
in particular targeting water supply and energy
infrastructure. As a result of those terrorist acts, the
supply of water to the territory of the republic from
the main artery, the Seversky Donets-Donbas Canal,
was cut off completely, so that today most towns in
the Donetsk People’s Republic have only a centralized
water supply, through which only utility water is
supplied once every three days for just a few hours.
People are forced to buy drinking water or receive it in
the form of humanitarian aid.
Cases of mass torture and execution of prisoners
have also been recorded in Ukraine. Civilians in
Kyiv-controlled territories are subjected to political
persecution and repression on ideological grounds by
the security services. Acting in that particularly cynical
manner, Ukraine has not only violated all the existing
provisions and norms of international humanitarian law
but also demonstrated a disregard for the fundamental
principles of humanity, decency and mercy. Moreover,
both the residents of the people’s republics of Donbas
and the residents of territory that had been controlled
by Kyiv before the start of the special military operation
have been subjected to neo-Nazi hatred. The information
I have just provided was part of the briefing that Daria
Morozova was supposed to deliver, which is effectively
a direct statement from the residents of Donbas, whom
the West stubbornly seeks to ignore — it was in order
to save their lives above all that the special military
operation was launched a year ago.
For my part, I note that in the past month, we have
once again witnessed the terrorist and inhumane nature
of the Kyiv regime. On 2 March, the Ukrainian armed
formations perpetrated a terrorist attack in two villages
of the Bryansk region of Russia, during which they
attacked a vehicle that was taking three children to
school, murdering the driver and wounding an 11-yearold boy named Fedor. He was nevertheless able to climb
out of the vehicle and helped two first-grade schoolgirls
out as well. Fleeing the terrorists, the three children

23-0787913/29

S/PV.9286

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

then began to seek shelter in a nearby wooded area. The
wounded boy proved himself beyond any doubt to be a
real man. The same cannot be said for the Ukrainian
fighters, who, in a cynical attempt to leave no witnesses,
fired at the backs of the children as they fled into the
woods. That is exactly how Ukrainian nationalist
battalions fire at the Russian-speaking people in the
towns of Donbas, attempting to pass off their actions
as crimes of the Russian army. Our investigative bodies
have already gathered plenty of evidence of that kind.
The attack was a planned, deliberate attack on
civilians in villages in which there are no military
facilities. In other words, the Bryansk attack was a true
terrorist attack. Its perpetrators are members of a socalled Russian Volunteer Corps, which is a subdivision
of the foreign legion of the Armed Forces of Ukraine
and acts on orders from the military leadership of
Ukraine. Zelenskyy’s regime even tried to deny that
subversive attack, since such crimes are so blatantly
abhorrent. However, the leader of the sabotage group
said that the act had been coordinated with the Kyiv
regime and carried out with its direct assistance.
Incidentally, that individual is a well-known neo-Nazi
and racist, including in Europe, who is banned from
entering the European Union. It is not surprising that,
like others with similar views, he felt at ease in Ukraine
and committed his crimes with impunity and with the
approval of the Kyiv leadership. It is not clear what
the Kyiv authorities seek to achieve by means of the
cold-blooded murder of children. Do they believe that
it will increase the level of Western support? If the
West is willing to support a regime that commits such
egregious acts, then there is probably no crime that the
West will not be willing to cover up in its maniacal and
vain desire to defeat Russia on the battlefield.
In general, we have obtained increasing evidence
that Western States are directly involved in the conflict,
not only by pumping weapons into Ukraine but also
through the direct participation of their military
specialists. For example, John McIntyre, a former
American soldier who enlisted in Ukraine’s so-called
foreign legion and the Carpathian Sich nationalist
battalion, gave revealing testimony to Russia’s law
enforcement agencies. The documents, maps and
other information that he handed over confirm that the
Armed Forces of Ukraine have directly coordinated
actions on the battlefield with members of United States
military and intelligence agencies. That evidence will
form the basis for a legal assessment of the degree
14/29

17/03/2023

of involvement and complicity of foreign officials in
the crimes perpetrated by the Kyiv regime against
the civilian population. Mr. McIntyre recounted the
horrific torture of prisoners of war by Ukrainian armed
formations. Our opponents, who vividly imagine that
Russia is committing war crimes, simply disregard that
and other evidence.
However, Ukrainian and Western sadists and
criminals will not go unpunished. An international
public tribunal has already been established in Russia to
collect and document witness testimonies. Preparations
are under way to launch and establish a full-fledged
international tribunal rooted in international law, not
the rules-based order that the States of the collective
West are devising based on their own interests.
The shots fired at Russian children in Bryansk
oblast are a clear example of the Kyiv regime’s attitude
to children. Even before the start of the special military
operation in February 2022, in view of the Ukrainian
authorities’ irresponsible and aggressive policies the
leaders of the Donetsk and Luhansk peoples’ republics
had decided to evacuate civilians, including children,
to Russian Federation territory. As at 27 February
2023, approximately 4.5 million people, including
about 690,000 children, had been evacuated to the
territory of the Russian Federation since the start of
the special military operation, with the vast majority
of the children accompanied to Russia by their
parents, relatives or guardians. In that connection,
the numerous speculations about the arrival of large
numbers of unaccompanied children are puzzling.
Throughout our bilateral cooperation with the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, UNICEF and the International Committee of
the Red Cross, we have provided reliable information
on the measures we have taken to prevent violations
of international humanitarian law where children are
concerned. In order to end speculation on the issue,
which has become a popular subject with Kyiv and
Western propagandists, we will be organizing an
informal Arria Formula meeting of the Council about
it in early April.
Many speakers have today touched on the topic
of the Black Sea Grain Initiative — more accurately
a package deal — whose 60-day extension could
be approved tomorrow. I would like to conclude by
elaborating on our position on the matter. On 22 July
last year, two packages, or interconnected agreements,
were signed in Türkiye. One of them — signed by
23-07879

17/03/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Russia, Türkiye and Ukraine for the export of food and
fertilizer through three Black Sea ports — was designed
at the time to deal with the immediate humanitarian
task of supplying food to starving people all over the
world. The second, agreed on between Russia and
the United Nations Secretariat, was on promoting the
export of Russian foodstuffs and fertilizers to world
markets. Our Western colleagues refused point blank
to acknowledge the second agreement and avoided any
mention of it in Security Council drafts. And it has not
been implemented in any way.
We and many others also have a lot of questions
about the implementation of the so-called Grain
Initiative, whose purpose is to facilitate the export of
grain from Ukrainian ports. The main question is why a
humanitarian initiative suddenly became a commercial
one. The statistics are a clear demonstration of that. Its
impact on global food prices is also highly controversial.
Contrary to what has been said today in this Chamber,
the world’s poorest countries have received not 66 or
65 per cent of supplies but a mere 3 per cent. More
specifically, according to data from the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, despite the
fact that food prices have come down from their record
highs at the beginning of last year, they are more than
20 per cent short of their 2021 levels. And depreciating
local currencies, including against the backdrop of a
stronger United States dollar in 2022, are exacerbating
domestic problems in developing countries as well.
And who do you think is profiting from the
situation? The main beneficiaries of rising food prices
and destabilized food supply chains are the giant
Western agricultural corporations. We are talking about
the so-called big four — the United States companies
Archer Daniels Midland, Bunge and Cargill, and the
Dutch Louis Dreyfus Company — which account for
75 to 90 per cent of global trade in the agro-industrial
complex. In 2022, Cargill alone saw its sales increase
by 23 per cent to $165 billion, with a record net profit
of $5 billion. How can we even talk about bonuses for
developing countries?
By the way, we should not forget that as a result
of uncontrolled exports of food from Ukraine, that
country is at risk of a real famine, as many experts have
said in so many words, and that has nothing to do with
Russia. And in that context is another acute issue, which
is Western companies’ seizure of chernozem arable
land in Ukraine. In the past 10 years, the area that is
now under foreign control is now more than 4 million

S/PV.9286

hectares, or over 10 per cent of all fertile land in
Ukraine. And yet the attempts continue to hide all these
processes from the international community behind the
traditional mantras of Russian aggression and blaming
our country for creating a food crisis and increasing
food prices. Of course that is all a complete lie. Even
the European Parliament’s resolution of 16 February
on the availability of fertilizers in the European Union
explicitly states that the high prices in the agricultural
sector have been seen for the past two years. However,
that has not prevented Brussels from creating additional
risks for the food security of poor countries thanks to
its new anti-Russian restrictions.
The Russia-United Nations memorandum is
simply not working. No one cares about the fact that
it is extremely beneficial for developing countries.
At the end of the day, the United Nations, via the
Secretary-General’s spokesperson, had to admit that
the Organization does not have the leverage to exempt
Russian agricultural export operations from Western
sanctions. I want to emphasize once again that the
situation is having a negative impact not on Russia,
whose economy is developing steadily in spite of our
adversaries, but on the developing world. Given that the
concerns expressed by our Western colleagues about it
are mere empty words and that the persistent efforts of
the Secretary-General have been fruitless, we will not
put up with it either. In that connection, on 13 March,
pursuant to paragraph H of the tripartite agreement, we
officially notified the Turkish and Ukrainian parties
that we do not object to the extension of the Black Sea
Grain Initiative operations for 60 days from 18 March,
that is, until 18 May. Further steps will depend on
progress in resolving the issues we have identified.
Finally, if Washington, Brussels and London
genuinely desire the continuation of food exports from
Ukraine along the maritime humanitarian corridor in
their interests, they have two months to exempt from
their sanctions, with the assistance of the United Nations,
the entire chain of operations supporting Russian
agricultural exports. If not, we fail to understand how
the Secretary-General’s package concept within the
framework of the Istanbul agreements will be able
to function.
In conclusion, with regard to the warrant issued
by the International Criminal Court (ICC) that has
been mentioned here today, that biased, politicized,
incompetent international judicial body has once
again demonstrated its flawed nature. The ICC is

23-0787915/29

S/PV.9286

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

a puppet in the hands of the collective West, always
ready and willing to deliver pseudo-justice to order.
It is particularly cynical that the legally null decision
was unveiled on the eve of the twentieth anniversary
of the United States’ invasion of Iraq, where the ICC
had jurisdiction but did absolutely nothing to hold
the perpetrators to account. The Russian Federation
is not a party to the Rome statute and the ICC has no
jurisdiction over Russia or its citizens. We consider
any documents issued by it to be legally null and void.
By all indications, the ICC has indeed gone down
a path towards self-destruction, above all where its
international authority and credibility are concerned.
We are not alone in that opinion. Allow me to end with
a surprising quote from John Bolton, former United
States National Security Advisor, in 2018: “We will let
the ICC die on its own. After all, for all intents and
purposes, the ICC is already dead”.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank UnderSecretary-General Griffiths for his contribution.
We have been following with extreme concern
the attacks in recent weeks on targets in various cities
in Ukraine, as well as the horrifying fighting around
Bakhmut. Brazil reiterates the call for all parties to fully
respect international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. It is a universal responsibility to
ensure the protection and safety of civilians, provide
humanitarian aid to those in need and treat detainees
humanely. These are non-negotiable obligations.
Brazil is also deeply concerned about the lack of
improvement in the humanitarian situation in Ukraine.
Urban areas continue to be shelled, and civilian
infrastructure destroyed. We remind both parties of
resolution 2417 (2018), which indicates our obligation
to spare civilian objects and critical infrastructure for
delivering humanitarian aid and to ensure the proper
functioning of food systems and markets.
In order to put an end to this humanitarian crisis,
it is necessary to seek pragmatic solutions. We urge
all Member States to pursue realistic ways to achieve
peace. Protecting human life and safeguarding human
dignity must always come first. In that regard, we
would like to mention three points.
First, it is necessary to keep channels open for
dialogue. Insisting on military solutions reinforced
by unilateral sanctions will not lead to an end to this
conflict. Dialogue is the way to de-escalate and build
trust. When there is engagement, it is possible to
16/29

17/03/2023

achieve positive results, as demonstrated by the Black
Sea Grain Initiative.
Secondly, it is urgent that the two sides agree to
cease hostilities in accordance with resolution ES11/6, adopted by the General Assembly in February
(see A/ES-11/PV.19). Continuing to fight will deepen
the humanitarian crisis, increase casualties and destroy
infrastructure, without resolving the underlying causes
of the conflict. The continuation of this war will also
affect other countries in the immediate neighbourhood,
as well as in developing nations hard hit by the
collateral effects of the conflict on their economies
and with limited resources and instruments to counter
those effects.
Finally, we reiterate our support for a negotiated
solution that takes into account ways to prevent
renewed violence in future. Brazil considers it essential
to understand the security concerns of the parties
involved and to respond to them in a constructive and
pragmatic manner. Alongside other countries, we are
ready to engage in diplomatic efforts based on the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and with
the goal of a just and sustainable peace in the long term.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for
his briefing.
The Ukrainian crisis has dragged on, is expanding
and is becoming more complex. The humanitarian
situation continues to deteriorate, and the prospect
of peace remains elusive. China is deeply concerned.
There are no winners in conflict and war, and bloody
confrontations will only exacerbate suffering. We call
on all relevant parties to truly put the people at the
centre, step up actions and spare no effort to mitigate
the humanitarian consequences of the conflict, while
simultaneously redoubling efforts to de-escalate the
situation and cease hostilities as quickly as possible.
In that connection, I would like to make
several remarks.
First, the basic norms of international humanitarian
law must be strictly observed. The protection of civilians
must always come first. Parties to the conflict should
refrain from attacking civilians and civilian facilities,
ensure the normal operation of key public services such
as energy, health care and education, protect victims
of conflict and respect the basic rights of prisoners of
war. All parties to the conflict should remain rational,
23-07879

17/03/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

exercise maximum restraint and avoid actions that
endanger the safety and security of nuclear facilities in
order to minimize the risk of accidents. China supports
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in
fulfilling its safeguards functions and playing an active
role in promoting the safety and security of nuclear
facilities. China will donate €200,000 to the Ukrainian
nuclear safety and security technical assistance project
through the IAEA.
Secondly, every effort must be made to maintain
the scope and intensity of humanitarian relief. Since
the outbreak of the conflict, the affected areas have
suffered severe shortages of materials, water, electricity
and heating supplies. China has delivered multiple
batches of emergency humanitarian aid to Ukraine and
developing countries affected by the spillover crisis.
The international community should scale up relief to
all affected people, speed up the repair and restoration
of civilian infrastructure and do its utmost to mitigate
the impact of the conflict on people’s lives. Relevant
parties should ensure rapid, safe and unimpeded
humanitarian access and support the United Nations in
its humanitarian coordination role. Women, children
and displaced persons are vulnerable groups in armed
conflicts. Targeted assistance should therefore be
provided in order to meet their special needs.
Thirdly, the spillover effects of the conflict must
be managed. All parties should work together in a
responsible manner in order to mitigate the impact of
the crisis on international energy, finance, food trade
and transportation so as to maintain the momentum
of the global economic recovery. Relevant countries
should stop abusing unilateral sanctions and longarm jurisdiction in order to eliminate the disruption
caused by such measures to international economic
and trade cooperation. China commends SecretaryGeneral Guterres for his active communication with
all parties on the extension of the Black Sea Grain
Initiative. We hope that the Initiative will be fully and
effectively implemented in a balanced manner. At the
same time, China hopes that the memorandum signed
between the United Nations and Russia will also be
actively implemented.
Fourthly, diplomatic efforts towards a peaceful
solution must be continuously advanced. No matter
how complex the situation, the door to a political
settlement cannot be closed, and peace efforts cannot
slow. The international community must promote
peace talks with the utmost urgency, create conditions

S/PV.9286

for the resumption of negotiations and push the parties
concerned to resume negotiations without preconditions
at an early date in order to give the restoration of
peace a chance. Facts have shown that the continuous
delivery of offensive weapons and resorting to group
confrontation and political isolation will not help to
resolve the crisis. On the Ukraine issue, China will
always take a stand on the side of peace, dialogue and
humanity. China issued a position paper on the political
settlement of the Ukrainian crisis and will continue
to work with the international community to play an
active role in the political settlement of the crisis.
Finally, I would like to state our position on the
procedural vote conducted before the start of today’s
meeting. China regrets that the Security Council had
to conduct a procedural vote on whether to invite
Ms. Daria Morozova to brief the Council. China is
of the view that the Council should make a decision
on this matter on the basis of consensus reached
through patient consultations. We believe that the
Council’s decision on this issue should comply with
the provisional rules of procedure and be consistent
with past practice on inviting briefers in order to avoid
giving the impression of double standards. I would also
like to reiterate that China’s position on the Ukraine
issue remains unchanged.
Mr. Boateng (Ghana): At the outset, let me explain
that Ghana voted in favour of the proposal to invite
Ms. Daria Morozova under rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, to provide the Council
with her personal views regarding the humanitarian
situation in the Donbas region of Ukraine. We have
consistently supported the President’s choice of
briefers. That in no way impairs our position on the
Donbas region being a part of Ukraine.
Indeed, it affirms Ukraine’s sovereignty. To be
clear, Ghana does not recognize the so-called Donetsk
People’s Republic, including any person purporting to
act in any official capacity on behalf of that entity. As we
understand it, Ms. Morozova is a resident of the Donbas
region and, by extension, a citizen of Ukraine. In that
sense, we are of the view that her personal views as a
citizen of Ukraine should be admitted by the Council.
Turning to the subject of our meeting, I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for
the important updates provided to the Council on the
prevailing humanitarian conditions in Ukraine. We
continue to value his contributions to resolving that

23-0787917/29

S/PV.9286

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

aspect of the war, concerning the survival of the people
of Ukraine. Ghana continues to be deeply concerned
about the overall humanitarian situation, in particular
the plight of the innocent civilians caught in the
crossfire of the intense combat raging across several
cities in Ukraine. If the hostilities in Bakhmut, Odesa,
Donetsk, Kharkiv and other front lines share anything
in common, it is the fact that we see rising casualties
and further destruction. The already impaired energy
infrastructure of Ukraine continues to be pummelled,
with no regard for the needs of the civilians who rely on
it for their survival, especially during the winter season.
While destroyed infrastructure can be rebuilt, the
destruction in the minds and hearts of the people, which
is hidden from our eyes, is perhaps worse than we have
imagined. They may never be restored from the deep
loss and trauma of the brutal war. For that reason,
we remain supportive of initiatives to provide mental
health care and counselling support for Ukrainians
affected by the war, especially children. UNICEF
reports that, despite the gruelling impacts of the war
on the 7.5 million children in Ukraine, they continue to
show tremendous resilience for survival. We must do
all that lies in our power to bring an end to the scourge
of the war on their lives.
The report of the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine, issued on
15 March, regrettably bears out our fears of widespread
and systematic human rights violations, disregard for
civilians and possible war crimes. We note the report as
an important contribution to international efforts aimed
at ensuring accountability for the horrendous crimes
being committed in Ukraine. We further agree with
the Commission that there is a need to ensure further
investigations and comprehensive accountability,
including to ensure the criminal responsibility of the
perpetrators and the right of victims to truth, reparations
and non-repetition.
At the core of the prohibition on the use of force as
a means for the settlement of disputes is the principle of
the value of human life and the essential obligation to
protect and preserve humankind from the harms of war.
International humanitarian law is therefore intended
to impose on warring parties a number of obligations
concerning the protection of civilians and the treatment
of prisoners of war during conflicts. We deeply regret
that those fundamental principles have not been obliged
and that more people continue to suffer needlessly with
each passing day of the war. In view of the worsening
18/29

17/03/2023

humanitarian conditions, we renew our appeal to the
parties to ensure compliance with their obligations
under international law, international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. Civilians must
be protected from harm and prisoners of war must be
treated with respect, in accordance with the measures
prescribed under the Geneva Conventions and their
Additional Protocols.
The continuing missile attacks near the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant, resulting in the
temporary loss of its only remaining back-up power
line, point to the growing risk of a catastrophic nuclear
incident. We remind the parties of the existential
and intergenerational harm caused by nuclear arms
and urge them to rethink their actions in the interest
of humankind, as we all stand at risk from any such
incident, whether accidental or calculated. We urge
the parties to treat nuclear safety and security as
non-negotiable and to undertake the steps outlined by
the IAEA, including the immediate demilitarization of
all nuclear facilities in Ukraine.
After 13 months of sustained violent exchanges
across all of Ukraine, there appears to be no hope of
an end in sight and little appetite on the part of the
warring parties for a peaceful settlement. We continue
to be concerned about the inflammatory rhetoric and
the heightened risk of a wider geopolitical conflict
involving other European nations. If peace in Ukraine is
to be attained, the parties must relinquish any military
logic to winning the war. We remain firmly of the view
that dialogue and diplomacy offer the best chances of
a comprehensive peace process that would address the
respective concerns of the parties, and we reiterate
our call for the intensification of international efforts
to achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
in Ukraine. It has been well asserted in the Council
and the General Assembly that peace in Ukraine
must be founded on the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and should seek to
uphold the sovereignty, political independence and
territorial integrity of Ukraine, in accordance with
international law.
We encourage agreement on the further renewal
of the Black Sea Grain Initiative when it expires on
18 March this year, as it once again offers a glimmer
of hope through the dark facade of the war. We are
encouraged by the commitments made by the parties,
given the significant impact the deal has been shown
to have on the global food supply chain and market
23-07879

17/03/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

stability, and we urge its full implementation in
line with the terms of the agreement. We thank the
Secretary-General for his visit to Kyiv on 8 March,
when he held discussions with President Zelenskyy
on the continuation of the Grain Initiative. Good faith
implementation by all stakeholders is now crucial to
sustaining its integrity in a manner that assures its
future extension for much longer periods of time. We
also underline the importance and necessity of further
efforts and cooperation in relation to the export of
Russian ammonia and agricultural products.
Humanitarian assistance and protection are vital to
saving lives and mitigating the impacts on the people.
As we all know, however, they do not replace the critical
need for the cessation of all violent hostilities. For that
reason and in the interest of the many suffering women,
children and vulnerable persons, we reiterate the calls
made to the Russian Federation to end the aggression
against its neighbour Ukraine. It is time to end the war
and begin the task of charting a path of peace between
the Russian Federation and Ukraine.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths for his briefing.
More than one year has passed since Russia launched
its aggression against Ukraine. That gross violation of
the Charter of the United Nations and international
law has led to yet another man-made humanitarian
catastrophe. Today, the war threatens not only Ukraine
and the region but also millions of people across the
world. As we heard, more than 17 million people — nearly
40 per cent of the population of Ukraine — require
humanitarian assistance and protection as a result of
the war, while more than 8 million Ukrainian refugees
have been recorded across Europe, and 5.4 million
people have been internally displaced.
We have all witnessed the humanitarian
consequences of the systematic use of missiles and
drones to attack civilian objects and infrastructure
indispensable to the survival of the civilian population
across Ukraine, not least in Tuesday’s missile strike
on an apartment building in Kramatorsk. Such attacks
have left millions without power, heating and water
for days, in the middle of winter, compounding the
hardship for the most vulnerable caught up in this
fighting, especially those in areas close to the front
lines and outside the control of Ukrainian authorities.
Furthermore, we have also seen the horrific effects
of the use of explosive weapons with wide-area effects

S/PV.9286

in populated areas, with town squares and residential
apartment blocks reduced to rubble. Malta once again
calls on the Russian Federation to cease such attacks,
which constitute a violation of international law.
The devastating impacts of Russia’s war on
children, women and men will be felt for generations.
We condemn the pattern of international humanitarian
and human rights law violations related to the use of
sexual violence as a weapon of war. Malta also deplores
the unlawful transfer and forced deportation out of
Ukraine of more than 6,000 children. Such actions
constitute war crimes. In this regard, Malta supports
the International Criminal Court’s efforts to ensure
that all those involved in violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law are held accountable.
In addition, we welcome the important work
being carried out by the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine and support the
idea of establishing a register of damages as a record
of evidence and information on claims for damages,
losses or injury caused by Russia’s war of aggression
against Ukraine. Such initiatives will support the
much-needed reconstruction of civilian infrastructure
destroyed in the country over the past decade as a result
of the conflict.
Malta is concerned that many of those in desperate
need of humanitarian assistance are unable to gain
access to or are prevented from obtaining the services
they need. We commend the work of the United Nations,
its partner agencies and all humanitarian organizations
working in such dangerous situations, and we appeal
for the full facilitation of humanitarian access and
operations throughout the country, especially in the
areas along front lines.
Malta highlights the importance of the continuance
of the Black Sea Grain Initiative. This initiative has
allowed the export of tons of grains and other foodstuffs.
Prolonging the agreement is crucial for the stability
of international prices and for the continuous flow of
grain, helping people worldwide struggling to put food
on their tables and supporting farmers whose incomes
have plummeted because of the war. Additionally, we
reiterate our call for unimpeded and repeated access to
be granted to the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) for all Ukrainian prisoners of war. Malta
recalls that under the Third Geneva Convention, all
prisoners of war are entitled to receive regular visits
from ICRC delegations.

23-0787919/29

S/PV.9286

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

As the war in Ukraine begins to ramp up once
again, we reiterate our call on the Russian Federation
to immediately cease its hostilities and withdraw
all Russian forces from Ukraine’s internationally
recognized borders. More than enough lives have been
lost, families torn apart and civilians traumatized by a
year of carnage. Let us see de-escalation and dialogue
in the days and weeks ahead, rather than this continued
cycle of death and destruction.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I also thank UnderSecretary-General Griffiths for his briefing today.
Today, over 21 million people need humanitarian
assistance as a result of Russia’s full-scale invasion: this
is over 50 per cent of Ukraine’s pre-war population. Of
these people, over 5 million are displaced internally, and
another 8 million have fled to Europe as refugees. This
is the most significant displacement seen anywhere in
the world for decades. In areas under Russian control,
approximately 4 million people are in acute need of
humanitarian protection and assistance.
The foregoing figures demonstrate the devastating
nature of Russia’s actions in Ukraine. We must not
forget that behind every number in these millions is a
person, a brother or a sister, a mother or a father, whose
normal life has been destroyed by Russia’s aggression.
I will focus on the situation in Bakhmut. The city
has been subject to near constant shelling, with civilian
infrastructure, such as schools, water and energy and
health facilities, suffering significant damage. There are
not many buildings left standing, and the humanitarian
consequences of Russia’s brutal assault are extreme.
Humanitarian assistance entering the city stopped
mid-February when the fighting intensified, and it
became too dangerous for most aid to get in. Nearly
4,000 civilians remain, hiding in basements. These
people are severely vulnerable, in particular children,
persons with disabilities and the elderly. Only a
limited number of local volunteer groups have been
able to distribute assistance, at great risk to their own
personal safety.
We therefore call for unimpeded and sustained
humanitarian access to the people of Ukraine, including
in Bakhmut. Russia must stop denying access and cease
its attacks on critical infrastructure and residential
areas. Ukrainians must be allowed to seek safety
wherever they choose.
20/29

17/03/2023

As the Under-Secretary-General has made clear,
the impact of Russia’s actions is still being felt around
the world. Commodity prices are up, and 345 million
people face crisis levels of food insecurity, with close
to 50 million people one step away from famine. This is
the global cost of Russia’s actions.
The United Kingdom strongly supports the efforts
of the United Nations in partnership with Türkiye to
continue bringing Ukrainian grain to the world markets.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative is vital — the world
needs Ukrainian grain. Everything should therefore be
done to tackle global food insecurity and ensure that
food assistance reaches those who need it most. We call
on Russia to respect the terms of the deal and the latest
120-day extension.
Finally, the United Kingdom is fully committed
to holding Russia to account for its illegal actions
in Ukraine. The International Criminal Court’s
announcement today is an important step for ensuring
those responsible are held accountable. Barbaric
atrocities have been committed during this conflict,
including against children. It is right that they should be
independently investigated, and that those accountable
face justice.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Under-Secretary-General Griffiths
for his thorough briefing and for the United Nations
efforts aimed at securing an extension of the Black Sea
Grain Initiative.
As Under-Secretary-General Griffiths clearly
outlined, as long as Russia continues to blockade
Ukraine’s ports, the world needs the Black Sea Grain
Initiative. The Black Sea Grain Initiative slashes global
food prices. It calms market volatility. It ameliorates
global food security. It saves lives. It must continue,
reliably and sustainably.
The Initiative must be allowed to operate
efficiently. It must work at a pace that meets global
demand. The delays imposed by Russia have already
reduced the number of ships leaving port and increased
transportation costs.
We agree with what the Secretary-General said
during his visit to Kyiv two weeks ago: the Initiative
should enable the greatest possible use of Black Sea
export infrastructure. Right now, only three ports are
free to operate, while global food prices remain at
historic highs.
23-07879

17/03/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Ukraine’s food exports are down by more than a
third from last year. Russia’s war of aggression against
Ukraine has already disrupted the global food supply
chain and caused a spike in food prices, pushing many
more people into extreme poverty. The world needs the
grain. It must flow freely.
Since the beginning of the Initiative, more than
24 million metric tons of grain and oilseed have been
shipped worldwide, including humanitarian aid through
the World Food Programme for the world’s most foodinsecure people. During his trip to Africa this past
week, Secretary Blinken saw bags of wheat — gifts
from the Ukrainian people — that had been delivered
to Ethiopia as a result of the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
That is grain that can feed the world. That is the critical
assistance that is at stake.
We know, and the rest of the world knows, that
Russia’s exports of food are at least as high as their
pre-war levels. When we hear the Russian Government
say that it is being held back from exporting grain
and fertilizer, the numbers show that that is just not
true. When it comes to sanctions, we have gone to
extraordinary lengths to communicate the clear
carveouts for food and fertilizer to Governments and
to the private sector. Simply put, sanctions are not
the issue.
Beyond the Black Sea Grain Initiative, the Council
must also focus on the continuing devastation and dire
humanitarian needs caused by Russia’s war in Ukraine.
On 15 February, the United Nations announced that
United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations will need $3.9 billion to bring
humanitarian aid to those inside Ukraine. That does not
include the additional $1.7 billion to support countries
hosting millions of Ukrainian refugees.

S/PV.9286

humanitarian access across Ukraine, just as 141 Member
States did last month (see General Assembly resolution
ES-11/6). We must call out Russia’s continued missile
and drone attacks on civilians and critical infrastructure
and how those attacks are preventing humanitarian
assistance from reaching areas temporarily occupied
by Russia.
Just last week, massive attacks destroyed residential
buildings, electricity infrastructure and railways,
killing at least 11 civilians. That was also the sixteenth
major attack on Ukraine’s energy infrastructure in
the past five months, showing flagrant disregard for
nuclear safety.
Russia’s attacks have even resulted in the deaths
and injuries of humanitarian workers. Women and
girls in particular have faced frightening and dramatic
increases in trafficking and gender-based violence as
they tried to flee for their lives. Today, as we wrap up
the sixty-seventh session of the Commission on the
Status of Women, let us all commit to holding Russia’s
forces accountable for such atrocities.
There is, of course, one way to instantly prevent
further suffering. Russia can heed the demands of
the United Nations and the world’s Member States to
withdraw immediately, completely and unconditionally
from Ukraine. Until then, let us do everything that we
can to help the people of Ukraine and all those affected
by the fallout of this horrific and unnecessary war.
Ms. Koumby Missambo (Gabon) (spoke in
French): I thank Under-Secretary-General Martin
Griffiths for his enlightening briefing.

For its part, since the invasion, the United States
has provided nearly $2 billion in humanitarian
assistance to those in need in Ukraine and the region.
We have provided nearly $15.5 billion in direct budget
support to the Government of Ukraine through World
Bank mechanisms. We plan to provide an additional
$7.4 billion up to the end of September. We are doing
our part, and we are asking the rest of the international
community to do theirs. We should all dig deep, and we
must do so without sacrificing a single cent to the many
other urgent humanitarian crises around the world.

There has already been a year of destructive war,
and there is no way out in sight. On the contrary, the
escalation continues and is becoming increasingly
widespread on the ground and in the air. After a year,
the cost of the war in terms of human and material
losses is increasing on a daily basis and continues to
exacerbate Ukraine’s economic situation and impede
the prospects for Ukraine’s reconstruction. As a result,
the humanitarian situation is steadily deteriorating.
Civilians and civilian infrastructure continue to be
targeted by relentless and extensive bombing. No area
has been spared, and the parties do not hesitate to strike
energy infrastructure, which has been a prime target
for holding operations of all sorts for some time.

However, funding alone is not enough. Security
Council members must continue to demand unhindered

In recent days, the tensions regarding the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant suggest that the risk

23-0787921/29

S/PV.9286

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

of a nuclear accident is still a possibility that should not
be overlooked. We reiterate that access to water, energy
and other essential public services must not be subject
to any blackmail.
My country reiterates its condemnation of attacks
on civilian populations and infrastructure and any kind
of strike targeting innocent populations, in particular
women and children, and reminds the belligerents of
their obligations under international humanitarian
law. Even in a situation of war, human rights must
be safeguarded.
Security Council meetings must be geared towards
finding a solution for the victims of the war in Ukraine
and for the more than 8 million refugees, 5 million
internally displaced persons and more than 17 million
Ukrainians in need of humanitarian aid. Prospects
must be offered to the young people of Ukraine, the
dispersed families and the thousands of children whose
lives and schooling have been disrupted.
It is quite clear that the war is becoming increasingly
entrenched, as are the dire international consequences
in terms of the soaring prices of consumer goods. In
some countries, there have been waves of protest and
unrest recently against the rising cost of living and the
fact that purchasing power has been reduced as a result
of soaring inflation.
We call on the parties to renew the Black Sea
Grain Initiative for the duration provided for by the
original agreement, and we express our support for
the facilitators’ ongoing commitment. We welcome
and encourage all efforts to remove all obstacles to the
agreement’s full and complete implementation for the
benefit of all parties.
We have taken note of the recent report of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the
assessment of the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations concerning, in particular, grain
exports to developing countries and their impact on the
global cereals price index.
The signing of the agreement also remains a beacon
of hope and a potential platform on which broader
initiatives can be built to chart a course towards the
cessation of hostilities. We continue to urge all parties
to safeguard such an outcome.
I reiterate my country’s condemnation of war, the
use of weapons of mass destruction and the use of
any methods of warfare aimed at spreading fear and
22/29

17/03/2023

causing unnecessary suffering to civilian populations.
My country expresses its support and encouragement
to humanitarian personnel working in combat areas
and in countries hosting refugees for their remarkable
work and their ongoing efforts to try to restore a little
humanity to the daily lives of those who have lost all
hope as a result of the war.
In conclusion, we call on the parties to commit to
peace through frank and direct dialogue and to refrain
from unilateral actions that could narrow the window
of opportunity for negotiations or draw us further away
from such an opportunity. My country continues to
believe that a political solution is the only option and
that peaceful coexistence is the ultimate goal.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Mozambique.
I want to begin by thanking Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths for his important briefing. I would
also like to recognize the presence in the Chamber of
the Permanent Representatives of Denmark, Lithuania,
Ukraine and the European Union.
As we enter the second year of the Russia-Ukraine
conflict, the humanitarian toll keeps mounting, the
prospects for peace keep receding and the resources
needed to alleviate the human suffering keep
multiplying. Mozambique strongly believes that the
best and most effective support that the Council can
give the humanitarian efforts in Ukraine is by stepping
up its efforts to bring the conflict to an end. Our own
experience in Mozambique shows that there is no
humanitarian solution to humanitarian problems. Only
negotiated political solutions can solve them.
However, Mozambique notes that notwithstanding
our repeated calls for dialogue and our appeals to the
parties to return to the negotiating table, there has
been little or no progress in the direction of peace. Nor
have the parties heeded our repeated warnings about
the increasing spillover effects of the conflict to other
parts of the world or the ever-present danger of strategic
miscalculation. We have said that the conflict is
constraining the ability of the humanitarian community
to muster an appropriate and rapid response to other
challenges throughout the globe, whether those are
earthquakes in Türkiye or cyclones affecting countries
such as Mozambique, Malawi and Madagascar.
We welcome the willingness expressed by some
members of the international community to facilitate,
23-07879

17/03/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9286

mediate and promote peace initiatives, with the consent
of all parties and in good faith. We have urged the parties
on several occasions to seize and build on the few signs
of goodwill shown during the conflict, such as prisoner
exchanges and the Black Sea Grain Initiative, with a
view to achieving a de-escalation. However, we must
realistically concede that the more than 22 Council
meetings dedicated to Ukraine alone since 2022, along
with multiple warnings and offers of mediation, have so
far yielded no positive momentum towards peace. It is
high time for us to redouble our efforts to take concrete
and pragmatic steps to end the conflict while increasing
humanitarian assistance. The Black Sea Grain Initiative,
aptly described by Mr. Griffiths as a beacon of hope
against a bleak backdrop, and in our view a rare bright
spot of multilateral diplomacy, expires tomorrow. We
hope that it will be extended immediately.

hard to mitigate the impact of the war until a just
peace can be attained. According to the SecretaryGeneral, a just peace would mean that the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine must
be upheld within its internationally recognized borders,
established at independence in 1991.

As the Secretary-General stressed recently, we
must do everything possible to preserve the integrity of
the Black Sea Grain Initiative and ensure its continuity.
That is in the interests of the people of Ukraine and of
the world at large. We once again urge all the parties
involved to set aside their differences and allow the
extension and possibly indefinite roll-out of those
life-saving arrangements, essential to countries like
mine that are already dealing with acute and imminent
threats to food security. Mozambique believes that the
unity of the Council on the issue is essential.

As a result of the missile terror, which peaked in
the winter season, for the time being Ukraine has lost
44 per cent of its nuclear generation, 75 per cent of
its thermal power plant capacity and 33 per cent of its
combined heat and power plants. However, Russia has
failed to bring Ukraine to its knees by terrorizing it
with missiles. It is also failing on the battlefield, as it
burns through more and more regular military units and
Wagner Group mercenaries near the town of Bahkmut.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I commend the Security
Council for upholding multiple General Assembly
resolutions on Ukraine’s territorial integrity by
not allowing the Russian citizen — and so-called
ombudsperson of a part of Ukraine’s Donetsk region
that Russia tried to annex — to address the Council.
We thank Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for
his briefing, which has once again highlighted the
devastating humanitarian impact of the Russian
aggression. We commend United Nations efforts for a
resolute humanitarian response in my country. United
Nations-led operations provide a lifeline for millions
of Ukrainians affected by Russia’s war of aggression
against Ukraine.
We also appreciate the fact that the SecretaryGeneral, while visiting Kyiv on 8 March, clearly
confirmed the United Nations commitment to working

Should it be a surprise that Russia responded to that
visit in the same way that it did on previous occasions
when the Secretary-General was in Kyiv? That is, with
missile shelling. Eighty-one missiles of various types
were immediately launched to kill Ukrainians and
destroy civilian infrastructure upon the visit of the
Secretary-General. It was the fifteenth massive missile
strike since October 2022, when the destruction of
civilian infrastructure, in particular energy facilities,
was publicly declared by Russia as a method of warfare.

The irrational enmity towards Ukraine and
Ukrainians keeps the peace efforts in a stalemate.
Russia continues to ignore the will of the General
Assembly as expressed in resolution ES-11/6, entitled
“Principles of the Charter of the United Nations
underlying a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
in Ukraine”. Russia rejects the peace plan formula
offered by the President of Ukraine, which follows
the same logic as resolution ES-11/6. Instead, Russia
persists with its warmongering rhetoric and, through
Putin’s spokesperson, threatens that it will continue to
achieve its goals and that “now it is possible only by
military means”.
The report of the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine, which was
circulated yesterday, provides us with a shocking
record of crimes that might seem unbelievable in the
twenty-first century. Let me cite just a few examples of
the Commission’s findings, and let me remind everyone
here — and those who listen to us — that these are not
our Government’s findings. They are the findings of
the United Nations and include the following:

23-0787923/29

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9286

“Rapes were committed at gunpoint, with
extreme brutality and with acts of torture, such
as beatings and strangling. Perpetrators at times
threatened to kill the victim or her family, if she
resisted. In some cases, more than one soldier raped
the same victim, or rape of the same victim was
committed several times. In one incident, the victim
was pregnant and begged, in vain, the soldiers to
spare her; she had a miscarriage a few days later.
Perpetrators also, in some instances, executed or
tortured husbands and other male relatives. Family
members, including children, were sometimes
forced to watch perpetrators rape their loved ones.”
The United
following fact:

Nations

also

established

the

“Detention, interrogation, torture, or illtreatment often preceded execution. Some victims
were found with hands or feet tied. According
to medical records and photographs, the most
common method of killing was a gunshot to the
head at close range.”
Highlighting the issue of forced transfers and
deportations of children, the Commission stated that
“the onus to trace and find parents or family
members fell primarily on the children. Parents
and relatives encountered considerable logistical,
financial and security challenges in retrieving
their children. In some cases, it took weeks or
months for families to be reunited. Witnesses told
the Commission that many of the smaller children
transferred have not been able to establish contact
with their families and might, as a consequence,
lose contact with them indefinitely”.
We welcome the fact that today the International
Criminal Court issued arrest warrants for two individuals
who are allegedly responsible for the war crimes of the
unlawful deportation of population (children) and the
unlawful transfer of population (children) from the
occupied areas of Ukraine to the Russian Federation.
There are reasonable grounds to believe that those
persons bear individual criminal responsibility for
the aforementioned crimes. Their names are Vladimir
Putin, President of the Russian Federation, and Maria
Lvova-Belova, so-called Commissioner for Children’s
Rights in the Office of the President of the Russian
Federation. That step testifies once again that the
process of ensuring justice is proceeding, and sooner or
24/29

17/03/2023

later it will end with Putin, Lvova-Belova and other war
criminals in the dock.
Russia’s war has taken a terrible human toll, leaving
tens of thousands of civilians killed, injured or maimed.
The tactics of siege and scorched earth employed by
Russia have resulted in the destruction of some 59,000
residential buildings, 436 hospitals and more than 2,200
educational institutions. Those numbers do not include
the temporarily occupied areas, in which the real level
of destruction is much higher. As Russia’s attacks
continue to mount, 17.6 million Ukrainians — about
40 per cent of the population — remain in dire need of
humanitarian assistance. The increasing level of landmine contamination in Ukraine constitutes another
grave threat to its people. Russia’s war of aggression has
turned Ukraine into one of the most mine-contaminated
countries in the world. In total, according to the State
Emergency Service of Ukraine, the territory of Ukraine
that is considered to be contaminated is about 174,000
square kilometres — or 30 per cent of the entire
territory of our country. The Russian forces in Ukraine
widely use anti-personnel landmines and cluster
munitions, planting mines on civilian roads, pathways,
residential areas and agricultural fields. Nearly 50,000
square kilometres of agricultural land are currently
unsuitable for use due to mines, explosive hazards and
armed hostilities.
Even under those extraordinary circumstances,
Ukraine has fulfilled its obligations under the Black
Sea Grain Initiative, which alleviates the food crisis in
the world and prevents many new crises from emerging.
Since 1 August, 814 vessels have exported 24.4 million
tons of Ukrainian food from the ports of Odesa to
Asia, Europe and Africa within the framework of the
Black Sea Grain Initiative. That volume could have
been significantly higher if Russia had not had a policy
of delaying the inspection of vessels. Owing to the
shortages in terms of the new fleet and the queue in the
territorial waters of Türkiye, the export of foodstuffs
via the grain corridor does not exceed 3.4 million tons
per month, despite Ukraine’s ability to give the world
6 million tons per month of its agricultural products.
For example, only 149 inspections were carried
out in February despite the fact that 296 inspections
had been planned for that month. In addition, as a
result of such actions, there are continuous queues
of vessels — between 120 and 140 vessels — and
Ukrainian ports face the problem of a shortage of new
vessels for loading. Today, 86 vessels that are due to be
23-07879

17/03/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

sent for loading are still awaiting inspection in Turkish
territorial waters.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative should be renewed
after it expires on 18 March for at least 120 days, as
is foreseen, or for an unlimited period. Its coverage
should be expanded to Ukrainian ports in the Mykolayiv
region. Today more than 30 countries and the European
Union joined the “Grain from Ukraine” humanitarian
programme launched by President Zelenskyy to help
the poorest countries of the world with food. The
programme raised almost $200 million and sent more
than 140,000 tons of Ukrainian grain to countries
suffering from hunger. We call on countries around the
world wishing to make their contribution to global food
security to join that initiative.
Yesterday Ukraine paid tribute to the victims of
one of the most horrendous Russian war crimes. A
year ago, Russian aerial bombing destroyed a theatre
in Mariupol — a building that was being used as a
shelter and was clearly identified with a sign that read
“Children”. We still do not know the exact number of
victims and Russia did everything it could to mop up the
traces of its crime as soon as Mariupol was occupied.
Every day of the war and every day of the Russian
presence in Ukraine multiplies the suffering of the
Ukrainian people. The war must be brought to an
end, and it must be followed by accountability for the
aggressor. We appreciate the international community’s
strong stance in striving for a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace based on the principles of the Charter.
Ukraine is ready to implement that approach, which
all peace efforts and proposals should be based on. We
urge Member States to contribute to the implementation
of General Assembly resolution ES-11/6, adopted at its
emergency special session on 23 February. That should
include stepping up pressure on the Russian Federation
to abandon its aggressive course. Until that happens,
Ukraine will continue to defend itself, the principles of
the Charter and the rules-based order.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Skoog.
Mr. Skoog: I would like to say a few words on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
candidate countries North Macedonia, Montenegro,
Albania, Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as the potential candidate
country Georgia and Andorra, align themselves with
this statement.

S/PV.9286

For more than a year now Russia has been
struggling to find any justification whatsoever for its
war of aggression against Ukraine. We are well aware
of the toll that Russia’s escalating aggression is taking,
with daily missile strikes that are costing innocent
Ukrainians’ lives. We have just heard living examples
of that from the Ukrainian Ambassador and from
many other speakers around the table today. While the
world is suffering from soaring food prices, Russia’s
war continues to hamper efforts to export Ukrainian
grain. That must end. I will emphasize three points
today — first, the global consequences of Russia’s
full-scale invasion; secondly, its systematic attacks on
civilians and critical infrastructure; and thirdly, the
need for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace.
First, the war has disrupted agricultural production
and trade and has driven world food and fertilizer prices
to unprecedented levels. We must all work together to
address those serious consequences, and we welcome
the Secretary-General’s engagement in that regard.
We echo the plea made by 14 members of the Council
this afternoon for the Black Sea Grain Initiative to
be renewed in order to provide the continuity and
predictability needed by operators and to avoid
discontinuations in shipments of grain to developing
countries. The Initiative has been instrumental in
bringing down global food prices and it needs to run at
its full potential.
In addition to the Black Sea Grain Initiative, the
EU’s solidarity lanes have enabled the export of more
than 29 million tons of Ukraine’s food and agricultural
goods to the world. Vessels chartered by the World
Food Programme have transported more than 481,000
metric tons of wheat through various Black Sea ports,
including to Ethiopia, Afghanistan, Yemen, Somalia
and Kenya. Ukraine is also helping those in need,
despite the effects of the war on its population. Through
the Grain from Ukraine programme, 175,000 metric
tons of grain have been donated to countries in need.
Many EU member States are also proud to be part of
that Ukrainian initiative.
Let us be absolutely clear. It is Russia’s war that
has rocked the markets. Russia’s fertilizer exports are
exempt from EU sanctions. United Nations data clearly
demonstrates that the volume of the total exports of
Russian fertilizers to developing countries remained
stable in 2022 compared with previous years. Moreover,
Russian revenue from fertilizer exports jumped by
70 per cent in the first 10 months of last year compared

23-0787925/29

S/PV.9286

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

to the same period in 2021, according to data from
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations. Russia conveniently omits to mention its own
export taxes and quotas on both cereals and fertilizers,
which lead to artificial increases in global prices and
the profits of Russian companies at the expense of those
most in need.
At a time of unprecedented humanitarian needs,
the EU not only supports Ukrainians but remains
collectively among the largest donors of humanitarian
aid globally. We are grateful to all countries that are
generously supporting those in need in Ukraine and
elsewhere and encourage all to step up their assistance,
in line with the appeal by the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for aid for this
year. I want to make one absolutely thing clear here. The
humanitarian funding that the EU allocates to Ukraine
does not come at the expense of other humanitarian
needs worldwide, which Mr. Griffiths eloquently
described earlier today. The EU remains consistently at
the forefront of efforts to meet those needs.
Secondly, as we have heard, the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine set
up by the Human Rights Council concluded yesterday
that Russia has committed numerous violations of
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, in addition to a wide range of war
crimes. The findings are shocking. The crimes include
sexual violence, forced deportation, torture and other
forms of inhumane and degrading treatment as a tactic
of war. We also heard about cases of rape just now.
We continue to be appalled by Russia’s continued,
systematic and indiscriminate attacks on civilians
and critical infrastructure, which we condemn in the
strongest possible terms. Russia’s shelling is killing
civilians and depriving them of electricity, heat and
water during winter. The accumulated damage to
the energy system and the consequent difficulties
in accessing electricity and heating services are
exacerbating the humanitarian situation.
Many of Ukraine’s cities have been bombed to
ruins. We just heard the Russian Ambassador say
that Russia uses only high-precision weaponry, which
would seem to constitute a confession that such
destruction is intentional and deliberate. We welcome
the fact that following the General Assembly’s adoption
of resolution ES-11/5, on a register of damage, all such
acts committed by Russia in Ukraine will be carefully
recorded. We are also extremely concerned about the
26/29

17/03/2023

Russian offensive against Bakhmut. We note that the
military operation is led by the infamous Wagner
Group, known for its abuses and serious violations of
human rights and humanitarian law, and not just in
Ukraine. We want to once again recall the importance of
upholding human rights and international humanitarian
law, and of ensuring that all commanders, perpetrators
and accomplices of war crimes and other most serious
crimes committed in connection with Russia’s war
of aggression against Ukraine are held to account.
Russia must also enable safe, rapid and unimpeded
humanitarian access to the temporarily occupied
territories through the front lines.
On 9 March, the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant was again cut off from Ukraine’s power grid for
several hours, with cooling depending solely on diesel
generators, for the sixth time since the start of the war.
The head of the International Atomic Energy Agency
issued a warning about safety and security at the plant.
That is extremely worrying for all of us. The EU fully
supports the work of the United Nations in assisting
Ukraine in ensuring nuclear safety and security and
maintaining the implementation of the safeguards
pursuant to Ukraine’s obligations.
Finally, we reiterate our call for a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in line with resolution ES-11/6,
adopted by the General Assembly on 23 February
with the support of an overwhelming majority of the
States Members of the United Nations. We express our
support for President Zelenskyy’s peace formula and
reaffirm our commitment to working actively with
Ukraine on the 10-point peace plan. It is clear that a
large majority of the United Nations membership,
including Council members, are committed to peace in
line with the Charter of the United Nations. But while
the General Assembly once again called for a peaceful
long-term solution based on the Charter and respect for
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, Russia
has continued and is in fact stepping up its offensive.
We reiterate our call on Russia to immediately cease
all hostilities and unconditionally, completely and
immediately withdraw all its forces and military
equipment from the entire territory of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders.
While Russia’s war lasts, the European Union will
remain steadfast in its support to the people of Ukraine
for as long as it takes.
23-07879

17/03/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark.
Mr. Hermann (Denmark): I thank
Secretary-General Griffiths for his briefing.

Under-

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the five
Nordic countries — Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden
and of course my own country, Denmark.
Allow me first to express our condolences for the
devastation caused by Cyclone Freddy to those affected
in Mozambique, as well as in Malawi and Madagascar.
We stand with them in solidarity, as we stand with the
people of Ukraine.
Last month, an overwhelming majority of Member
States from all regions of the world adopted a resolution
for peace in Ukraine (General Assembly resolution ES11/6) and once again demanded that Russia immediately,
completely and unconditionally withdraw from the
territory of Ukraine (see A/ES-11/PV.19). The General
Assembly underscored the need to reach, as soon as
possible, a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in line
with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
And we reaffirmed our commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine
within its internationally recognized borders.
The Nordic countries would like to highlight the
following three areas of concern: first, the disruptive
global consequences of Russia’s war of aggression and
the importance of the continuation of the Black Sea
Grain Initiative for global food security; secondly,
Russia’s ongoing violations of international law and the
obligation to provide full, safe and unhindered access
for humanitarian actors; and thirdly, the impacts of
conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence.
Russia’s illegal invasion has had shattering
consequences, and not only for the people of Ukraine. It
has also worsened the humanitarian situation globally.
Russia’s war of aggression has hampered Ukraine’s
ability to produce and export grain and other agricultural
products that are much needed in communities around
the world. We, the Nordic countries, are determined to
be at the forefront of mitigating the disruptive, global
consequences of the war. We have continued our efforts
to assist where the needs are greatest. That includes
countries in Africa, where existing food insecurity has
been made worse by the decline in exports from Ukraine.
The continuation of the Black Sea Grain Initiative is
imperative to mitigating the food insecurity caused by

S/PV.9286

Russia’s war against Ukraine, especially in developing
countries. The Initiative has ensured exports of more
than 24 million tons of grain and other foodstuff from
Ukraine since August 2022. It has helped to stabilize
global food markets and food prices, and it has ensured
the delivery of food to countries in need. We urge
Russia to be part of a solution to ensure a 120-day
rollover of the Black Sea Grain Initiative, in line with
the Istanbul agreement.
In Ukraine, the violence and destruction show no
signs of abating. Russia has resumed its deadly and
destructive missile attacks. The most recent report by
the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on Ukraine, published yesterday, concludes that Russia
has committed numerous violations of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law,
in addition to a wide range of war crimes. The findings
are shocking and include sexual violence, torture and
the forced transfer and deportation of children from
Ukraine and their illegal adoption in Russia. Such acts
are in violation of international humanitarian law and
may amount to war crimes.
The Commission has further documented
indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks in
populated areas causing excessive suffering and harm
to civilians and civilian objects, including hospitals
and schools. Russia’s attacks on civilian infrastructure,
including the systematic targeting of energy-related
infrastructure, may amount to crimes against
humanity. This is real. It means, for instance, that
pregnant women are denied prenatal care and forced
to give birth under dangerous circumstances. We call
on all parties to protect health care and the provision of
reproductive health services — not only in accordance
with international humanitarian law, but as a basic
human right.
The need to ensure protection for all civilians is a key
humanitarian prerogative. However, Russia continues
to violate our agreed norms and rules of armed conflict.
We call on all parties to comply with their obligations
under international law and to protect civilians and
civilian infrastructure, as well as to enable full, safe
and unhindered access for humanitarian actors.
Lastly, we would like to draw attention to the
alarming reports of sexual and gender-based violence in
Ukraine. The violence is perpetrated, overwhelmingly,
by Russian military personnel against Ukrainian women,
girls, men and boys. Conflict-related sexual violence is

23-0787927/29

S/PV.9286

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

a clear violation of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law and may constitute war
crimes and crimes against humanity.
We must listen to the survivors of violence.
They demand justice, but also dignity and support to
continue their lives. Investing in the mental health
and psychosocial well-being of survivors is an
investment — not only in their recovery, but also in
sustainable peace and national resilience.
In conclusion, the Nordic countries will continue
to stand with Ukraine and its people. We commend
Ukraine’s initiative for a just peace and support the
various initiatives established to secure accountability
for atrocity crimes committed in Ukraine.
The President: In my capacity as the representative
of Mozambique, I would like to thank the representative
of Denmark, speaking on behalf of the Nordic countries,
for his expression of solidarity towards the people of
Mozambique, Malawi and Madagascar.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Lithuania.
Mr. Paulauskas (Lithuania): I am speaking on
behalf of the Baltic States — Latvia, Estonia and my
own country, Lithuania. I also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Martin Griffiths for his briefing.
For more than a year, Russia has pursued its war
of aggression against Ukraine. Thousands of civilians
have been killed and injured, millions forced from their
homes and their jobs and livelihoods destroyed, with
many left struggling to access food, water, health care,
education and a safe place to live.
The humanitarian toll of Russia’s unprovoked war
against Ukraine continues to mount. The situation in
Ukraine remains a massive humanitarian crisis, with
almost 18 million people in need of humanitarian aid.
Nearly 6 million are internally displaced, forced to
flee their homes in search of safety and shelter. Eight
million people have sought refuge in Europe and
other countries.
We have seen, day after day, cynical disregard by the
Russian Federation of international humanitarian law.
Russian missiles and drones destroy Ukrainian cities
and infrastructure, kill and injure civilians, and damage
roads, homes, schools, medical facilities, farmland and
power systems. Attacks on energy infrastructure in
28/29

17/03/2023

the depths of winter caused an energy crisis, testing
the entire country’s resilience and deepening the
humanitarian crisis. According to the World Health
Organization, a staggering number — 859 — of attacks
on health-care facilities have been reported since
24 February 2022.
The war has had a severe impact on children,
with massive destruction of schools and displacement
imposing immense challenges to the education system.
It is estimated that, since the outbreak of the war,
Russia has deported thousands of children from the
newly occupied Ukrainian territories. Credible reports
have shown that this operation is centrally coordinated
by Russia’s federal Government in an effort to erase
Ukraine’s identity and future. The report of the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
Ukraine of the Human Rights Council, released on
15 March, concluded that
“Russian authorities have committed unlawful
transfers and deportations of civilians and of other
protected persons within Ukraine or to the Russian
Federation, respectively. This is a war crime.”
This is a plain violation of the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide.
In that regard, we also welcome the arrest warrants
issued today by the International Criminal Court for
Vladimir Putin and Maria Lvova-Belova for the war
crimes of the unlawful deportation of children and the
unlawful transfer of children from Ukraine to Russia.
Russia must return those children to their parents and
guardians, provide registration lists of the children it
has removed and allow independent observers to access
facilities within Russian-controlled or occupied areas
of Ukraine and in Russia.
As Ukraine continues to defend itself against
this aggression, it is important to remember what
Russia’s occupation of parts of Ukraine means for the
people: filtration operations, summary executions and
torture, rape and other forms of sexual and genderbased violence.
Russia’s war has also greatly exacerbated the
global food security crisis. We support the Grain from
Ukraine initiative and the Black Sea Grain Initiative, as
well as European Union solidarity lanes, which help to
reduce the global cost of food and provide food supplies
to the most vulnerable populations. Russia must allow
the unrestricted movement of grain from Ukraine’s
23-07879

17/03/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

ports and extend the Black Sea Grain Initiative beyond
18 March.
The international community has provided muchneeded aid, with United Nations agencies and local
and international civil society organizations working
tirelessly to ease the suffering of the Ukrainian people.
Humanitarian aid must reach those in need safely and
without impediments. Providing support for Ukraine
is at the heart of our foreign policy. The Baltic States,
together with Poland, make up the top four donors of
bilateral aid to Ukraine, based on percentage of gross
domestic product. We are proud to have been among
the first to provide military assistance, and we grant
protection to nearly 200,000 Ukrainian refugees and
provide humanitarian relief. Behind those efforts are
private citizens and businesses — they have welcomed
Ukrainians into their own homes and donated millions
of euros to support Ukraine’s armed forces.
We fully support President Zelenskyy’s 10-point
peace plan and Ukraine’s efforts to secure a just
and sustainable peace, in line with the Charter of
the United Nations, international law and General

S/PV.9286

Assembly resolutions. Until then, we stand with
Ukraine as it exercises its inherent right to self-defence
against Russia’s war of aggression, in accordance
with international law, notably Article 51 of the
United Nations Charter, and we will continue doing so
for so long as it takes.
Russia must end the war by fully withdrawing its
forces from all occupied territories in Ukraine. That is
the most effective way to end the humanitarian crisis
in Ukraine. There must also be full accountability for
the perpetrators. The International Criminal Court,
regional bodies and individual States must prosecute
those responsible for war crimes, crimes against
humanity and the crime of genocide in Ukraine. Today’s
arrest warrant issued by the International Criminal
Court represents a powerful first step in that direction
and an international special tribunal should be created
to prosecute the crime of aggression. Lastly, we should
explore all legal means to ensure that Russian assets
are used to compensate for all the material and moral
damage caused by the aggression.
The meeting rose at 6.50 p.m.

23-0787929/29
