S/PV.8044

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8044th meeting

Tuesday, 12 September 2017, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alemu. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ethiopia)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Allen
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
African Union
Report of the Secretary-General on strengthening the partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union on issues of peace and security in Africa,
including on the work of the United Nations Office to the African Union (S/2017/744)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-28374 (E)
*1728374*

S/PV.8044

Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
African Union
Report of the Secretary-General on
strengthening the partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union on issues
of peace and security in Africa, including on
the work of the United Nations Office to the
African Union (S/2017/744)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefer to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Haile Menkerios, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to the African Union and Head of
the United Nations Office to the African Union.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/744, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on strengthening the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union on
issues of peace and security in Africa, including the
work of the United Nations Office to the African Union.

12/09/2017

on the cordial and constructive nature of the discussions
held by the two Councils in Addis Ababa, which testifies
to the strong commitment of both to address peace
and security challenges in Africa in close cooperation
and partnership. It also illustrates the recognition that
the current threats to peace and security in Africa are
so complex and interconnected, and their impact so
profound, that neither organization can resolve them
without the other. I would like to commend the two
Councils for sending the unequivocal message that a
unity of purpose between the two organizations, based
on mutual respect and solidarity and on recognition
of their respective comparative advantages, is their
strength, and should be further institutionalized
going forward.
As Council members were briefed on last week,
the strategic partnership between the United Nations
Secretariat and the African Union Commission has
been growing steadily. It is now characterized by
continued engagement between peers at various levels.
United Nations Special Representatives and Envoys are
working with and complementing the efforts of their
AU counterparts in a number of critical situations,
including in Burundi, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, The Gambia, Mali, Libya, Somalia, South
Sudan and the Sudan.

Mr. Menkerios: I would like to express my
appreciation to the President of the Security Council
for convening this important meeting on cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
including the African Union (AU), and for giving me
this opportunity to introduce the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2017/744) on strengthening the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union on
issues of peace and security in Africa, including on the
work of the United Nations Office to the African Union.
The Council has the report before it, and last week held
briefings and discussions on the topic in Addis Ababa.
I will therefore just update the Council on what has
happened since the report was issued.

As I mentioned last week, United Nations and
AU special representatives now frequently deliver
joint briefings to the AU Peace and Security Council,
including, most recently, on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, South Sudan and Somalia. During the
period under review, United Nations representatives
have also participated and made statements in more than
40 AU Peace and Security Council meetings, most of
them through the United Nations Office to the African
Union. Similarly, AU representatives have briefed the
Security Council, although more of that is needed.
At the working level, daily engagements, including
horizon-scanning, joint analysis and assessments, and
joint operations planning continue consistent with the
provisions of Security Council resolution 2320 (2016),
the AU Peace and Security Council communiqué
of 29 September 2016 and the Joint United NationsAfrican Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security.

Let me start by congratulating the United Nations
Security Council and AU Peace and Security Council

I would like to focus on five points arising from
Council members’ successful deliberations last week.

I now give the floor to Mr. Menkerios.

2/19

17-28374

12/09/2017

Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union

First, both Councils reiterated the principle of the
Charter of the United Nations that the Security Council
has primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, and also recognized
the important role of regional arrangements in dealing
with challenges related to conflict, in line with Chapter
VIII of the Charter. In that regard, the Councils noted
the important and critical role of the AU and its regional
economic communities and regional mechanisms,
whose proximity to the countries and regions in conflict,
together with their in-depth knowledge of the political,
social and economic root causes and dynamics of the
conflicts, provides a unique vantage point from which
to address them.
Secondly, we welcome the consensus that
partnership between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council can be
deepened through more frequent interaction between
the two. That could include joint field missions to
conflict situations that are on both Councils’ agendas.
A number of suggestions were made about how such
joint missions could be organized. It was also suggested
that the Councils could interact more frequently,
particularly in advance of mandate decisions. Such
interactions would facilitate the adoption of common
approaches to addressing conflict situations and ensure
that both Councils’ instructions on implementation
to the Secretariat and the AU Commission are more
closely aligned.
Thirdly, we welcome the Security Council’s
recognition that its deliberations and decisions on
peace and security issues in Africa can be enriched by
briefings from AU special representatives and envoys
alongside those of their United Nations counterparts. As
many Council members said during the deliberations,
there is a wealth of knowledge, experience and
understanding that special representatives of the
African Union and the regional economic communities
could put at the Security Council’s disposal. The United
Nations Secretariat stands ready to work with the AU
Commission and the regional economic communities to
give effect to the Security Council’s wishes in that area.
Fourthly, many representatives underlined the
importance of closer collaboration between the two
organizations on conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
Although the United Nations and the AU have
improved their early-warning mechanisms, early action
is still a challenge, and we often tend to be reactive
rather than proactive. The United Nations and the AU

S/PV. 8044

should strengthen their collaboration with the regional
economic communities, as well as with neighbours of
countries where there are conflict areas. We should
also engage more with non-State actors, such as faithbased groups, since they have historical contacts with
the affected communities and enjoy a higher level of
trust with them.
On peacebuilding, the two Councils emphasized
the importance of paying more attention to addressing
the root causes of conflict and preventing relapses into
it. That will require sustained engagement on the part
of the United Nations, the AU, bilateral partners and
non-governmental organizations, including by building
institutional capacity in fragile States, increasing
economic opportunities and enhancing resilience. The
AU Peace and Security Council also called for greater
collaboration with the Peacebuilding Commission and
the Peacebuilding Support Office, with which they
agreed in October last year to meet annually to assess
progress and plan joint work.
Fifthly, we are encouraged by the continued
commitment of the Security Council and the AU Peace
and Security Council to considering financial burdensharing for AU peace support operations authorized
by the Security Council in line with resolution 2320
(2016). African countries continue to argue that they
already carry the heavy burden of sending their young
men and women into dangerous conflict situations
where the United Nations cannot deploy, in addition
to promising to provide 25 per cent of the total cost
of such operations. The AU has also taken further
steps to strengthen and fully comply with its financial
and human rights accountability and compliance
mechanisms. The Secretary-General has commended
the strong political will that the leaders of the African
Union have shown, including through their payment to
the AU Peace Fund to date of 18 per cent of their 2017
target of $65 million.
As I mentioned last week, it is also essential to
ensure that the financing of AU peace support operations
authorized by the Security Council is framed within
the context of a common political strategy, agreed to
by both Councils and informed by joint analysis and
assessments of conflict situations. Between them, the
Secretariat and the Commission have launched such a
process so as to ensure that the financing of AU-led
peace support operations becomes a tool for achieving
a common political and operational strategy.

17-283743/19

S/PV.8044

Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union

Finally, we continue to hear passionate appeals from
the AU Peace and Security Council and Commission
that the related issue of predictable, flexible and
adequate funding for the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) must be urgently addressed. The
United Nations support provided through the United
Nations Support Office in Somalia is either inadequate
or insufficiently flexible for the nature of AMISOM
operations, while non-United Nations support is
uncertain beyond 2018. Members of the AU Peace
and Security Council have described the situation as
untenable, and one that could result in AMISOM’s
precipitous withdrawal before the Somali national forces
are ready to take over their security responsibilities. It
would be tragic, not least for the long-suffering Somali
people, if the gains and sacrifices of the past decade
were reversed because the international community was
unable to provide adequate and predictable funding for
AMISOM. As requested by the Security Council, the
Secretary-General will present a report on AMISOM’s
further funding in November, and the AU Peace and
Security Council has asked the Security Council to
take appropriate decisions to address this urgent and
critical issue.
In conclusion, I would like to express appreciation
for the Security Council’s continued high-level political
support to the Framework Agreement, signed by the
Secretary-General and the AU Chairperson, which
ensures our ability to fully operationalize the strategic
partnership that the Security Council has called for.
The President: I thank Mr. Menkerios for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): First of all,
I thank you, Sir, for having organized this briefing, and
take this opportunity to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to the African Union Haile
Menkerios very much for his enlightening briefing,
which strongly highlights the stakes related to
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union (AU) in the area of peace
​​
and security.
As noted in the report of Secretary-General
(S/2017/744) before us, the partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union has taken several
important steps forward over the past recent years. The
positive development in that cooperation emanates
from a shared awareness of the interdependence and
4/19

12/09/2017

complementarity of the two organizations in the area of​​
peace and security. It is worth recalling the importance
of strengthening that cooperation and developing a
more effective partnership to confront the common
challenges of collective security in Africa. In that
connection, we welcomed the signing on 19 April of
the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security by the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission. We are hopeful that the monitoring
mechanism put in place by the two secretariats to that
end will facilitate the implementation of that important
instrument to further strengthen cooperation between
the two organizations and reach its full potential.
The Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council have a central role to play in
that cooperation, as you have just illustrated, Sir, in
summarizing the proceedings of the eleventh annual
joint consultative meeting of members of the Security
Council and African Union Peace and Security Council,
chaired by you, in Addis Ababa on 7 and 8 September.
I will limit myself to underlining that, as pertains to
that cooperation, African peacekeeping operations
are illustrative of the fact that they constitute local
responses to global problems. From that perspective,
the strengthening of the partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations should enable
the African Union to equip itself with additional
capacities, tools and means for effective and concerted
action to the benefit of all. That requires strengthening
the partnership not only at the strategic and operational
levels, but also on the level of joint analysis and planning
until deployment so as to ensure a more effective and
adapted response to the evolving peace and security
challenges that the African continent is facing. The
lessons learned, particularly in the transition from
African Union-led peace operations to United Nationsled peacekeeping operations, illustrate the numerous
logistical, operational and capacity difficulties facing
both organizations in the effective management of
peace and security issues.
In that respect, we believe that strengthening the
capacity of the African Union and its regional economic
communities in the area of peace and security is
important. In the same vein, it is necessary to strengthen
the means and capacities of regional Offices, such as
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
and United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa,
as well as the work of African Union special envoys and
17-28374

12/09/2017

Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union

special representatives to optimize their contributions
to that end.
My delegation welcomes the efforts made thus far
in seeking predictable, sustainable and flexible funding
mechanisms for African Union-led peace operations
authorized by the Security Council, in particular the
adoption of resolution 2320 (2016) in November 2016,
during the Senegalese presidency, which, in our opinion,
is an important step in that it opened up real prospects
for further reflection on how best to ensure sustainable
and predictable financing for African Union-led peace
operations. We are counting on the Ethiopian presidency
to take the lead in realizing that vision.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission for the quality of their reports,
submitted in accordance with resolution 2320 (2016),
the concrete proposals of which bring us closer together
towards realizing our common goal and making the
strategic partnership more predictable. The Senegalese
delegation hopes that the Council will demonstrate the
necessary political will so as to ensure an appropriate
follow-up through working collectively in a constructive
spirit on the adoption of a substantive draft resolution
establishing the principle that peace support operations
mandated or authorized by the African Union with
the consent of the Council must be financed through
assessed contributions to the United Nations budget,
with decisions on the funding of specific missions to be
determined on a case-by-case basis.
My delegation looks forward with great interest to the
review of the implementation of resolution 2320 (2016).
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I warmly thank Mr. Menkerios for the
his outstanding briefing, which he delivered to the
Security Council. I also thank the Secretariat for the
comprehensive report (S/2017/744) on cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union (AU).
The partnership described in the report has
evolved with regard to cooperation on various fronts.
The partnership between the AU and United Nations
has evolved in connection with peace and security.
The Security Council adopted resolution 2320 (2016)
in November 2016. The resolution emphasized the
importance of strengthening the existing cooperation
between the two organizations so as to ensure that
the partnership become strategic and institutional in
nature, thereby ensuring the tools necessary to build

S/PV. 8044

and develop the capacities of both organizations to
confront the complex and complicated challenges
facing the African continent. That partnership will be
strengthened under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations and will ensure that both parties can
benefit from it.
I would like to emphasize the importance for
the Security Council to consider all the alternatives
included in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/744), submitted in accordance with resolution
2320 (2016), namely, with regard to support for peace
operations on the African continent according to the
mandate issued by the Security Council, as well as
ensuring the principle of access to the peacekeeping
budget of the United Nations according to established
criteria. Adhering to those criteria will ensure sustained
and durable funding of peacekeeping operations on the
African continent.
Cooperation between the United Nations Secretariat
and the African Union Peace and Security Council is a
key factor involving the two organizations, and against
that backdrop, I wish to commend the efforts of the
Secretary-General as well as those of the Chairperson
of the African Union Peace and Security Council to
bolster and promote cooperation between the two
parties with regard to the institutional and practical
aspects of their endeavours. Within that framework,
on 19 April, the Joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security was signed and established the areas of
priority for cooperation between the two parties. We
hope that the document will be implemented and that
once it is, it will bolster AU capacities, fully activating
all the components of the African peace and security
architecture in its entirety, including the African
Standby Force.
I also wish to stress the importance of implementing
the principle of sustaining peace and of integrating it
into the various facets of AU work. We must attach
greater importance to conflict prevention, early warning
systems, the peaceful resolution of conflicts, postconflict peacebuilding and the promotion of cooperation
between the two organizations in those spheres so as
to ultimately reach a common understanding of the
challenges facing the African continent in the field of
peace and security. We must also be able to evaluate the
means that will allow those challenges to be tackled.

17-283745/19

S/PV.8044

Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union

I would be remiss if I did not refer to the efforts
of the United Nations Office to the African Union
to strengthen the partnership between the two
organizations. We hope that the report to be submitted
by the Secretary-General soon for the Council’s
consideration, in accordance with resolution 2320
(2016), will be assess the needs of the Office in the
light of the strengthening partnership between the two
organizations. We hope that the Council will attempt
to enhance the capacities of the Office to ensure that it
can discharge its mandate, acting as a bridge between
the two organizations.
To conclude, I wish to emphasize that Egypt, as a
member of the United Nations Security Council and
the AU Peace and Security Council, is determined
to effectively contribute to the efforts to strengthen
the partnership between the two organizations. We
are convinced that that is the best way to address the
modern-day challenges facing Africa and the world
as a whole, which are complex and multidimensional
in nature.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
you, Sir, for convening this meeting and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Menkerios for
his briefing.
It is not often enough that we gather as the Security
Council to talk about the bright side of what we
do — finding new ways for nations to work together to
foster peace and security. Today, I am glad to say, is one
of those occasions.
The African Union (AU) is a critical partner of the
United Nations. From Somalia to Mali to South Sudan,
the AU has joined the United Nations in promoting our
shared values of peace and security across the African
continent. That partnership was further demonstrated
by last week’s joint consultations. As we said the last
time we considered this relationship, the question is not
whether the AU and the United Nations will continue to
work together closely. Rather, the question is how we
will deepen and strengthen our partnership.
That partnership has come a long way over the
past decade, thanks in large part to the work of both
the United Nations Office to the African Union and
the AU Peace and Security Council. When those two
organizations work together, mission planning is better,
mandates are clearer and political support is greater. All
of that means that outcomes are better. However, most
importantly, the people on the ground whose safety and
6/19

12/09/2017

lives depend on that work are better served, which is
what we are working for.
One bright spot in that relationship is the AU
plan to finalize its human rights and conduct and
discipline frameworks. Those are areas where progress
is critical if we are to deepen cooperation. It is
absolutely essential that the AU continue to work to
prevent abuses and promote respect for human rights.
Nothing does more to destroy trust — not to mention
damage the reputation of both the AU and the United
Nations — than abuses and misconduct by troops and
police. That means there must be rigorous procedures
in place for the screening and selection of personnel on
the front end. There must be training, monitoring and
reporting while peacekeepers are in the field, and there
must be independent investigations and accountability
when violations do occur. We welcome the AU
determination to promote respect for human rights, and
we look forward to progress on the implementation of
those frameworks.
We are also encouraged by the closer working
relationship that has been established between the
United Nations Secretariat and the AU Commission
staff. There has also been progress in improving internal
management and oversight of AU-led peace support
operations. These are all steps in the right direction. We
recognize that fully implementing those benchmarks
for transparency, performance and accountability will
take time, and we stand ready to continue to work
together to see that those frameworks are implemented
and show demonstrable progress.
But before we can consider additional financial
support through the United Nations, we must see
concrete evidence of such progress. The United States
will not consider the use of United Nations-assessed
contributions for any future AU operations until
the benchmarks for financial transparency, conduct
and discipline and human rights are demonstrably
implemented across AU field operations. To do
otherwise would be to risk jeopardizing the legitimacy
of United Nations peacekeeping. We will continue to
support AU efforts to increase financial self-reliance,
including reinvigorating the African Union Peace
Fund. We especially look forward to working with
AU member States to identify non-trade mechanisms
for greater self-financing that are transparent and
compliant with Member States’ international obligations
and commitments.
17-28374

12/09/2017

Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union

Finally, we look forward to continuing leadership
from the African Union to mobilize member States
to end violence and prevent mass atrocities. In places
like South Sudan, Mali and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the AU has sought to strengthen regional
responses to conflict and atrocities, but there is a good
deal of work left to be done. At the end of the day, we
are confident that this important relationship is moving
in the right direction. We are building a partnership
capable of shouldering shared responsibilities, and we
are building a partnership based on shared values.
As long as we remain steadfast in our commitment
and dedicated to showing progress, we will continue
to strengthen that important partnership. That makes
today a good day in the Security Council.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I too would like to thank
Mr. Haile Menkerios, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to the African Union (AU), for his
in-depth briefing.
When we talk about cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations in
Africa, two of the key concepts that arise are ownership
and partnership. We must balance ownership and
partnership to maximize each actor’s comparative
advantages. The creation of the Organization of African
Unity and, later, the African Union (AU) signalled broad
regional ownership and consensuses on preventing and
resolving conflict.
One of the many important roles of the AU is its
ability to deploy peace-support operations swiftly
to harsh environments. Regarding partnership, the
United Nations Office to the African Union has been
playing a growing role that is driven by a need for
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU.
Both institutions can further develop joint planning and
decision-making processes, as well as concrete ways to
enhance their communication.
Secretariat-level cooperation is under way, in
response to the Secretary-General’s May report
(S/2017/454), and regular direct interactions between
the Council and the AU Peace and Security Council are
essential in order to tangibly enhance our cooperation.
Japan also notes the interest shown during the recent
mission in the possible expansion of joint missions
going forward. Those could potentially provide
valuable insights to both Councils on the situation on
the ground.

S/PV. 8044

I would like to emphasize that enhanced partnership
is needed not only as part of peace support operations
but also for conflict prevention and mediation, as well
as on addressing root causes of conflict. The trilateral
collaboration between the Council, the AU and the
Economic Community of West African States on The
Gambia is an excellent example. We also look forward
to an expanded conflict prevention role being played by
subregional organizations throughout Africa.
During our recent mission, the Council was made
aware of the AU’s keen interest regarding funding
contributions in support of peace and security
operations. This requires further discussion in the
Council and the General Assembly as well as continued
efforts by the AU.
Mr. Llorenty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Bolivia wishes to express its
thanks for the information presented by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Haile
Menkerios. We also take this opportunity to express
our thanks for the hospitality shown the members of
the Security Council during their recent visit to Addis
Ababa and to particularly thank you, Mr. President, and
the Government and the people of Ethiopia.
Bolivia reiterates its support for and commends
the work of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the Secretary-General of the United
Nations in connection with the outcome of the first
annual conference of the United Nations and the African
Union (AU), held in April in order to foster a common
understanding of the root causes of conflict and to
promote consensus around the adoption of decisions.
We support the commitment shown by both
organizations to strengthening and improving dialogue
and mechanisms for cooperation and coordination
through the Joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security. The remits of the two organizations
provide a comprehensive strategic vision that will
make it possible to forge a stronger and more robust
partnership that will make it possible to address
the peace and security challenges faced by both
organizations, including disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration.
In that connection, we welcome the master road
map of the African Union on practical measures to
silence the guns in Africa by 2020 and its cooperation
in activities related to anti-personnel mines, as well as

17-283747/19

S/PV.8044

Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union

12/09/2017

the signing in June of a memorandum of understanding
between the AU Commission and the United Nations
Mine Action Service.

work done in Mali and coordinate them with the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali.

Turning to mechanisms for cooperation and
coordination, an example to be highlighted is the
deployment in 2007 of the AU mission in Somalia
and the support it provided in building the federal
system of that country and in the implementation of the
political road map, thanks to the joint efforts of the AU
and the Inter-Government Authority on Development
(IGAD). This progress has made it possible for the
United Nations and the African Union to establish a
partnership at the strategic and operational levels that
in the past 15 years has incorporated innovative work
methods, primarily in peacekeeping operations. In the
case of Somalia, this partnership made it possible to
establish a security pact involving mutual commitment
between the Government and its international partners,
highlighting the importance of a transition of the
security functions of the African Union Mission in
Somalia to the Somali forces.

Bolivia underlines the growing level of strategic
partnership between the Security Council and the AU
Peace and Security Council and the commitment to the
development of a structured, equitable relationship,
focusing on strengthening mutual support and
continuing technical assistance on both political issues
and peacekeeping operations.

In that context, the peacekeeping operations
deployed in Africa are a key tool for ensuring the
success of the ongoing quest for peace and security.
They are also a useful tool to confront challenges and
threats such as terrorism and humanitarian crises. This
is the case in the Lake Chad basin area, where the
United Nations, the AU and other international partners
are supporting the work of the Multinational Joint Task
Force in tackling Boko Haram.
Bolivia welcomes the signing of the agreement
on the provision of support and the memorandum
of understanding of 24 February between the AU
Commission and the countries that contribute troops in
the Lake Chad basin region, with a view to enabling the
international community to provide additional support
to the region.
In South Sudan, this support has been reflected in
the work of the AU Commission Chairperson and the
AU High Representative for South Sudan, who have
worked to ensure the inclusivity of the national dialogue
and the implementation of the agreement, in close
consultation with the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, IGAD and the United Nations. Bolivia
encourages these initiatives, including the deployment
of the Group of Five for the Sahel joint force, and we
agree with the Secretary-General, as stated in his report,
that it is important to complement those efforts with the
8/19

In that connection, Bolivia supports the SecretaryGeneral’s statement in his report that coherence in the
decisions taken by the two Councils is crucial in order
to ensure greater impact and strategic convergence so as
to enhance our collective capacity to tackle challenges
of peace and security.
Moreover, we believe that we must continue to
explore various ways to provide support and assistance
to AU operations, pursuant to resolution 2320 (2016).
Against this backdrop, Bolivia supports the request made
by the African Union concerning flexible, predictable
financing and economic support for peace and security
operations. We highlight the importance of dialogue
and cooperation with regional and subregional partners
in order to prevent conflicts. The importance of this
cooperation is reflected in the joint efforts undertaken
by the Economic Community of West African States,
the AU and other international partners, including the
United Nations, which made it possible to avert conflict
in the Republic of the Gambia.
In the same way, Bolivia believes that success in
crisis resolution depends on the role assigned women
and young people in that area and therefore underscores
the need for both organizations to endeavour to ensure
that both these groups are fully integrated into all
activities related to peace and security.
To conclude, Bolivia deems it crucial to allow the
African Union to play a more central role in the making
of decisions on issues of concern to it, respecting the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
all of its member countries. It is key to abide by the
principle of finding an African solution to African
problems if we wish to be successful in overcoming our
common challenges.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Haile Menkerios, for his
17-28374

12/09/2017

Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union

detailed briefing. We share the views we have heard as
to the increased level of interaction between the United
Nations and the African Union in the area of ensuring
peace and security in Africa.
In recent years, both organizations have been
endeavouring to use the experience that they have
garnered and their comparative advantages while
working out common approaches in order to overcome
the crisis situations on the African continent. A very
good illustration of that was the meeting held on
19 April in New York, the first annual United NationsAfrican Union conference, in the wake of which the
Secretary-General, António Guterres, and African
Union Chairperson Mahamat signed the framework
agreement between the secretariats on the issues of
peace and security.
Among the positive points in the interaction
between the United Nations and the African Union
we would underscore the July visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Nigeria. The delegation
included, inter alia, the Deputy Secretary-General,
Amina Mohammed. This is a clear reflection of the
determination of the secretariats of the United Nations
and the African Union to devise common approaches to
the most complex issues in Africa.
We deem it necessary to continue working very
closely within the framework of annual consultative
meetings between the Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council. The recent 11th
joint consultative meeting of the Council, held in Addis
Ababa, showed that this was very useful in order to
harmonize positions on the more complex issues on the
African continent.
The importance of involving regional and
subregional organizations in the resolution of crisis
situations is reflected in the interaction between
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
the African Union and the United Nations on South
Sudan. We hope that this tripartite format will prove
its effectiveness and serve as an example for the further
use of United Nations forces on the continent.
We underscore that it is unacceptable to impose
on African countries outside formulas for settlement.
There are many negative examples of such interference,
including those in South Sudan, Burundi and many
other places. We support the idea in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/744) that it is important
to increase preventive efforts on the continent. At

S/PV. 8044

the same time, they must not be in essence a mentorlike external review of domestic political and human
rights issues and even less so should they force African
countries to correct their ways. We must delegate to the
African Union the role of defusing crises. The situation
in Libya in 2011 and what transpired there afterwards is
a poignant example of such ill-conceived interference.
We agree that we must responsibly approach the
issue of increasing the predictability, reliability and
flexibility of the funding for African operations and
joint missions. At the same time, we think these issues
should not be dealt with in the Security Council. For
that purpose, we have specialized bodies within the
United Nations system, such as the Fifth Committee of
the General Assembly and the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions. We must be
sure to follow the existing procedures for considering
and approving budget requests and we must ensure
transparency and accountability in allocating the use
funds. We stand ready to have further constructive
dialogues on this issue and concerning specific work
in that regard.
In November, for example, we are looking forward
to the report of the Secretary-General on the issues of
funding the AU mission in Somalia. We think that we
need to carefully study the specific proposals therein.
Furthermore, we hope that the Africans themselves will
conscientiously approach the implementation of their
own decisions and commitments regarding increasing
their own financial share.
In conclusion, we would like to underscore, once
again, something we said last week in Addis Ababa.
There we made a proposal aimed at enhancing the
interaction between the United Nations and the African
Union. More specifically, we suggested that we should
consider the possibility of initiating the appointment
of relevant special representatives of the African
Union Commission to report to the Security Council
during our discussion of African issues. That would
allow Council members to have a more comprehensive
picture of what is going on and to determine the
necessary level of support to mediation efforts through
the African Union.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Mr. Menkerios, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to the African Union for his briefing.
Last week, the eleventh annual consultative
meeting of the Security Council and the African Union

17-283749/19

S/PV.8044

Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union

(AU) Peace and Security Council was successfully
convened in Addis Ababa. Members of the Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council had
an in-depth and frank discussion on issues of common
concern to both Councils. This has brought about a
close partnership between the United Nations and the
AU. China welcomes this and, once again, extends its
appreciation to the AU and Ethiopia for its meticulous
preparation and thoughtful arrangement for this year’s
annual meeting.
For a long time, the AU and other subregional
organizations in Africa endeavoured to promote unity
among African countries and played an important
role in maintaining peace and stability and promoting
regional economic and social development in Africa.
They made a great contribution to the United Nations
goal of fostering peace and development. China
commends those efforts.
At present, the overall situation in Africa is stable
with good development momentum. At the same
time, as stated in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/744), there are challenges facing peace and
stability and economic and social development in
Africa. Greater close cooperation between the United
Nations and the AU is needed.
First, both sides should further enhance targeted
cooperation and raise the efficiency of such cooperation.
This past April the Secretary-General and Chairperson
of the AU signed the Joint United Nations-African
Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security in which four key areas of cooperation
were identified: preventing and mediating conflicts and
sustaining peace, responding to conflict, addressing
root causes, and continuous review and enhancement
of the partnership between the United Nations and the
AU. For the next phase of work, both sides should bring
into a full play their respective comparative advantages
and accelerate the implementation of the Framework.
Secondly, both sides should further expand
their fields of cooperation and help Africa tackle its
fundamental issues. Supporting Africa’s economic
and social development is an important thrust of
enhanced cooperation between the two sides in the
future. It is also an important means of helping Africa
to resolve the roots of conflicts. The United Nations
should closely integrate the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development with the African
Union’s Agenda 2063. The international community is
10/19

12/09/2017

urged to prioritize assistance and investment in health
care, education, trade and connectivity and other
infrastructure areas to help enhance the economic and
social development of African countries.
Thirdly, the Security Council and AU Peace and
Security Council should further play their leading
role. Supporting capacity-building in Africa’s peace
and security is a key area for an enhanced United
Nations-AU partnership. The AU Peace and Security
Council’s operations are an important complement to
United Nations peacekeeping operations. The Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council should
further communicate and coordinate with each other
and quickly establish a mechanism for joint planning,
decision-making, assessment and reporting, joint
early warning on crises, strategic review, mandate
authorization and deployment. The Security Council
should provide more support and assistance in
providing predictable, stable and sustainable funding
and enhancing African countries’ capacity-building
in security.
China has consistently and resolutely supported
Africa’s peace and development. President Xi Jinping
of China proposed five pillars and ten cooperation
programmes in building China’s relationship with
Africa. The Belt and Road Initiative is also conducive
to the development of Africa.
China will maintain its approach of extensive
consultations, joint efforts and shared benefits. It will
closely corporate with African countries and continue
to assist and support Africa in enhancing its capacitybuilding in peace and security, resolving its regional
hotspot issues more quickly, and achieving peace,
stability and development on the African continent.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this meeting and for your leadership
during our trip to Addis, as well as for your very
accurate and good report this morning. I also want to
thank Ethiopia for its hospitality during our trip. I also
thank Special Representative Haile Menkerios for his
briefing this morning.
Last week’s mission to Addis Ababa for our eleventh
joint consultative meeting with the African Union Peace
and Security Council marked an important moment
in the ever stronger partnership between our two
organizations. We were encouraged by the constructive
discussions and by the degree of commonality in our
approaches to a number of security challenges on the
17-28374

12/09/2017

Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union

African continent. I think that you, Mr. President,
very accurately referred to them in your report this
morning. We look forward to a swift adoption of the
joint communiqué, and we stand ready to work very
diligently on that to get it over with as soon as possible.
The United Nations, including the Council,
cannot achieve its goals without an ever stronger
partnership with the African Union and the subregion.
We understand that when the African Union acts,
it acts on behalf of all of us. Therefore, we continue
to be a staunch supporter of an enhanced strategic
partnership between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in Africa.
Last week’s meeting, as well as the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security, signed in April,
only serve to reinforce this conviction. It is clear to
us that the African Union and its regional partners
are undertaking vital operations that are not only in
the interests of the African continent, but, in a world
of increasingly interconnected challenges, are in the
interests of all of us. We must now mobilize political
will and concrete support for the AU-United Nations
partnership in order for that relationship to reach its
full potential.
I want to commend the efforts of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, the African Union
Commission and the United Nations Office to the
African Union for their efforts in developing and
implementing the partnership. The current momentum
needs to be seized and built upon. That entails looking
at concrete options for more flexible, predictable and
sustainable funding of AU peace operations, including
access to assessed United Nations contributions. I bring
back a sense of urgency in resolving this issue — not
least in order to safeguard the security gains that have
been made in Somalia thanks to the African Union
Military Observer Mission in Somalia.
The women and peace and security agenda remains
a vital area of partnership. The recent launch of the
African Women Leaders’ Network represents a positive
step. We hope that the use of joint United Nations-AU
visits to raise awareness on gender can be used more
frequently, and we welcome the joint visits to Nigeria
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo in July. We
also support looking into joint field visits of the two
Councils, as was suggested during our trip.

S/PV. 8044

Finally, we welcome the positive developments
with regard to United Nations-AU cooperation on
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law in peace support operations. We
would welcome more attention to that issue in the next
report of the Secretary-General.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): First of all, let join others in
thanking you, Mr. President, and the Secretariat for
the excellent organization of the joint meeting with the
African Union (AU) Peace and Security Council and
for the warm hospitality offered by your Government in
your capital last week. I would also like to thank Special
Representative Haile Menkerios and Commissioner
Smail Chergui for their active participation in the
meeting, and particularly Mr. Menkerios for his
briefing today.
Resolution 2320 (2016), the AU-United Nations
framework agreement signed last April, the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2017/744) on the mechanism to
finance AU peace operations and the report of the
Chairperson of the AU Commission on the same subject
mark the beginning of the new strategic partnership
between the two organizations. Last week, the Security
Council had a very frank and very substantial and
constructive exchange of views with the African Union
Peace and Security Council on those important topics.
Today’s meeting fosters continuity in our discussions.
Focus should now be placed on implementation. In that
regard, the discussion held in Addis Ababa made it clear
that there is broad consensus for developing joint field
missions and harmonizing the work programmes on
Africa. We support that pragmatic way to improve our
methods of work and strengthen cooperation between
the two bodies.
In the same vein, we encourage the African Union
Commission and the United Nations Secretariat to
further enhance their cooperation in addressing the
root causes of African conflicts. We commend Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed for the firstever joint high-level mission with the African Union
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Nigeria
on women’s meaningful participation in peace, security
and development.
New common challenges have been arising in
recent years. I have underlined them in the meetings
in Addis Ababa. First and foremost is terrorism and
the growing connection among criminal networks,
including on human trafficking. The scope of those

17-2837411/19

S/PV.8044

Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union

crimes is cross-regional. It is no longer a challenge
related only to local conflicts in Africa. The effects of
those conflicts are global, and therefore more relevant
than even to collective security.
The cross-regional dimension of African conflicts
and the regional capacities of the African continent
are interlinked, whether in the Horn of Africa and
the Red Sea or in West Africa and the Sahel, or in the
Mediterranean region of Africa. We must continue to
enhance the regional capacities of the continent. As
indicated by the Secretary-General in his latest report,
cooperation can be further implemented through
triangular mechanisms that involve subregional
organizations and regional economic communities.
A contribution by the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development to the South Sudanese crisis and by
the Economic Community of West African States
in The Gambia crisis are clear examples of political
comparative advantages. That is also the case in the
security field for the Group of Five for the Sahel States
and its newly established force for the region.
Such a flexible framework will help respond to
the legitimate demand for African solutions to African
problems. In the long run it will also contribute to
making our joint efforts sustainable, even financially.
African Union peace operations have comparative
advantages when it comes to African crises. In that
respect, Italy supports the mechanism set out in the
Secretary-General’s report for joint planning and
mandating of African Union peace operations.
The African Union has taken on important
responsibilities in recent years and has shown a
willingness to take on more. We support its ambitions
in the development of the African Peace and Security
Architecture, the African Union Peace Fund and
the African Standby Force and its rapid deployment
capability. In the meantime, following the pragmatic
approach we advocate for shoring up that cooperation,
we deem it critical to start securing the current capacities
of African Union-mandated peace operations.
The founding of the African Union Military
Observer Mission in Somalia, for instance, requires a
prompt solution. The Secretary-General’s next thematic
report will be issued in November, during Italy’s
presidency of the Security Council. We look forward to
developing our discussion on that occasion.
Enhanced strategic cooperation with the African
Union is the leading way to smart and cost-effective
12/19

12/09/2017

peace operations. We encourage African partners to
finalize their operative arrangements for the 25 per cent
contribution of the African Union to peace operations.
Financing predictability is an essential, yet not the
exclusive way, to strengthen African capabilities.
We are in favour of the United Nations exploring
the use of assessed contributions, provided that the
appropriate set of requirements in terms of troop
quality, accountability, human rights compliance and
conduct and discipline standards are met. Equipment,
technological innovation and training are also crucial.
Italy stands ready to strengthen its engagement in
capacity-building in favour of police and military units
in African Union missions and to contribute to devising
new training schemes tailored to African needs.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, allow me to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to the African Union,
Mr. Haile Menkerios, for his briefing on the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2017/744) on ways to strengthen the
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union on issues of peace and security in Africa.
Uruguay recognizes the progress made over the past
15 years in the partnership between the African Union
and the United Nations on issues related to peace and
security. In our view, that partnership is fundamental
and necessary given the ongoing conflicts in complex
contexts, in which we must face asymmetrical threats
and the spread of violent extremism and terrorism
and — in many cases — also confront humanitarian
crises and massive violations of human rights. In that
regard, Uruguay appreciates the enthusiastic efforts of
the African Union to achieve peace and development
in Africa, thereby playing a positive role in the
peaceful resolution of such conflicts. That is why we
encourage the African Union to continue to contribute
constructively to addressing the various conflicts on
the continent.
My delegation welcomes the progress made in
the partnership over the past year, a period covered
by the report under consideration. The signing of the
Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, the
implementation of the African Union Peace Fund,
the adoption of resolution 2320 (2016) and the recent
meeting between the Council and the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union, which was mentioned a
few minutes ago, are concrete steps aimed at further
bolstering the cooperative framework for Africa. We
17-28374

12/09/2017

Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union

also share the view of Mr. Menkerios that the United
Nations Office to the African Union continues to play
an essential role. The Office is a fundamental channel
for providing substantive and technical support and
ensuring concerted decision-making, particularly
between the Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council. Uruguay appreciates the
ongoing efforts to restructure the Office with the aim
of fulfilling the new dynamics of our alliance, and we
look forward to a comprehensive review of what the
Office needs in order to enable it to meet the demands
on it.
The growing number of regional peacekeeping
and peace support operations shows that the demand
for such efforts in Africa now exceeds what the United
Nations, the African Union or any other regional or
subregional organization can handle individually. This
reality confirms the fact that peacekeeping remains
essential not only because it is a versatile instrument
but also because it is cost-effective. In that regard, my
delegation would like to emphasize three factors that
we believe will be decisive in enabling the alliance
between the United Nations and the African Union to
reach its full potential.
The first relates to the process of planning and
defining the joint mandates of African Union peace
support operations authorized by the Security Council.
We believe that close cooperation on this process is
essential to ensuring the efficiency and effectiveness of
such operations. It is vital to continue efforts to improve
the organizations’ joint work throughout the life cycle of
a mission. Among other things, that includes the initial
assessment of a crisis, a joint strategic assessment, the
implementation of the mission and assessments of its
fulfilment of its mandate and its accountability.
The second factor concerns the financing of
African Union peace support operations. We have seen
that a lack of predictable and sustainable funding and
support for such operations has undermined the African
Union’s ability to act and respond to crisis situations.
We believe that the various funding models proposed
in the Secretary-General’s May report on the subject
(S/2017/454) offer viable options for Member States
to consider.
The third factor relates to developing the capacities
of African Union personnel deployed in peace support
operations. As a country that has been actively involved
in peacekeeping operations for many years, Uruguay

S/PV. 8044

considers the responsibility of countries that contribute
troop and police contingents particularly important,
since they are the people who do the work on the
ground and have to implement operation mandates. In
that context, we should emphasize that any non-United
Nations force authorized by the Security Council,
including African Union peace support operations,
must comply with the same requirements as United
Nations peacekeeping personnel in terms of capacities,
performance, conduct, discipline and accountability.
We would like to highlight the efforts that the African
Union is making to refine its human rights and conduct
and discipline frameworks in order to ensure that
its peace support operations are conducted in full
compliance with human rights norms and international
humanitarian law, while also ensuring oversight
and accountability.
Lastly, I would like to reiterate our appreciation for
the African Union’s mediation and facilitation efforts
in various areas of conflict, such as South Sudan and
the Central African Republic. We are confident that an
even closer alliance with the United Nations will also
help to enhance the effectiveness of those efforts.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I
would first like to thank Mr. Haile Menkerios, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing, and you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s
meeting at a very timely moment, just as the Security
Council has returned from its annual meeting in Addis
Ababa with the African Union Peace and Security
Council and when one of the main parts of the General
Assembly’s high-level week will be devoted to a Council
meeting on 20 September on maintaining peace. In that
regard, Mr. President, I commend your team’s work on
a draft resolution on peacekeeping operations, which
France supports. Today I would like to enlarge on three
main points arising from our discussions in Addis
Ababa last week.
My first point is about emphasizing once again the
strategic nature of the partnership between the United
Nations, the African Union (AU) and the regional
economic communities. France is firmly committed
to strengthening that partnership. The time has come
to make a qualitative leap, as part of the evolution of
peacekeeping and the division of roles between the
United Nations and regional organizations, and to fully
implement Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations. That change is both inevitable — owing to the
evolving nature of the multiplying threats to peace — and

17-2837413/19

S/PV.8044

Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union

highly desirable, owing to the two organizations’ clear
respective comparative advantages. It should enable us
to share tasks in a rational way, which will both improve
operations’ efficiency and performance and ensure a
better allocation of financial and human resources.
The many crises affecting Africa and their terrible
consequences for its peoples, particularly on the
humanitarian front and with regard to violations of
human rights, compel us to deepen our thinking on how
to provide an adequate response. We must also work
together if we are to be more effective in preventing
such crises. That has been the aim of all the efforts
made since the Secretary-General took office, working
in close collaboration with the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission. It has also been the aim of
the actions taken in the wake of the Council’s adoption,
in November 2016, of resolution 2320 (2016) and the
signing, on 19 April, of the Joint United NationsAfrican Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security, as well as the Council’s visit to
Addis Ababa for its annual meeting with the African
Union Peace and Security Council.
Of course — and this is the second point I would
like to address — the question of the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union for
peace and security in Africa means dealing with the
goal of improving the conduct and organization as well
as the financing of African peace operations authorized
or mandated by the Security Council. African peace
operations can have comparative advantages over
their United Nations counterparts. They can be
deployed more quickly and benefit from more robust
mandates, and their troop contingents generally have
a good knowledge of the terrain. Besides that, they
also correspond to the universally supported goal of
African States’ ownership of their own security. In
that regard, I commend the work undertaken so far
by the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission. Several options have been
proposed for financing African operations and should
be followed up and defined more precisely, including
the AU Peace Fund, designed to enable African States
to finance 25 per cent of the cost of operations by 2020
in line with the decision taken at the Kigali Summit in
July 2016 and confirmed at the Addis Ababa Summit in
January. And I would also point to the financial impact
that such proposals could have on the budget of the
United Nations.

14/19

12/09/2017

With regard to political and operational cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union, the
Security Council, the AU Peace and Security Council, the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission have come up with constructive
proposals for a joint mechanism for analysing threats,
defining mandates and assessing operations. Those
concepts should be pursued with a view to producing
more detailed proposals on strengthening the capacities
of the African Union and African’s regional economic
communities for planning and conducting peace
operations, in collaboration with the United Nations.
That also involves creating mechanisms essential to
ensuring transparency, accountability and respect for
codes of conduct and respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law. The Security Council
must be kept duly informed and able to guide the
missions it authorizes and mandates.
The third point I want to make is that while
African peacekeeping operations are key to the return
of stability in the African continent, they are not the
only decisive factor. That is why strengthening the
partnership between the United Nations and the AU
and regional economic communities must also be based
on a collaborative approach aimed either at better
preventing crisis situations — for example, through
greater sharing of early warning information, and I
welcome the progress made in cooperation between the
United Nations and the AU to that end — or at better
anticipating solutions for ending crises by sharing a
common political vision.
In particular, as the Secretary-General highlights
in his report (S/2017/744), it would seem indispensable
for the African Union and the regional economic
communities to contribute, where relevant, to creating
conditions conducive to a political resolution of crises
on which stabilization and reconstruction efforts can
be based. As our discussion in Addis Ababa strongly
highlighted, we must therefore ensure that the
partnership is not limited to issues of security but that
it be expanded and deepened in the area of sustaining
peace and sustainable development, in line with the the
African Union Agenda 2063 and the United Nations
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
To conclude, I wish to underscore that many crises
on the Council’s agenda — be it the threat posed by
Boko Haram in the Lake Chad basin countries, the

17-28374

12/09/2017

Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union

situation in Somalia, or insecurity in Mali and the region
of the Group of Five for the Sahel — are emblematic
of the regional and cross-cutting nature of issues
facing States and peoples today. The interlinkage of
security, political, environmental, social and economic
challenges requires an integrated response addressing
both urgent security issues and the underlying causes
of violence.
The time has come to make a decisive qualitative
leap in the United Nations-AU partnership by
articulating their respective actions in a structured and
pragmatic way. France is determined to contribute to
that end and to support the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and the Deputy Secretary-General in this area.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We are grateful to
your presidency, Sir, for the excellent organization
of the eleventh annual joint United Nations-African
Union (AU) consultative meeting, held in Addis Ababa,
and for the warm hospitality provided to the Security
Council delegation.
I would also like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Haile Menkerios for his
comprehensive and insightful briefings, in Addis Ababa
and here, on strengthening the United Nations-African
Union partnership on issues of peace and security in
Africa and the activities of the United Nations Office
to the African Union (UNOAU).
My delegation supports the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/744)
and would like to make the following observations.
The United Nations-AU partnership has evolved
significantly, as reaffirmed at the recent United NationsAU consultative meeting, in line with the landmark
resolution 2320 (2016). The Joint United NationsAfrican Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security, signed on 19 April, also marks a
new phase of enhanced strategic collaboration that can
have optimal value for Africa. What we realize today is
the need for what the Secretary-General calls a whole
new approach, with a shift to conflict prevention, rather
than spending more time and resources on resolving
them. These characterize the Secretary-General’s New
Agenda for Peace and fast-forwards Africa’s Strategy
2063 and the Silence the Guns by 2020 project.
Therefore, the United Nations-AU preventive
diplomacy tools and mechanisms can be strengthened
only by working closely at each level, with every

S/PV. 8044

entity — the United Nations Security Council and the
AU Peace and Security Council, UNOAU, and the AU
Observer Mission to the United Nations. This calls
for close synergy between the United Nations and AU
Special Representatives and Envoys, including possible
joint field missions of the Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council. We also need to combine
our strengths at all phases of the continuum, from early
warning, conflict prevention, resolution, recovery to
development and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. We welcome, therefore, the establishment
of the two separate working groups of the United
Nations and the AU to further advance the recently
signed partnership.
The United Nations can leverage the comparative
advantages of regional and subregional organizations,
as well as groups of neighbouring countries, for they
possess a better understanding of the dynamics and root
causes of conflicts and the terrain, and are therefore
in a better position to mobilize resources. Often our
response to crises remains fragmented, while their
causes are deeply interlinked. It is therefore necessary
to elaborate comprehensive approaches, connecting
security, humanitarian and development efforts, to be
better reinforced by financial outlays on peacebuilding
measures. We must invest much more in addressing the
root causes of tensions and instability by building State
institutions and consolidating constitutions, holding
elections, building democracy and the rule of law,
ending impunity, establishing good governance and
implementing security sector reforms.
Equally important are investments in human
development, infrastructure development, climate
mitigation, disaster risk reduction and building
resilience. Only these will promote intra-African
economic growth, resulting in greater and more vibrant
regional integration with tangible progress. In addition,
there has to be harmonization of AU and United Nations
standards across the African continent. Furthermore,
peace will be more durable when women and young
people are fully integrated into all activities at every
stage of the peace and security process, and are at the
negotiating table at the highest levels.
While the framework of decision-making, proposed
by Secretary-General in his latest report, will make
joint action more effective, further technical work
needs to be undertaken to agree on the modalities for
joint analysis, planning and assessment of the relevant

17-2837415/19

S/PV.8044

Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union

intergovernmental bodies. These will also require a
revision of internal administrative processes, policies
and procedures.
AU peace support operations, with the
organization’s knowledge of local conflicts and the
tactics of militias, are effective tools in helping the
United Nations to better discharge its mandate of
maintaining international peace and security. This
joint work is particularly advantageous in combating
terrorism, organized crime, human trafficking and
other scourges. The international community therefore
needs to provide AU peace operations with capacitybuilding and financial support, in accordance with
resolution 2320 (2016).
We commend AU for its continued commitment
with regard to covering 25 per cent of the cost of its
peace-support operations, and believe that the AU
Peace Fund will be a robust mechanism for cooperation
and partnership. The four options of a jointly developed
budget, as identified in the Secretary-General’s report
of 26 May (S/2017/454), should be explored for optimal
results, beyond the use of voluntary contributions.
Kazakhstan, as an observer of the AU, remains
committed to further strengthening the AU and to
helping African countries fulfil their vision for peace,
progress and prosperity.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I wish you a
Happy New Year, Mr. President. I also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Menkerios for
his briefing.
At the outset, let me express my thanks to you, Sir,
and tio the Secretariat for leading a successful visit
to the Africa Union (AU) in Addis Ababa. We all saw
and heard first hand just how critical the relationship
is between the United Nations and the AU, and I
look forward and commit to doing whatever I can to
strengthen that relationship. I do so because our two
great organizations share the same objectives, the same
priorities and the same respect for the principle of
African leadership. It is therefore in all of our interests
to forge an even closer relationship as we strive to
maintain peace and security in Africa.To do so, I see
three steps that we should take.
First, and the others have said, we need to do more
to learn from each other. A simple first step would be
having more joint briefings in the Chamber from Au
and United Nations officials, as we do on Somalia.

16/19

12/09/2017

They are a vital means of increasing the awareness and
knowledge of all of us around this table. There should
also be more joints analysis, joint planning and joint
assessments so that we form a common understanding
of a situation and together find common solutions. The
recent un-Au visit to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Nigeria on the theme of women and peace
and security was an example of the sort of collaborative
work we should encourage. We should cultivate our joint
reporting on gender-based violence in places like South
Sudan so that we move beyond reporting to the sharing
of action plans and further collaboration. We should
agree as the United Nations that we will make available
any of our special envoys or special representatives if
the African Union Peace and Security Council wishes
to hear from them, and we should invite the African
Union to do the same.
We should also look at what more we can do as
Member States. The United Kingdom works closely
with AU member States to provide military capacitybuilding, delivering, training and sharing expertise on
improving accountability, human rights compliance
and preventing sexual violence in conflict. I know
others are doing the same, and I encourage all to do so.
Secondly, we need both organizations to play to
their comparative strengths so that together we are more
than the sum of our parts. We need only look to Somalia
to see that it works. The bravery and the heroism of
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) troops,
to whom I pay genuine and profound tribute, supported
by the United Nations, has enabled the political process
and progress we see there.
During this year’s presidential elections, it was
AU troops who protected the venue, infrastructure
and participants, ensuring the safety and security
of all those involved, and it was the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia that helped AMISOM in
the preparatory work, setting up the venue, ensuring
the integrity of the site and providing vital security
equipment to AMISOM. Together, they — we — helped
make history, ensuring that the most democratic
presidential elections in Somalia in decades passed
off successfully and peacefully. It is a model that we
should replicate elsewhere.
My third and final point is that our cooperation
will count for little without sustainable financing.
As we heard last week during our discussions with
the AU Peace and Security Council in Addis Ababa,

17-28374

12/09/2017

Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union

S/PV. 8044

this is a top objective for all of us. So we must find
a solution which shares the responsibility to provide
adequate, predictable and sustainable financing to AUled missions, including the AU’s own commitment to
fund 25 per cent of costs by 2020. It was important to
the United Kingdom that on our visit to Addis Ababa,
so many speakers from the two Councils and the AU
Commission reiterated their commitment to funding
that 25 per cent.

African Union to stand united and to reach consensus
on multifaceted issues. The recent AU master road map
of practical steps to silence the guns in Africa by 2020
serves as a vivid example.

This financial solution must be combined with the
undertaking of agreed standards and mechanisms to
ensure oversight and accountability for performance,
conduct and discipline, including sexual exploitation
and abuse, and financial management. In doing so, not
only will the finances of AU missions be secured, but
their performance and accountability will also improve.
This will only be to the benefit of peace and security
and to the benefit of many outside this Chamber. This
seems to me a fruitful area for concrete follow-up by
the United Nations Secretariat and the AU Peace and
Security Council.

The United Nations should continue building and
enhancing its strategic partnership with the African
continent, working in concert with the AU and using the
comparative advantages of each actor in peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and conflict management. In that
light, we are encouraged by the increased efforts of
the Secretary-General aimed at strengthening the
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU,
particularly the signing of the Joint United NationsAfrican Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security.

In conclusion, there is still some way to go to bring
our organizations even closer together, but through
these three steps, I believe that we can do so, and our
collaborative progress to date should encourage us that
we can resolve future challenges together.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I want to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this briefing. It is
important to maintain a high level of engagement by
the Council in the discussion of the role of the African
Union (AU) and subregional organizations in promoting
peace and sustainable development among the African
States. The outcomes of the joint consultations just
held in Addis Ababa will certainly contribute to this
end. I would like to express our sincere gratitude to
the Ethiopian presidency for this initiative and for
its hospitality.
In addition, I would like to welcome Special
Representative Haile Menkerios and thank him for his
comprehensive presentation.
No one can deny that the African Union has
demonstrated its ability to take the lead in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts. During our membership in
the Council, we have witnessed on numerous occasions
how the African Union can adapt itself to both the
ongoing and emerging challenges on the African
continent. This relates specifically to the ability of the

Such an effort should go hand in hand with the
elimination of the root causes of conflict on the
continent, and here the United Nations should continue
to serve as the AU’s indispensable partner.

Let me highlight several aspects of the current
United Nations-AU cooperation that in our view are
worthy of priority attention.
First, the United Nations is yet to succeed in taking
timely and effective preventive measures in response
to situations or tensions that could possibly become a
full-scale conflict or where the civilian population is
endangered and urgently requires protection.
In that regard, we commend the efforts of the
African Union in this area, as the first responder to
crises with the authorization of the Security Council. We
are encouraged by the fact that the AU and the relevant
regional economic communities and mechanisms are
continuing to strengthen the operational readiness of
the African Standby Force. The operationalization
of the Force will ensure a robust and swift regional
reaction in case of need.
In that light, it is important to continue to make
efforts to eliminate shortcomings in AU peace-support
operations, in particular capability gaps. We believe
that ensuring deployment readiness and increased
performance requires collective and coordinated
actions by the United Nations, the AU and other
key partners such as the European Union. We look
forward to the establishment of the relevant trilateral
collaborative mechanisms.

17-2837417/19

S/PV.8044

Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union

Secondly, it is crucial to ensure sustainable and
predictable financing of the AU operations authorized
by the Council. In that respect, the Secretary-General’s
proposals on options for financing AU peace-support
operations provides a range of viable choices. Given
the complexity of the peacekeeping endeavour, we are
convinced that there can be no uniform approach that
will fit all situations. We therefore support preserving a
maximum degree of flexibility in considering this issue.
Thirdly, in keeping with the people-centered
approach to United Nations peacekeeping and
peacebuilding activities, we believe that the protection
of civilians is a decisive factor for the success of the AU
operations endorsed by the Council. It is clear also that
there can be no peace without human rights. Thus this
component should become an indispensable element of
all AU operations authorized by the Security Council,
with proper adherence to the United Nations human
rights due diligence policy.
Last but not least, in the light of the latest joint
consultations between the two Councils and the further
enhancement of their cooperation, Ukraine underlines
the merit of joint United Nations-AU field missions,
which we see as an important conflict-prevention tool.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ethiopia.
I want to join other Council members in expressing
thanks to Special Representative Haile Menkerios for
his comprehensive briefing on the annual report of
the Secretary-General (S/2017/744) on strengthening
the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU) on issues of peace and security in
Africa, including the work of the United Nations office
to the African Union.
Strengthening the United Nations-AU partnership
is indeed a matter of priority for us, and we are very
pleased that this discussion is taking place during
our presidency of the Council and a few days before
the start of the high-level week of the seventy-second
session of the General Assembly.
Let me highlight the following three points in
relation to our discussion on the United Nations-AU
partnership today.
First, it is indeed fitting that this meeting is taking
place immediately after the successful conclusion of
the 11th joint annual consultation between the United

18/19

12/09/2017

Nations Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council.
I wish to thank once again both Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haile
Menkerios and Commissioner Chergui for all their
support and cooperation and for making all the
arrangements necessary for the smooth conduct of the
meeting. The frank exchange of views between members
of the two Councils demonstrated the significant
importance that they attach to the partnership between
the United Nations and the AU in the area of peace
and security.
Secondly, this annual briefing is also taking
place against the backdrop of leadership change in
both organizations and a renewed commitment to
elevating the United Nations-AU partnership to a
new, higher level. That is reflected in the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security, signed by SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and Chairperson Moussa
Faki Mahamat on 19 April. The implementation of
the framework will certainly go a long way in further
strengthening and deepening the partnership between
the two organizations in the areas of conflict prevention
and mediation, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and postconflict recovery.
Thirdly, and last but not least, this meeting is
being held after both the Secretary-General and
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
presented their report on options for financing AUmandated peace-support operations authorized by the
Security Council on a case-by-case basis in accordance
with resolution 2320 (2016). It is also happening just
before the high-level open debate on the reform of
United Nations peacekeeping operations, scheduled
to take place on 20 September, where the issue of
partnership with the AU in the area of peacekeeping
will form one of the important pillars of the discussion.
We are pleased with the progress in terms of United
Nations-AU cooperation and collaboration on a range
of issues. Our discussion today will certainly build
momentum in that regard. We express our appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his commitment to
enhancing the United Nations-AU strategic partnership
and for his readiness to work closely with the African
Union on a range on issues based on Africa’s needs
and priorities. We cannot agree more with him on the
need to build African capacity, in particular in the area

17-28374

12/09/2017

Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union

of peacekeeping. We hope we will be able to make

S/PV. 8044

progress in terms of ensuring predictable, flexible

is not only fair and appropriate, it is also in the best
interests of our collective security.

and sustainable financing for AU-led peace support

I now resume my functions as President of the Council.

operations authorized by the Security Council. That

The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

17-2837419/19
