222

General Assembly- Thirty-ninth Session

the relevant provisions of General Assembly resolution
37/14 C of 16 November 1982.
JO 1st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/131. Elimination of all forms of religious
intolerance
The General Assembly,
Conscious of the need to promote universal respect for,
and observance of, human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or
religion,
Reaffirming its resolution 36/55 of 25 November 1981,
in which it proclaimed the Declaration on the Elimination
of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based
on Religion or Belief,
Recalling its resolutions 37/187 of 18 December 1982
and 38/ l 10 of 16 December 1983, in which it requested
the Commission on Human Rights to consider what measures might be necessary to implement the Declaration,
Welcoming Economic and Social Council resolution
1984/39 of 24 May 1984, in which the Council authorized
the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities to entrust its Special Rapporteur
with the preparation of a study, in accordance with the
terms of Sub-Commission resolution 1983/31 of 6 September 1983, 164 on the current dimensions of the problems
of intolerance and of discrimination based on religion or
belief,
Taking note of the proposed outline for the study 165
presented by the Special Rapporteur to the Sub-Commission at its thirty-seventh session,
Welcoming the fact that the Secretary-General organized
at Geneva, from 3 to 14 December 1984, within the
framework of the advisory services programme, the Seminar on the Encouragement of Understanding, Tolerance
and Respect in Matters relating to Freedom of Religion or
Belief,
Recognizing that it is desirable to enhance the promotional and public information activities of the United
Nations in matters relating to freedom of religion or belief
and that both Governments and non-governmental organizations have an important role to play in this domain,
Aware that intolerance and discrimination based on religion or belief continue to exist in many parts of the world,
Believing that further efforts are, therefore, required to
promote and protect the right to freedom of thought, conscience, religion or belief,
l. Reaffirms that everyone has the right to freedom of
thought, conscience, religion or belief;
2. Urges all States to give continuing attention to the
need for adequate legislation to prohibit discrimination
based on religion or belief in the recognition, exercise and
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
3. Also urges all States to take all appropriate measures
to combat intolerance and to encourage understanding,
tolerance and respect in matters relating to freedom ofreligion or belief;
4. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to continue its consideration of measures to implement the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance
and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief and to
164 See E/CN.4/l 984/3-E/CN.4/Sub.2/1983/43 and Corr. I and 2. chap

XXI, sect. A.

report, through the Economic and Social Council, to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit, to this
end, the report of the Seminar on the Encouragement of
Understanding, Tolerance and Respect in Matters relating
to Freedom of Religion or Belief to the Commission on
Human Rights at its forty-first session and to the General
Assembly at its fortieth session;
6. Invites the Secretary-General to continue to give
high priority to the dissemination of the text of the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and
of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief, in all official languages of the United Nations, and to take all appropriate measures to make the text available for use both by
United Nations information centres and by other interested bodies;
7. Requests the Secretary-General in this context to
invite interested non-governmental organizations to consider what further role they could envisage playing regarding the dissemination of the Declaration in national and
local languages;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Elimination of all forms
of religious intolerance" and to consider the report of the
Commission on Human Rights in the context of that item.
101st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/132.

Implications of scientific and technological
developments for human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/53 of 14 December 1978, in
which it requested the Commission on Human Rights to
urge the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities to undertake, as a matter
of priority, a study of the question of the protection of
those detained on the grounds of mental ill-health, with a
view to formulating guidelines,
Recalling also its resolution 38/ 111 of I 6 December
1983, in which it urged the Commission on Human Rights
and the Sub-Commission to expedite their consideration
of this question, so that the Commission could submit its
views and recommendations, including a draft body of
guidelines, principles and guarantees, to the General
Assembly at its fortieth session, through the Economic and
Social Council,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/33 and decision 1984/ l 42 of 24 May 1984,
Noting that the Commission on Human Rights will not
be in a position to submit its views and recommendations
to the General Assembly at its fortieth session through the
Economic and Social Council because the Sub-Commission has still not concluded its consideration of the draft
body of guidelines, principles and guarantees, 166
Noting with satisfaction the progress made by the SubCommission on this question,
Reaffirming its conviction that detention of persons in
mental institutions on account of their political views or
on other non-medical grounds is a violation of their
human rights,
Again urges the Commission on Human Rights and,
through it, the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities to expedite their
165 See E/CN.4/Sub.c, 1984128.
166 See E/C'N.4/1985 1-EiC'N.4/Sub.2/1984/43. chap. IX.
