S/2015/576

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 July 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the
Central African Republic
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2217
(2015), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) to 30 April 2016 and requested me to report to the Council every four
months beginning on 1 August 2015. The report provides an update on the situation
in the Central African Republic since my report of 1 April 2015 ( S/2015/227) and
on the implementation of the mandate of MINUSCA.

II. Major developments
A.

Political developments
2.
The Bangui Forum on National Reconciliation was held from 4 to 11 May.
More than 600 representatives, including some 120 women, from the country’s
16 prefectures and from different communities, religious backgrounds and
ethnicities, including the diaspora and the refugee populations, participated in the
historic event. The participants discussed four themes in plenary debates and
working groups: peace and security; governance; justice and reconciliation; and
economic and social development. The inclusive nature of the Forum marked a
significant departure from past dialogue and reconciliation efforts by expanding the
discussion on the future of the country beyond Bangui -based political elites.
3.
On 11 May, delegates adopted by acclamation the Republican pact for peace,
national reconciliation and reconstruction in the Central African Republic, which
spells out a set of recommendations based on the Forum’s four themes. Discussions
in advance of the Forum among representatives of 10 armed groups, the transitio nal
Government and the international community resulted in the signing of a
commitment agreement between the Government and the politico -military groups
on 23 April by 10 armed groups, and set the stage for the negotiation and signing of
an agreement on the principles of disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation and integration into the uniformed State forces of the Central African
Republic. In addition, representatives of 10 armed groups and the transitional
Government signed, on 5 May, a commitment of politico-military groups to the

15-12417 (E)

300715

*1512417*

S/2015/576

liberation of children associated with armed forces and groups to end the
recruitment and use of child soldiers. In the closing stages of the Forum, on 10 May,
nine armed groups signed an agreement on the principles of disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation and integration into the uniformed
State forces of the Central African Republic. The Front démocratique du Peuple
Centrafricain did not sign, however, stating that it had not been allowe d to
participate in the discussions on peace and security because of quotas on the number
of armed groups in that session.
4.
Through my Special Representative for the Central African Republic, Babacar
Gaye, along with my Special Representative for Central Africa, Abdoulaye Bathily,
who also chaired the Forum, the United Nations continued to provide good offices
aimed at supporting the conclusion of the political transition. MINUSCA, as a
member of the Forum’s preparatory and organizing bodies, provided sub stantial
political and logistical support for the Forum. MINUSCA, in collaboration with the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), also facilitated local
consultations throughout the country in advance of the Forum to ensure the
strengthened participation of community representatives. The Mission also provided
secretariat support to regular weekly meetings with the country’s international
partners: the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS), the
European Union, France, the Mediator’s team, MINUSCA, the Congo, the United
States of America and the World Bank, collectively known as the “Group of Eight”.
5.
To enable citizen participation in and ownership of the political process,
discussions during the Forum were broadcast live across the co untry through Radio
Guira. The station provided around-the-clock coverage and reached citizens in
Bambari, Bangui, Bouar, Bossangoa, Bria and Kaga Bandoro.
6.
On 23 May, the Transitional Authority established by decree a 25 -member
follow-up committee, which included seven women, to implement the
recommendations of the Forum. The committee membership represents different
segments of society, comprising anti-Balaka and ex-Séléka as well as
representatives of the diaspora and the international community, inclu ding
MINUSCA. The committee reports to a steering committee chaired by the Prime
Minister and is mandated to establish decentralized structures at the sub -prefecture
level. The final reports of the Forum were presented on 2 July to the Head of State
of the Transition, who expressed her Government’s commitment to the work of the
follow-up committee.
7.
Meanwhile, at its sixteenth ordinary session, held in N’Djamena on 25 May,
the ECCAS Conference of Heads of State and Government authorized the technical
extension of the transition to 31 December 2015 in order to permit the Transitional
Authority to organize credible and transparent elections before the end of 2015.
8.
Efforts to revise the Constitution also continued. During the constitutional
review workshop that was held from 3 to 6 July, representatives of Central African
civil society, traditional chiefs, magistrates and armed groups worked with
representatives of the Transitional Government and the National Transitional
Council to make final amendments to the draft constitution. Consistent with the
Constitutional Charter, the Transitional Government transmitted to the
Constitutional Court, on 15 July, the draft Constitution as amended by workshop
participants. MINUSCA continued to support the constitutiona l review process in
order to enable the holding of a constitutional referendum on 4 October, including

2/19

15-12417

S/2015/576

by supporting efforts to foster cooperation between the legislative and executive
branches.
9.
On 6 July, a presidential decree was issued to reduce the number of special
advisers in the Prime Minister’s Cabinet, while increasing the number of envoys,
resulting in a total of 52 Cabinet members, up from 44. The decree also incorporates
two new portfolios: one to follow up on the transition road map and the second to
liaise with the international forces.
10. On 27 July, the International Contact Group on the Central African Republic
met in Addis Ababa. Among the conclusions were the need to uphold the right of
refugees to vote in the elections; the importance of respecting the ineligibility clause
of the Transitional Charter; and the imperative to respect the electoral calendar. The
conclusions also emphasized the need to forge a national consensus on security
sector reform and its links to the disarmament, de mobilization, reintegration and
repatriation process. The Group also called upon the Transitional Authority to
ensure that the deployment of the Central African Armed Forces was undertaken in
full coordination with MINUSCA.

B.

Preparations for the elections
11. Notable progress has been made in preparing for the referendum and the
elections. That process has been accelerated by the establishment in April of a
strategic committee, chaired by the Prime Minister, Mahamat Kamoun, with the
participation of the National Electoral Authority, key government ministers and
members of the Group of Eight.
12. On 16 June, the strategic committee adopted a revised electoral calendar,
setting the dates for: voter registration (27 June to 27 July); the constitutional
referendum (4 October); the first round of combined presidential and legislative
elections (18 October); and a second round (22 November), should there be no
winner in the first round. In addition, voting centres have been mapped and voter
registration materials and equipment delivered. On 29 June, the voter registration
process was launched; it was to conclude on 27 July. Meanwhile, as at 15 July,
the National Electoral Authority had established 151 local branches and sworn in
1,057 election personnel in the country and abroad.
13. With regard to the participation of refugees in the elections, on 1 June, the
Transitional Authority issued a decree identifying the 12 countries in which the
National Electoral Authority would establish a total of 16 branches to allow Central
Africans living abroad to participate in the constitutional referendum and the
presidential election. The strategic committee noted the urgency of negotiating
tripartite accords with relevant host countries and the Office of the United Natio ns
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to allow refugees to participate in the
electoral process. Despite the rejection by the National Transitional Council of
relevant provisions in the draft electoral code, the Constitutional Court decided, on
20 July, to reinstate the right of Central African refugees to vote in the elections.
14. Significant efforts to solicit international support and mobilize funds for the
elections notwithstanding, a critical funding gap of $11 million out of the required
$36.6 million remains, including a gap of 48 per cent in the basket fund for
elections managed by UNDP. Of the estimated $25.7 million pledged,

15-12417

3/19

S/2015/576

approximately $11.4 million has been disbursed. Efforts are under way to find
mitigating measures that could further reduce the budget, including in-kind
contributions and the identification of additional donors.
15. MINUSCA continued to provide logistical and technical support to facilitate
the establishment of National Electoral Authority offices inside and outside the
country. It also devised security plans for the elections and provided logistical
support for transporting electoral materials from Bangui to the regions.
16. In June, the United Nations integrated electoral assistance team (MINUSCA/
UNDP) assisted the National Electoral Authority with the deployment of voter
registration materials. MINUSCA electoral staff were also deployed to 17 field
locations and will continue to reinforce the technical, planning and logistical
capacity of local Authority offices. The United Nations has further supported the
mapping of voter registration centres and begun to train voter registration experts
who will be deployed throughout the country.
17. In support of women’s participation in the electoral process, MINUSCA,
UNDP and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women (UN-Women) supported the establishment of a national database of women
for potential leadership roles in decision-making bodies of the Government.

C.

Reconciliation
18. Efforts were undertaken by the Transitional Authority and the United Nations
to promote reconciliation and reintegration, in particular for those at risk, including
young people. The Ministry of Reconciliation, working closely with the United
Nations, focused on establishing local mediation mechanisms. At the national level,
UNDP, in close coordination with MINUSCA and with funding from the
Peacebuilding Fund, supported the implementation of the National Reconciliation
Strategy. Efforts to promote reintegration and reconciliation included continued
support by MINUSCA and the International Organization for Migration for the
voluntary relocation of ex-Séléka elements from their camps in Bangui to their
communities of origin or choice.
19. In close coordination with the Transitional Authority and the United Nations
country team, MINUSCA initiated labour-intensive income-generating projects for
young people at risk in communities affected by conflict. Pilot projects began in
Bambari, Bouar, Bria and Kaga Bandoro to employ yo ung people from armed
groups and local communities in non-skilled labour initiatives to rehabilitate local
infrastructure. In addition, the United Nations Trust Fund for Human Security
announced financial support for a pilot project for social cohesion, co nflict
prevention and human security to support young people in the Central African
Republic.

D.

Security situation
20. The security situation in Bangui and key towns continued gradually to
improve but, the general situation across the country remained volatile owing to
clashes between armed groups, criminal activities and violence relating to the
seasonal migration of Fulani (Peuhl) cattle herders. Protection assistance from

4/19

15-12417

S/2015/576

MINUSCA, humanitarian actors and the French Sangaris force continued to deter
and restrict activities of armed groups, although civilians continued to face security
threats, in particular in the western and central parts of the country. Enclaves of
vulnerable populations, nearly all Muslim, remained under threat.
21. Armed groups, driven by criminal, economic or political interests, continued
to assert control in parts of the country. Anti-Balaka factions dominated the west
while ex-Séléka elements controlled areas in the north and east. Elements of the two
groups clashed regularly in the central part of the country. The Central African
Republic also continued to face threats from other armed groups, such as the Lord’s
Resistance Army in the east, Révolution et Justice in the north and the Front
démocratique du Peuple Centrafricain in the west.
22. In Bangui, the security situation stabilized but remained unpredictable, in
particular in the city’s third, fourth, fifth and eighth districts, where gang -related
crime and violence remained problematic. On 17 May, with the complicity of si x
national gendarmes, the anti-Balaka leader, Eugene Ngaikosset, known as the
“butcher of Paoua”, escaped from the custody of the national gendarmerie.
23. In the west, the security situation remained challenging, particularly in areas
bordering Cameroon and Chad, where anti-Balaka affiliated groups, as well as the
Front démocratique du Peuple Centrafricain and Révolution et Justice, continued to
pursue criminal activities. MINUSCA continued to provide armed escorts to
commercial and humanitarian convoys along the main supply road. MINUSCA also
undertook a number of robust operations, including one on 21 May to expel
elements of the Front démocratique from the Baboua-Beloko route and another in
mid-June in Zoulombo. Those operations resulted in the dismantli ng of one Front
démocratique camp.
24. Attacks by armed groups increased during the reporting period, however, with
13 incidents reported in July. For example, on 3 July, a peacekeeper suffered
gunshot wounds during an attack against a MINUSCA -escorted convoy, on 18 July,
armed attackers shot at a World Food Programme vehicle, killing the driver, and on
28 July, a peacekeeper was severely wounded in an attack against MINUSCA in
Deba village. MINUSCA has taken further steps to address the insecurity and has
redeployed additional forces to those areas.
25. In Gamboula-Amada Gaza, Mambere-Kadei prefecture, several significant
confrontations between Fulani herders from Cameroon and anti -Balaka groups were
reported. On 2 May, armed elements attacked 11 villages, reportedly killing
40 civilians and displacing at least 87 families toward Gamboula, while others took
refuge in Cameroon. In response, MINUSCA conducted robust military operations
to improve security in the area.
26. In Batangafo, Ouham prefecture, in the central part of the Central African
Republic, Operation “Arms-free city” significantly improved security, encouraged
the ex-Séléka to vacate public buildings and allowed the displaced population to
begin returning to their villages. MINUSCA also discover ed an illegal detention
facility with 18 detainees, run by the ex-Séléka Union pour la paix en Centrafrique.
To date, MINUSCA has secured the release of seven of the detainees; efforts to
release the others are continuing.
27. Following a security incident on 8 April involving Mbororo herders and
members of the local community, an armed mob of some 600 to 800 individuals

15-12417

5/19

S/2015/576

attacked the MINUSCA camp in Kaga Bandoro on 10 April, slightly wounding
10 peacekeepers. In addition, from 14 to 16 May, clashes between Mbororo herders
and the local population reportedly resulted in the death of at least nine civilians and
the displacement of more than 1,460 people from surrounding villages to Kaga
Bandoro. Meanwhile, in Kouango sub-prefecture, south of Bambari, an economic
centre between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central African
Republic, Union pour la paix en Centrafrique and anti-Balaka elements clashed in
late April and early May, leaving 32 people dead.
28. In the eastern and northern parts of the country, the two main ex-Séléka armed
groups, the Front populaire pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique and the Union
pour la paix en Centrafrique, continued to assert influence in their areas of control,
but attacks against civilians were rare. Activities by the Lord’s Resistance Army
reportedly increased in the Yalinga area, Haute Kotto prefecture, where the
population deserted some villages fearing attacks by the group.

III. Protection of civilians
29. The protection of civilians in response to serious threats of physical violence
remained the highest priority task for MINUSCA, which continued to work closely
with the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), UNHCR and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to identify and address pr otection issues.
MINUSCA forces and police continued to intensify protection efforts in priority
areas and responded to a number of serious threats to civilians. In Bangui,
MINUSCA police and forces, as part of the Joint Task Force, conducted targeted
operations to protect civilians by containing the movement of armed elements.
30. Displaced Fulani stranded in Yaloké and in several other areas in the region
continued to be subjected to serious violations of human rights, including
enslavement, sexual exploitation and other abuses. From 21 to 25 April and 5 to
9 May, respectively, a joint assessment mission and a joint protection team
comprising representatives of MINUSCA, the United Nations country team and
humanitarian actors visited Ombella-Mboko and Mambere-Kadei prefectures. Those
missions resulted in the release of 91 Fulani who had been unlawfully detained or
enslaved by anti-Balaka elements. They were resettled under MINUSCA protection.
31. MINUSCA, UNHCR, UNICEF, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and other humanitarian partners made use of their good offi ces role to
advocate at the highest levels of the Transitional Authority for the right to freedom of
movement for internally displaced persons in the Central African Republic. The effort
culminated in a visit on 20 May, led by the Prime Minister and my Deputy Special
Representative to Yaloké, during which the Prime Minister publicly confirmed the
right to free movement for all Central Africans. Following the visit, MINUSCA,
UNHCR and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs facilitated the
safe departure from Yaloké of an estimated 300 Fulani, while UNHCR successfully
advocated entry into Cameroon by 23 Fulani who had left by their own means and
were stranded in Garoua-Boulai. Early in July, a further 61 Fulani requested to be
relocated by UNHCR to Cameroon; 281 Fulani have chosen to remain in Yaloké.
32. The increased presence of Fulani nomads in Ouham prefecture triggered a
joint protection mission conducted by MINUSCA and the Transitional Authority in
Ben Zambe, Bossangoa and Nana-Bakassa from 6 to 9 July. The assessment was

6/19

15-12417

S/2015/576

followed by a joint high-level mission to Nana-Bakassa sub-prefecture on 22 July,
led by the Minister of Territorial Administration. The visit was aimed at mitigating
the growing risk of community violence resulting from the recent arrival of an
ex-Séléka group in the area.
33. In the Kaga Bandoro-Mbres area, MINUSCA, in coordination with the French
forces, led two robust operations to reduce conflict between Fulani, ex -Séléka and
anti-Balaka elements. Investigations by a joint protection mission in Kouango
sub-prefecture, south of Bambari, on 28 April and 8 May, confirmed 36 empty
villages, including 27 totally or partially burned down, and reported that the
destruction was the result of a cycle of attacks and reprisals by Union pour la paix
en Centrafrique and anti-Balaka elements.
34. MINUSCA continued to adjust its military presence in line with its integrated
analysis of threats to civilians. The Mission established temporary operating bases
in Gamboula, Kuango, Markounda, Mbres and Paoua, all priority protection
flashpoints. In June, MINUSCA trained and deployed 24 community liaison
assistants to 20 company operating bases to serve as links between the Mission’s
military component and local communities in order to enhance its early warning and
response capability.

IV. Human rights
35. The human rights situation remained of concern throughout the country. All
parties to the conflict continued to commit human rights violations, while civilians
continued to be affected during intercommunal clashes. Between 1 April and
30 June, MINUSCA documented 208 new incidents, with 240 victims, including
60 women, 24 boys and 10 girls, alongside other allegations still under
investigation. Most violations reported to MINUSCA were committed by
anti-Balaka and ex-Séléka elements. Of serious concern are verified cases of
arbitrary killings, sexual- and gender-based violence, cruel and inhumane treatment
and arbitrary arrest and detention and restrictions on the freedom of movement, in
particular of internally displaced persons. Accusations of witchcraft targeted older
women and children in particular, resulting in a number of serious abuses and
unlawful killings, including by burying victims alive.
36. MINUSCA continued to monitor, investigate and advocate with local and
national actors. On 14 May, armed Fulani affiliated with elements of the Front
populaire pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique attacked the localities of Bissingalé
and the waterfall of Nana, in greater Kaga Bandoro. D uring the attack, at least seven
civilians were killed and four seriously injured.
37. Further to recommendations made in the Bangui Forum, MINUSCA organized
a workshop for lawyers on 18 and 19 May on the right to truth, reparations and
commemoration. The Mission also conducted a two-month awareness-raising
campaign on human rights, focusing on peace and social cohesion between
communities, due process and the role and importance of the judiciary, with more
than 2,500 participants from civil society, including university students, community
leaders and community members. During the reporting period, awareness -raising
sessions were conducted for 660 members of the national armed forces, including
13 women, in Camp Kassaï, Bangui. Participants received trainin g on human rights
principles, standards and instruments and the Mission’s human rights mandate.

15-12417

7/19

S/2015/576

38. The Independent Expert on Human Rights for the Central African Republic,
Marie-Therese Keita Bocoum, conducted her fifth mission to the country from 16 to
24 June. On 30 June, she presented her preliminary report to the Human Rights
Council in the presence of the Minister of Justice and the Minister of Reconciliation
and a representative of the interreligious platform.

V. Conflict-related sexual violence
39. Conflict-related sexual violence continued at unacceptable levels. Armed
groups committed sexual- and gender-based violence against civilians across the
country, predominantly against women and girls. Internally displaced persons were
particularly at risk. Between 1 April and the end of the reporting period, the gender based violence subcluster assisted at least 216 victims of sexual violence with
specialized medical, legal and psychosocial services. In April, the subcluster
reported 85 incidents of sexual violence against women and girls in a single
prefecture (Nana-Gribrizi) in which most perpetrators were armed elements. In
response, MINUSCA dispatched patrols to the affected areas and worked with local
actors on raising the awareness of communities.
40. MINUSCA and the United Nations Population Fund together led United
Nations efforts on reinforcing joint initiatives on the prevention of and response to
conflict-related sexual violence, including through the strengthening of existing
alert systems and the provision of medical treatment, legal advice and psychosocial
support to sexual violence survivors. MINUSCA, through its police component,
raised awareness of preventive measures and responsive policing to combat sexual
violence. Efforts are currently under way to deploy additional MINUSCA protection
officers for women in Bangui and in field offices in Bouar, Bria and Kaga Bandoro.

VI. Child protection
41. MINUSCA and UNICEF continued together to lead the United Nations task
force on the monitoring and reporting mechanism on grave violations against
children. In April, 272 children (91 girls and 181 boys) had self -demobilized from
the anti-Balaka; they were provided with psychosocial support by UNICEF partners.
42. MINUSCA documented two incidents of the killing of children and 86 child
victims of violence, 4 of whom were injured by the explosion of an abandoned
grenade and 7 by gunshots. In Bangui, on 3 June, 87 schoolchildren were slightly
injured while fleeing the Lycée Boganda, followin g an armed attack by anti-Balaka
elements against MINUSCA forces. During the attack, two military officers serving
with the Bangui Joint Task Force were injured, one sustaining gunshot wounds.
MINUSCA supported the transport of the children to surrounding hospitals, where
they received medical and psychosocial assistance. MINUSCA also identified
62 children, between 13 and 17 years of age, held in detention in prisons in Bangui
and subjected to ill-treatment.
43. On 14 May, following the agreement at the Bangui Forum to end the
recruitment and use of children by armed forces or groups, 357 children were
released in Bambari by the anti-Balaka and 2 by ex-Séléka groups: the
Rassemblement patriotique pour le renouveau de la Centrafrique and the Union pour

8/19

15-12417

S/2015/576

la paix en Centrafrique. The released children received psychosocial assistance and
support for reintegration into their communities of origin.
44. During the reporting period, MINUSCA trained more than 860 officers and
soldiers of the national armed forces, local authorities (sous-préfets) and members
of civil society on child protection. MINUSCA also established a child protection
unit within its police component to facilitate the training of national security forces
personnel and increase awareness on child protection.

VII. Humanitarian
45. More than 2.7 million people were still living in dire humanitarian conditions.
More than 460,000 Central Africans were refugees in neighbouring countries, an
increase from the last reporting period by some 25,000 since January. Meanwhile,
400,000 Central Africans remained displaced within the country: as at 30 June,
UNHCR reported 244,819 Central African refugees in Cameroon, 98,281 in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, 91,211 in Chad and 27,654 in the Congo. New
displacements continued to be reported in the Kaga Bandoro area and near the
border with Cameroon, an increase caused mainly by insecurity in the border areas,
notably Kouango, and recent clashes in border areas between the Central African
Republic and Cameroon (Gamboula-Amada-Gaza). Humanitarian resources have
been stretched; an estimated $613 million is urgently required to cover the needs of
2 million people in 2015, with only 18 per cent of the required funds received to
date.
46. After having doubled the number of humanitarian actors operating in the
country and strengthened humanitarian leadership and coordination mechanisms, on
13 May, the Inter-Agency Standing Committee of United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organizations deactivated its level-3 system-wide emergency
response for the Central African Republic, which had been in place since December
2013. Subsequently, on 27 May, I appointed my Deputy Special Representative and
Resident Coordinator in the Central African Republic also as Humanit arian
Coordinator.

VIII. Socioeconomic developments
47. The economy of the Central African Republic remained stagnant, with a
growth rate of 1 per cent. Inflation was at 15.3 per cent, owing to the rise in food
prices. Because of inflation and the impact of the conflict, 1.5 million people
remained in acute food insecurity. Agriculture contributes 50 per cent of the gross
domestic product and provides more than 75 per cent of the food consumed in the
country. The 2015 budget and revenue projections are not likely to be met, given the
financial constraints of the Central African Republic. The cumulative effect of the
crisis has affected women and girls in particular, due in large part to chronic
insecurity and the erosion of the social fabric and productive capital. More than
75 per cent of the working population relies on income from the agricultural sector
and women comprise 81 per cent of the workforce in that sector.

15-12417

9/19

S/2015/576

IX. Extension of State authority
48. MINUSCA, in cooperation with the United Nations country team, continued to
support the restoration and extension of State authority, including through the
rehabilitation and equipping of State offices and buildings in and outside Bangui
through the use of quick-impact projects.
49. MINUSCA, in coordination with France and the Ministry of Territorial
Administration, trained 50 newly nominated sous-préfets on administrative
management and election-related procedures and equipped them and supported their
deployment. In April and May, MINUSCA trained préfets and sous-préfets on
mediation and conflict resolution practices.
50. MINUSCA, together with relevant agencies of the United Nations country
team, continued to support the deployment of national police outside Bangui. The
renovation of the national police headquarters in Bangui was completed in May.
MINUSCA also carried out joint police activities with the national security forces
and the border-airport police.

X. Justice and the rule of law
51. The key recommendations of the Bangui Forum’s the matic group on justice
and reconciliation were the creation of a national human rights commission,
transitional justice mechanisms, a commission on truth, justice, reparation and
reconciliation and the operationalization of the Special Criminal Court. MINU SCA
provided advice to the national authorities on the implementation of the
recommendations.
52. MINUSCA supported the Ministry of Justice in developing a strategic plan to
extend the rule of law across the country by gradually reopening courts and
detention facilities. With the assistance of MINUSCA, the Ministry deployed
magistrates to 18 of the country’s 28 courts. Together with UNDP and UN -Women,
MINUSCA initiated a joint programme to support jury trials at the Court of Appeals
in Bangui. The court has registered 70 cases (with 104 male and 8 female
defendants), which include such serious crimes as murder, criminal conspiracy, the
mutilation of bodies, the illegal possession of arms and corruption. Further efforts
will be devoted to ensuring the prosecution of sexual- and gender-based violence
cases, accompanied by the provision of protection and support to victims. The court
began hearings on 30 June. In the area of corrections, MINUSCA conducted more
than 20 training sessions on prison security for prison workers. The Mission also
supported efforts by the judicial authorities to address the backlog of cases, which is
the principal cause of prolonged detention.

A.

Implementation of urgent temporary measures
53. In accordance with paragraph 32 (f) of Security Council resolution 2217
(2015), MINUSCA arrested more than 85 criminal suspects during the reporting
period and more than 365 criminal suspects from 15 September 2014 to 30 June
2015 and facilitated their transfer from various regions to Bangui u nder its urgent
temporary measures mandate, in coordination with other international forces.

10/19

15-12417

S/2015/576

Apprehended suspects included individuals accused of serious violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law. MINUSCA provided technical advice to
the judicial police, prosecutors and investigative magistrates on due process
procedures. Two detention facilities (Camp de Roux and Ngaragba prison) are being
rehabilitated to isolate the most dangerous detained criminals.

B.

Special Criminal Court
54. On 3 June, the Head of State of the Transition promulgated the statute
establishing the Special Criminal Court, after the National Transitional Council had
integrated the observations of the Constitutional Court into the law. The Court will
be composed of 13 national and 12 internationally recruited magistrates. The
prosecution office will be headed by an international prosecutor. While the Court
will generally apply Central African laws, the death penalty has been excluded. The
law does not provide for amnesty or immunity in cases involving crimes against
humanity, war crimes or genocide. MINUSCA deployed experts to advise the
authorities on the resources necessary to make the Court operational, in particular
its budget.

XI. Disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation
55. Building on the outcome of the Bangui Forum, MINUSCA supported efforts
by the Transitional Authority to negotiate with armed groups the terms and
modalities of the agreement on disarmament, demobilization, reintegratio n and
repatriation signed during the Forum. The agreement outlined the eligibility criteria
for former combatants; arrangements for being regrouped under a preliminary
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation programme preceding
the launch of the national programme; a timeline for the new national plan on
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation; conditions for potential
individual integration into the defence and security forces; specific arrangements for
vulnerable groups; and the repatriation of foreign combatants.
56. In June, MINUSCA intensified efforts to mobilize funds for preliminary
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation activities and developed
an initial project document in collaboration with the Transitional Authority and the
World Bank. On the basis of the initial project document, the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation programme will require $28.5 million
for the demobilization and community reintegration of an e stimated 7,000
combatants from armed groups. In addition, $20 million is required for the
implementation of a community violence reduction programme targeting around
70,000 people to complement the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation programme and address the issue of violence and young people at risk
in the communities. Funding has yet to be identified for the programmes.
57. MINUSCA is carrying out programmes to support former combatants with
food and installation kits to provide for the basic needs of former combatants and
their families. In conjunction with the international community, MINUSCA has set
up labour-intensive projects for former combatants to prepare for the launch of the
national programme. Efforts to promote voluntar y disarmament included support for
the relocation of ex-Séléka elements and families gathered in the Support and

15-12417

11/19

S/2015/576

Service Batallion, the Operational Defence of the Territory Regiment and the Béal
camps in Bangui, with financial support from the Peacebuilding Fund. MINUSCA
has set up a disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation joint task
force with the Transitional Authority and the international community, which is
engaged in a large awareness-raising campaign in advance of the extension of the
pre-disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation activities to the
16 targeted locations.
Weapons and ammunitions management
58. During the reporting period, MINUSCA retrieved 995 unsafe weapons and
items of ammunition in Bangui and evaluated 99 weapons seized in the capital and
other cities, including Bria. Following negotiations, facilitated by MINUSCA,
between the ex-Séléka and the Transitional Authority, the United Nations Mine
Action Service and MINUSCA, on 4 July in Bangui, re moved a stockpile of some
6 tons of explosives from Camp Béal for destruction. The range -of-danger perimeter
in case of explosion thus decreased from 400 to 190 m. On 29 April, the Mission
initiated the construction of a permanent armoury in Camp Kassaï, with the capacity
to store 1,000 weapons.
59. The Mission conducted 692 education sessions on the risk of weapons and
explosives for 19,213 children and 8,947 adults in Bangui. To date, 35,164 people
have received such briefings. The Mission also completed “training-of-trainers”
sessions on counter-improvised explosive device awareness and certified
19 MINUSCA personnel as trainers.

XII. Security sector reform and vetting
60. MINUSCA continued to provide strategic advice and to co -chair the Technical
Committee on Security Sector Reform under the Strategic Committee on
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration and Security Sector Reform that
had adopted the principles of the future defence forces and the criteria for the
integration of former combatants. As at 15 July, MINUSCA, in cooperation with the
French forces, the European Union Common Security and Defence Policy Military
Advisory Mission in the Central African Republic and the Swiss Foundation for
Mine Action, had assisted the Ministry of Defence in the preliminary verification of
some 2,130 national armed forces personnel.
61. UNDP, in close cooperation with MINUSCA, completed the rehabilitation of
Camp Kassaï, the military hospital in Camp Oubru in Bangui and the Camp de Roux
high-security prison and three gendarmeries brigades in Bangui. MINUSCA also
supported the development of a human resources management database for the
national armed forces.
62. On 12 May, the Committee of Ministers of Defence of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region held an extraordinary meeting in Luanda.
Among the key recommendations were the establishment of a military experts
committee and its dispatch to the Central African Republic to assess the country’s
military needs.

12/19

15-12417

S/2015/576

XIII. Coordination of international assistance
63. MINUSCA, together with the United Nations country team, continued to
support the Transitional Authority in strengthening international assistance
coordination mechanisms to better align multiple approaches by international
partners. The United Nations helped the aid coordination unit of the Transitional
Authority to develop a database and a system for evaluating international assistance.
In that context, the United Nations continued to support the realization of the New
Deal for Engagement in Fragile States initiative, including through established
national structures. As a result, Bangui Forum participants adopted the New Deal
approach and the recommendation on the need to outline specific commitments
between the country and its development partners.
64. On 26 May, the European Union convened a high-level conference on the
Central African Republic in Brussels to present the first results of the European
Union “Bêkou” Trust Fund and its future goals. The meeting resulted in a total of
€377,868 in pledges (€180,945 from the European Union and its member States
(Belgium, France, Germany, Italy and the Netherlands) and €196,923 from the
African Development Bank, the African Union, the World Bank, Switzerland and
the United States of America). Only a portion of the funds announced reflected new
funds.

XIV. Deployment of the Mission
A.

Military
65. As at 14 July, MINUSCA had completed the deployment of some 9,389
military personnel, or approximately 87.3 per cent of the total authorized military
strength of MINUSCA of 10,750 troops (including 480 staff officers and military
observers). The figures include the deployment of 10 of 11 infantry battalions and
most of the necessary enablers, including three engineer companies, two level II
hospitals, two signal companies and two helicopter units. However, gaps in
contingent-owned equipment continue to pose a significant challenge for certain
contingents that have yet to meet United Nations standards.
66. With the increased number of troops in theatre, MINUSCA continued to
extend its military presence throughout the country, including in Vakaga prefecture.
The Mission maintained 46 operating bases comprising 35 permanent and
11 temporary bases.

B.

Police
67. As at 14 July, MINUSCA comprised 307 individually deployed police officers
(51 women and 256 men) or 76 per cent of the total authorized strength of
400 police officers, and 1,248 personnel of formed police units, including
66 women. Overall, 75 per cent of the total of 2,0 80 authorized police personnel and
9 of 10 formed police units have been deployed. The deployment of police officers
outside Bangui continued, with officers deployed in Bossangoa, Bouar and Bria and
one fully formed police unit deployed in Bouar.

15-12417

13/19

S/2015/576

C.

Mission concept and revised component concepts
68. The revised mission concept has taken into account new elements on the
prioritization and phasing of tasks set out in resolution 2217 (2015). In that context,
the immediate priority of MINUSCA is to support activities that will conclude the
political transition by the end of 2015 (phase III), leading to long -term support for
stabilization activities (phase IV), when a newly elected Government is installed.
The prioritization of mandated tasks is reflected in the prioritization of the resources
of the Mission in each phase.
69. In line with the mission concept, the military concept of operations is being
adjusted, taking into consideration specific demands to protect civilians as well as
provide military support to the electoral process and the extension of State authority.
70. MINUSCA and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations undertook an
assessment from 18 to 27 May to assess measures to enhance the effectiveness of
the Bangui Joint Task Force. Recommendations focused on strengthening the
command and control structure of the Task Force, increasing the performance of the
patrols and identifying resource and logistical gaps hampering its effective
functioning. The need for streamlined procedures and common terminology between
military and police personnel was also highlighted as a challenge.
71. MINUSCA is also finalizing its revised concept of operations for the police,
taking into consideration lessons learned since 15 September 2014. All formed
police units will deploy in Bangui, except for one in Bouar. MINUSCA continued to
support the national security forces in maintaining law and order in its areas of
deployment and protecting civilians, especially the return of the displaced persons
at Bangui M’Poko airport to their places of origin.

D.

Status-of-forces agreement
72. The Mission has been experiencing challenges with regard to compliance with
the status-of-forces agreement by the Central African authorities. The problem of
the imposition of taxes and duties on the importation of goods by MINUSCA has
been resolved. Other issues remain, however, including the imposition of a tax on
fuel, Mission equipment and supplies and on the personal effects of staff, as well as
a 12 per cent per annum registration fee on residential leases.

XV. Safety and security of United Nations staff
73. United Nations personnel and other humanitarian personnel operated under
increasing threats relating to armed conflict and criminality. The overall security
threat levels for United Nations civilian personnel remained substantial in the parts
of the country in which armed groups were present. Following a relative reduction
in the number of security incidents affecting humanitarian personnel, an increase
was observed in the central part of the country in June. During the reporting period,
MINUSCA peacekeepers were attacked or ambushed on 20 occasions, resulting in
injuries to 15 staff members.

14/19

15-12417

S/2015/576

XVI. Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
74. During the reporting period, allegations of misconduct against MINUSCA
personnel were reported, including some very serious allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse, including against children, as well as the excessive use of
force, which on 10 June led to the death of two civilians. In response, MINUSCA
took immediate action and repatriated the peacekeepers involved in the case,
without prejudice to the investigation and prosecution in their home country. The
Force Commander and the Police Commissioner issued directives to tighten
command and control and emphasize the United Nations standards of conduct.
MINUSCA also reiterated to all personnel the applicable rules and regulations,
including the Organization’s zero-tolerance policy, and stepped up its activities in
providing training, including refresher training, to existing military and police
personnel. The Mission has reinforced preventive measures, including by
conducting regular spot checks of areas and places conducive to sexual misconduct.
Risk assessments of military and police installations are also under way. The
implementation of the United Nations strategy for victim assistance, in coordination
with in-country partners, remains a priority.

XVII. Financial aspects
75. In its resolution 69/257 B, the General Assembly appropriated the amount of
$814.1 million for the maintenance of MINUSCA for the period from 1 July 2015 to
30 June 2016.
76. As at 16 July 2015, unpaid assessed contributions to the special account for
MINUSCA amounted to $135.6 million. The total outstanding assessed
contributions for all peacekeeping operations as at the same date amounted to
$1,740.2 million.
77. As at 16 July 2015, amounts owed to Member States contributing troops to
MINUSCA totalled $26.8 million. The reimbursements for troop costs and
contingent-owned equipment costs have been made for the periods up to 30 April
2015 and 31 March 2015, respectively, in accordance with the quarterly payment
schedule.

XVIII. Observations
78. The Bangui Forum marked an historic milestone in the Central African
transition and the country’s path towards long-term peace and stability. I
congratulate the people of the Central African Republic for their courage and for
their determination to take their destiny into their own hands. The Republican Pact
for Peace, National Reconciliation and Reconstruction should serve as a road map
for the country’s future. The agreements on the principles for disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation and on halting the use of children i n
armed conflict were also significant achievements.
79. I urge all national stakeholders, with the support of regional and international
partners, to ensure that the outcomes of the Forum meet the expectations of citizens.
Priority areas include advancing the electoral process; the disarmament,

15-12417

15/19

S/2015/576

demobilization and reintegration or repatriation of members of armed groups and
the release of the children among their ranks; security sector reform; efforts to
combat impunity; and the promotion of the rule of law. In this regard, I urge the
Transitional Authority and relevant national actors to take courageous steps to
implement the recommendations. I appeal to the international community to sustain
their efforts and provide the required support in this regard for the long term.
80. I welcome the efforts to establish a commission on truth, justice, reparations
and reconciliation as well as the ongoing local reconciliation initiatives. Such
efforts will be critical tools for healing the social fabric of the country and for
addressing the core grievances of the victims of the conflict as well as marginalized
populations. The integration of women’s perspectives into all these areas will be
vital to securing a long-lasting and sustainable peace. The United Nations, in
tandem with international partners, will play a leading role in supporting the
establishment of such mechanisms. While reconciliation is a process that takes time,
I call upon all national actors to continue to actively promote and work for
reconciliation at all levels of society.
81. I commend the Transitional Authority for its promulgation of the law on the
establishment of the Special Criminal Court and for their continued commitment to
combating impunity. Financial and technical support from regional and international
partners will be critical to the establishment and operationalization of the Court. I
encourage the Transitional Authority to continue efforts to develop, through an
inclusive and participatory process, a wider strategy for combating impunit y and
ensuring justice for the victims of crimes committed in the Central African
Republic. Such a strategy should ensure complementarity between judicial and
non-judicial mechanisms. The United Nations stands ready to further provide
support to the judicial authorities in this regard.
82. In the coming months, it will be important to move forward on the
implementation of the agreement on disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation, signed by the Government and armed groups at the Bangui For um. The
agreement is fragile because of continued divisions within, and shifting alliances
among, armed groups. All armed groups should seize this opportunity to
demonstrate their commitment to peace and their engagement in the future of their
country, and enter the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation
process. I also urge all parties to intensify efforts to defuse tensions through
confidence-building measures and to continue dialogue to further advance the peace
process. MINUSCA, through its good offices, will continue to remain engaged with
all parties concerned to broaden the gathering together of former combatants in
areas outside Bangui in order to help to improve the security situation before the
elections. Nevertheless, spoilers will not be allowed to derail the process and the
broader implementation of the Bangui Forum outcomes.
83. Meanwhile, concerted international efforts and close consultations between the
Central African authorities and their partners are critical for advan cing holistic and
sustainable security sector reform, including that of the armed forces and the police
into multi-ethnic, regionally balanced and professional security forces, and their
strengthening in accordance with international standards. A key eleme nt will be to
ensure civilian control of all defence and security forces.
84. I wish to commend the Transitional Authority for its commitment and the
progress achieved towards the holding of the constitutional referendum and

16/19

15-12417

S/2015/576

presidential and legislative elections before the end of 2015. The upcoming
elections will not only mark the end of the transition, but also a new beginning for
the Central African Republic, an opportunity for all Central Africans to participate
in the construction of a new future for their country, for and by themselves. The
institutions that will be elected will have the great responsibility of healing the deep
wounds opened by the conflict, restoring a functioning State throughout the territory
and driving a recovery process that should benefit all on an equitable basis. It will
be vital, as the Central Africans work towards those goals, for the international
community to remain at their side.
85. The United Nations and international partners are preparing to coordinate and
provide logistical and security support for the elections. I appreciate the efforts by
international partners and national stakeholders to remain committed to advancing
the electoral process. Areas of concern, however, persist. I call upon all national
stakeholders to ensure the swift adoption and application of the revised electoral
code to ensure inclusive elections, and for this legal framework to be accompanied
by specific measures to allow all Central African citizens, including refugees and
displaced persons, the opportunity to exercise their franchise in the upcoming
elections. To this end, I commend MINUSCA and the Group of Eight for
intensifying their engagement with national stakeholders to ensure that no Central
African is left behind at this crucial juncture in the country’s history.
86. I also urge all actors in the electoral process, including the Transitional
Authority and the National Electoral Authority, to continue to accelerate
preparations for the holding of free, fair, transparent and inclusive pres idential and
legislative elections. While I am encouraged by the significant progress achieved to
date, I remain deeply concerned about the financial gaps that risk undermining and
derailing the important progress made in the political process. Our support is even
more critical at this point in the Central African transition. Funding is also critically
needed to implement the outcomes of the Bangui Forum, in particular disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration as well as reconciliation efforts and the
establishment of the Special Criminal Court.
87. I therefore urge Member States to step forward and bridge the relatively small
funding gap remaining for the organization of elections and to support the other
essential processes that will consolidate peace and enable both a successful end for
the transition and a sound basis for future development. We cannot let lack of
funding undo the remarkable political progress made. The country stands at a
critical juncture. We must together do our utmost to ensure lon g-term peace and
stability for the Central African people. This will require considerable effort and
responsibility on the part of both the Central Africans and the international
community. I count on the Transitional Authority, neighbouring States and the
United Nations family and its partners to redouble their efforts to ensure a
successful and peaceful transition.
88. The security situation remains volatile, continued improvements in Bangui and
in key towns notwithstanding. I remain deeply concerned about continued serious
human rights violations and abuses, including acts of sexual - and gender-based
violence, perpetrated against civilians with impunity. The crisis also continues to
have regional and multidimensional consequences, with almost half a milli on
refugees in the neighbouring countries.

15-12417

17/19

S/2015/576

89. I therefore call upon all parties to protect and respect human rights and stop
the violence and harassment, especially against the most vulnerable. More than
36,000 people, predominantly Muslims, remain in seven enclaves throughout the
country, most individuals with limited access to basic services. This situation cannot
continue. I am encouraged by the Transitional Authority’s recent efforts to facilitate
the movement of displaced persons who wish to leave enclave areas such as Yaloké.
I call upon the Transitional Authority to ensure freedom of movement for all
without discrimination, including those remaining in enclaves, and to uphold the
obligations of the Central African Republic under international huma n rights law.
90. I am also concerned about the continuing serious humanitarian situation. More
than 2.7 million people, or half of the total population, are in need of assistance and
protection, while close to 1 million people remain displaced inside and outside the
country. Although the presence of and escorts by MINUSCA continue to expand
areas for humanitarian activities, attacks by armed groups continue to prevent
assistance from reaching those most in need. Humanitarian needs also continue to
surpass available resources because of a lack of funding. Considering the extreme
vulnerability of the civilian population, I wish to reiterate the need for timely and
sustained support to humanitarian operations, and call upon donors to respond
generously to the humanitarian appeal for the Central African Republic.
91. I deplore and condemn in the strongest terms the reported sexual abuse of
children by international forces deployed to the Central African Republic to protect
them. The United Nations is following up on the status of investigations regarding
allegations against the French forces and the forces of the African -led International
Support Mission to the Central African Republic. I have also initiated an
independent external review to assess the United Nations handling of the
allegations. I will continue all efforts necessary to ensure appropriate and more
timely action to bring the perpetrators to justice. I am seriously concerned about
recent allegations of exploitation and abuse by MINUSCA personnel. MIN USCA
has taken swift action to ensure that thorough and prompt investigations into those
serious allegations are conducted by relevant Member States or the United Nations.
The United Nations is also ensuring that the needs of victims of abuse are met, in
coordination with in-country partners, through its strategy for victim assistance. I
urge on all concerned troop- and police-contributing countries to United Nations
and non-United Nations operations to take preventive measures and to provide
timely and adequate responses.
92. I am grateful to my Special Representative for the Central African Republic
and Head of MINUSCA, Babacar Gaye, for his tireless efforts. I am deeply
appreciative of the work by the personnel of MINUSCA, the United Nations country
team and the humanitarian country team in a dangerous and unpredictable
environment. I should like to reiterate my deepest condolences to the countries and
families of United Nations staff and humanitarian workers who have lost their lives
in the line of duty in the Central African Republic. I am also grateful to my Special
Representative for Central Africa, Abdoulaye Bathily, for his role in international
mediation on the Central African Republic. I should like to thank the African Union,
troop- and police-contributing countries, the ECCAS Conference, the European
Union, the World Bank, international partners and multilateral and
non-governmental organizations for their continued efforts to end the suffering of
Central Africans and to work with them towards a b etter future.

18/19

15-12417

S/2015/576

15-12417

19/19
