SECURITY+ COUNCIL
0FFICI.k

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

2&()‘”

NEW

YEAR

MEETING:

31 MAY 1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2450)
Adoption of the agenda

... ... ... ... . ... ... ... ... . .... .. ... .

1

. ... .. ... .. ... ... ... ... . ... ... ... ... . ... ... ....

1

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Mauritius to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15760);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15761) . . . . . . .

1

S/PV.2450

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative ‘on that date.

2450th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday,
President: Mr. UMBA

di LUTETE

(Zaire).

Present: The representatives of .the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption

31 May 1983, at 3.30 p.m.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lusaka (President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia) and the other
members of the delegation tookplaces at the Council table.
3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2439th meeting, I invite Mr. Sam Nujoma, President of the South
West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), to take a
place at the Council table.

agenda (S/Agenda/2450)

of the agenda

2. The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Mauritius to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15760);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15761)
The meeting was called to order at 4.10 pm
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted
‘l%e situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of &lauritius to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15760);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/15761)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the .2439th meeting, I invite the representative of Mauritius to take a
place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Maudave (Mauritius) took a pIace at the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2439th meeting, I invite the President of the United Nations Council
for Namibia and the other members of the delegation of
the Council to take places at the Security Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nujoma took a
place at the Council table.
4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with decisions taken at previous meetings on
this item [2439th to 2444th, and 2446th to 2449th meetings], I invite the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria,
Angola, Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Benin, Botswana, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czechoslovakia,
Democratic Yemen, Egypt,
Ethiopia, Gabon, the Gambia, the German Democratic
Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany, Ghana,
Grenada, Guinea, Hungary,
India, Indonesia, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Liberia, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Mali, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique,
the
Niger, Nigeria, Panama, Qatar, Romania, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, the
United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia and Zambia to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.
At the invitation Of the President, Mr. Zar~f (AfghaniStan), Mr. Hadj Azzout (Algeria), Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola), Mr. Mufiiz (Argentina), Mr. Woolcott (Australia), Mr. Hashim (Bangladesh), Mr. MoseIey (Barbados),
Mr. Adjibade (Benin), Mr. Mogwe (Botswana), Mr. Tmetkov (Bulgaria), Mr. PeIIetier (Canada), Mr. Truce0
(Chile), Mr. Malmierca (Cuba), Mr. Moushoutas (Cyprus),
Mr. Suja (Czechoslovakia), Mr. AI-Ashtal (Democratic
Yemen), Mr. KhaIiI (Egypt), Mr. lbrahim (Ethiopia), Mr.
Davin (Gabon), Mr. BIain (Gambia), Mr. Ott (German
Democratic Republic), Mr. van Well (Federal Republic of
Germany), Mr. Gbeho (Ghana), Mr. Taylor (Grenada),
Mr. Kaba (Guinea), Mr. R&z (Hungaty), Mr. Rao (India),
Mr. Kusumaatmadja (Indonesia), Mr. Serajzadeh (Islamic
Republic of Iran), Mr. Shearer (Jamaica), Mr. Kuroda
(Japan), Mr. Wabuge (Kenya), Mr. AbuIhassan (Kuwait),
Mrs. Jones (Liberia), Mr. Bunvin (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Tan Sri Zainal Abidin (Malaysia), Mr. Traore

(Mali), Mr. MIU?OZ Ledo (Mexico), Mr. Erdenechuluun
(Mongolia), Mr. Mrani Zentar (Morocco), Mr. Chissano
(Mozambique),
Mr. Oumarou (Niger), Mr. Bolokor
(Nigeria), Mr. Cabrera (Panama), Mr. Jamal (Qatar), Mr.
Marinescu (Romania), Mr. Niasse (Senegal), Ms. Gonthier
(Seychelles), Mr. Stevens (Sierra Leone), Mr. Adan (Somalia), Mr. von Schimding (South Africa), Mr. Fonsika (Sri
Lanka). Mr. EI-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Slim
(Tunisia), Mr. Kirca (Turkey), Mr. Owiny (Uganda), Mr.
Salim (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Bassole (Upper
Volta). Mr. Chaderton-Matos (Venezuela), Mr. Le Kim
Chung (Viet Nam), Mr. Mojsov (YugoqIavia) and Mr.
Goma (Zambia) took the pIaces reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.

9. As we consider again the question of Namibia our
minds turn immediately to South Africa’s intransigence
and non-co-operation. My delegation has never had any
doubt that, for South Africa, participation in the negotiating process was but a mere nod to the pressure of community opinion and a means of assuming a posture of
co-operation in the hope of easing that pressure. It is clear
to us that South Africa’s manoeuvres and delaying tactics
have been designed only to buy time, so as to find a way
of ensuring its continued domination of Namibia while
giving the appearance that change will have taken place.
10. But South Africa’s intransigence is only one side of
the coin. The other side is the permissiveness and the
tolerance which has been shown towards South Africa by
those States which, by virtue of their extensive trade and
other links with the apartheid regime, are in a position to
pressure South Africa into compliance with the decisions
of the Council. South Africa’s intransigence is therefore
not all homegrown. Each restraint placed upon international action against that regime has contributed to fortifying the belief in Pretoria in its ability to survive and to
continue pursuing its policies. Meanwhile, the authority,
status and effectiveness of the Council suffer. Our concern
is therefore also focused on the role of those who, by their
inaction no less than by their action, have facilitated
South Africa’s intransigence, and on the weakening of the
international
Organization that naturally follows when
those with positions of special responsibility fail to discharge that responsibility.

5. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
should like to inform the members of the Council that I
have just received a letter from the representative of
Colombia in which he requests to be invited to take part
in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite him to take part in the
discussion without the right to vote, under relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Albdn-Holguin
(Colombia) took a place at the side of the Council chamber.
6. Mr. SINCLAIR
(Guyana): When, two years ago, the
Council considered the question of Namibia, the liberation of that Territory had already been too long delayed.

11. To say that Guyana shares the feelings of dissatisfaction expressed at what has been accomplished so far in the
negotiations is to say the very least; and as we look back
on the course of those negotiations involving South
Africa and five of its major Western trading partners we
are naturally tempted to ask ourselves how well principle has
fared against national interest throughout that process,
how much real serious pressure was placed upon South
Africa to comply with the demands of the international
community. My delegation has always believed and urged
that, in the event of non-compliance by South Africa, the
members of the Western contact group had an irreversible
obligation to lend their positive support to the adoption
by the appropriate organs of the United Nations of effective measures designed to achieve the objectives which
those States sought to realize through their joint efforts.

7. We meet now in 1983 in a context that makes it even
more imperative that action be taken sooner rather than
later by the United Nations. Within Namibia repression
has intensified. This also has external repercussions, in
that the number of Namibians now in exile is greater than
it .ever was. Even in their exile and their refugee camps
they are not safe from South Africa’s terror. Tension and
instability pervade southern Africa as the Pretoria regime
steps up its policy of terrorizing its neighbours and those
in the region who dare to lend support to the cause of
freedom in Namibia. South Africa continues to be in military occupation of part of the territory of Angola. Meanwhile, along with Western transnational corporations,
South Africa continues the indiscriminate plunder of the
natural resources of the Territory of Namibia, so prejudicing the future development of an independent Namibia.

12. We have always held the view that, in this Herculean
task in which we are all engaged in respect of South
Africa, concern and action must go hand in hand. For the
people of Namibia, concern to ensure South Africa’s cooperation wears a more credible face when it is at the
same time accompanied, and seen to be accotnpanied, by
a consideration of practical measures to be taken in the
event of non-co-operation. We are wondering whether the
threat was ever made to South Africa that opposition to
sanctions would be withheld if South Africa did not show
more flexibility. These questions become all the more relevant in view of certain recent developments. I refer, for
example, to the embrace in which South Africa is now
being held by some, an embrace that mocks the sensitivi-

8. It was an appreciation of this worsening situation that
moved the Heads of State or Government of non-aligned
countries, in their analysis last March of the situation in
southern Africa, to request the convening of this series of
meetings of the Council [see S/Z5675 and Corr.Z and 2,
annex, sect. I, para. 493. The high level of participation in
this debate, including that of the President of SWAPO,
Mr. Sam Nujoma, manifests the deep and widespread
concern for the early termination of South Africa’s illegal
occupation of Namibia.
2

ties of Africa and the indignation
community.

of the international

Namibia and its oppression of the people of that Territory
are a stain on the human conscience, an insult to Africa
and a threat to peace and stability in southern Africa and
indeed to international peace and security. The United
Nations and the international community must remobilize political forces in pursuit of the struggle for the liberation of Namibia and for implementation of resolution 435
(1978), which remains the only valid basis for a negotiated
settlement of the Namibia question. We feel that the
momentum of international action must be regained.

13. The details of the negotiations for the implementation of Council resolution 435 (1978) are too well known
for me to repeat them here. My delegation has taken careful note of the varying assessments of the progress of
those negotiations. It is a process, we recall, which has
tested to the utmost the patience, the flexibility and the
statesmanship of SWAPO, in particular, and of the frontline States; but they have prevailed.

19. In his report on the work of the Organization submitted last September,’ the Secretary-General observed,
among other things, that the Security Council, the organ
of the United Nations with primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, all too
often found itself unable to take decisive action to resolve
international conflicts, and its resolutions were increasingly defied or ignored by those who felt themselves powerful enough to do so. He pointed out that the Council
too frequently seemed powerless to generate the support
and influence needed to ensure that its decisions were
respected, even when they were taken unanimously. The
Secretary-General did not say it, but members of the
Council will agree that the case of Namibia, in particular
with regard to resolution 435 (1978), is a demonstration of
that weakness to which he refers.

14. While we should avoid giving way to cynicism and
despair, we need to be very sober in our assessment of
what has been accomplished so far. While we need to
approach the future positively, we need to be careful that
our spirits are not made to soar too high. How many
times have we told, for example, that the breakthrough
was just around the comer? We have taken note with
appreciation of the efforts of the contact group so far.
However, if we have learned anything at all about South
Africa in the course of the negotiations, it is the need to be
cautious.
1% Quite apart from South Africa’s particular approach
to the negotiations, which itself has effectively stymied
that process, the Pretoria regime is now being freely given
another pretext for not co-operating in the implementation of resolution 435 (1978), by the introduction of an
element that was nowhere envisaged in that resolution
and bears no relationship whatsoever to the settlement
plan. That element is the withdrawal of Cuban troops.

20. Is there another issue on the international agenda on
which three major organs of the United Nations have
pronounced themselves in such- historic concert? In 1971,
the International Court of Justice declared South Africa’s
presence in the Territory of Namibia to be illegal.* The
General Assembly, in its resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27
October 1966, terminated South Africa’s Mandate and
decided that the United Nations would assume direct
responsibility for the Territory. The Council unanimously
adopted a resolution approving a plan for South Africa’s
withdrawal and for the Territory to proceed to independence. Yet, for all this, Namibia continues to be illegally
occupied; and the supreme irony is that the representative
of the occupying regime is pretending’to warn the Council
about what kind of decision we should or should not
adopt.

16. Cuban forces entered Angola following a sovereign
decision of the Government of that country. The Govemment and people of Angola already have tremendous
problems defending their sovereignty against South
Africa, They deserve our support and solidarity in those
efforts. States must refrain from cqmpounding
those
difficulties.
17. Those who are most directly affected by the insistence on a Cuban withdrawal from Angola as part of a
settlement in Namibia are the brutalized and oppressed
people of Namibia, for that insistence gives yet another
pretext for the Pretoria @me to prolong its presence in
the Territory. My delegation would like to urge that in
our approach to the solution of the question of Namibia
we keep uppermost in mind the interests of the suffering
people of that Territory and avoid actions or policies that
are inconsistent with the promotion of those interests. In
this regard, I must pay a tribute to the Government of
France for publicly separating itself from the policy of
linkage.

21. My delegation is fully in accord with the provisions
of resolution 532 (1983), adopted this morning, which
mandates the Secretary-General to undertake consultations with the parties to the proposed cease-fire and to
report to the Council not later than 31 August on the
results of those consultations. We sincerely hope that in
the coming weeks those who have influence with South
Africa will, in support of the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral, exert the necessary pressure on the Pretoria
regime and so make the’contribution
to freedom in Namibia that their strength and influence have long made
possible and that so many have for so long been urging
upon them. Should South Africa still continue in its
intransigence, there can be no reluctance to impose mandatory sanctions in accordance with Chapter VII of the
--Charter of the United Nations.
22. My delegation shares fully the Secretary-General’s
perceptions on the question of Namibia, as expressed in

18. For the Organization, which has so resolutely set its
face against racism and for which the freedom of peoples
is one of its comer-stones, the situation in Namibia constitutes what is perhaps the greatest challenge since-its establishment, all the more so since the Territory of Namibia is
one for which the United Nations itself has assumed direct
responsibility. South Africa’s continuing occupation of
3

the concluding paragraphs of his report [S/I5776J. We
feel his anguish at the tragic delays in the implementation
of resolution 435 (1978), most recently through the introduction of new extraneous issues. We reassure him of our
continuing support and cooperation
in his efforts to
bring liberation to Namibia and peace to southern Africa.
23. I also wish to express praise to the President of the
United Nations Council for Namibia, Mr. Lusaka, for the
strong and committed leadership he has been providing to
the Council, as the legal Administering Authority for the
Territory. We also wish to pay a tribute to Mr. Mishra for
his own dynamic contribution to the struggle as United
Nations Commissioner for Namibia.
24. After more than three decades of apartheid, Africa is
impatient. The people of Namibia are impatient, and
understandably so, after years of oppression and degradation. The United Nations must reassert its authority in
respect of Namibia, and my delegation nourishes the hope
that this debate will mark the beginning of the last phase
of the efforts of the international community for Namibia’s liberation.

that it is not one or another resolution that will bring
freedom to Namibia. We know that numerous resolutions
have been adopted over the years, the implementation of
which has been obstinately frustrated by the racist regime
of Pretoria. But we also know that whenever the intemational community,
in a clear and categorical way,
expresses its support for and solidarity with our people in
their heroic struggle, that further strengthens our resolve
to carry on and advance the struggle by conquering new
heights and expanding the zones of combat inside
Namibia.
30. The resounding success which we have been able to
score here could not have been possible without creative
imagination and the systematic use of strategy behind the
scenes and in the course of the consultations, resulting in
the text of the resolution adopted by the Council.
31. In this connection, our thanks and appreciation go
to all the Ministers for Foreign Affairs and other high
officials representing the countries of the Non-Aligned
Movement and other friendly countries who participated
in the debate, thus lending their enormous prestige to the
deliberations. Similarly, we express our indebtedness to
all the other representatives who added the convincing
voices of their countries in support of our just cause, while
sparing no effort and not mincing words in strongly condemning and rejecting the linkage or parallelism that is
being unscrupulousiy injected into the process of the decolonization of Namibia by the United States Administration and the apartheid rbgime.

25. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the President of SWAPO, Mr. Sam
Nujoma, who was invited by the Council at its 2439th
meeting to participate in this debate. I now caIl on him.
26. Mr. NUJOMA:
Mr. President, I am very grateful to
you and the other members of the Council for according
the delegation of SWAP0 the opportunity once again to
-address this body at this time. _

32. In the same vein, I wish sincerely to thank the initiators of this meeting, that is, the Chairman of the African
Group for this month, the representative af the current
Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement and the President of the United Nations Council for Namibia. Likewise, I am grateful to the African members of the Security
Council for sponsoring my participation in the debate.
Needless to say, the presidency of the Security Council by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zaire and by you, Sir,
has been most effective, as can be seen from the resounding success achieved.

27. My delegation is immensely gratified by the highlevel participation in the debate and also by the correct
political’ orientation of the important ‘statements made
by nearly all the speakers throughout the’debate.
28. We are naturally greatly satisfied at the final outcome of the meeting, which has proved to be tim.eiy and
significant. In other words, our mission has been accomplished as planned. The agreed objectives which we had set
out to pursue here, in close co-operation and coordination with the United Nations, are now embodied in
the Council resolution just adopted unanimously. This
positive action by the Council has further underscored the
inevitability of the victory of our just cause over the forces
of colonial domination,
foreign exploitation, reaction,
darkness and death. Today we are happy to note that our
cause is the cause of the United Nations, which means the
cause of all who cherish peace and uphold justice. On this
basis we are confident that, with the solid backing of
progressive forces the world over, final victory is certain,
for this is the only logical and historically valid outcome
of the colonial conflict in Namibia.

33. These are our well-considered sentiments directed to
our friends and defenders of the ideals of the United
Nations and of the Charter.
34. On the other hand we have our detractors, namely,
the collaborators with and apologists for racist South
Africa. Their objectives both before and during the meeting were different, and appeared to be to sabotage the
meeting, if not to prevent it altogether. A litany of distortions and false rumours was spread in various capitals
about alleged progress and it was erroneously intimated
that a Council meeting on Namibia at this time would be
counter-productive. Well, the overwhelming majority of
the States Members of the United Nations thought otherwise and persisted, thus rebuffing this kind of unwarranted manipulation of the situation in Namibia for the
sake of the selfish interests of-the major capitalist Powers.

29. There is absolutely no question in our minds, as our
own liberators, who must continue to bear the heavy
burden of the struggle, that we shall win, whether through
the_ bullet or the ,ballot. This fact has been repeatedly
acknowledged by friend and foe alike, including the Boer
racists themselves. Thus we are realistic enough to know
4

35. Having failed in their initial ploy, racist South Africa’s friends have sought to use the debate for stonewalling
and disinformation, on the cynical basis of “If you cannot
beat them, join them”. Their statements confirm this, for
they were all at variance with what everybody else said.

as typical as those of all hi’ predecessors. Their language
is usually intemperate, abusive, insulting and belligerent,
with generalized threats against the whole world, and
their logic is always crooked. It seems that successive
spokesmen for the apurtheid regime are chosen not on
the basis of their diplomatic skills or political acumen but
strictly on the basis of their Afrikaner bellicosity and their
unmitigated
rhetoric about reactionary violence and
racial arrogance.

36. We strongly deplore the fact that, despite the unanimous adoption of the latest resolution of the Council,
which, inter &a, unambiguously reinforces the mandate
of the Secretary-General as the principal authority in the
implementation
of resolution 435 (1978), the so-called
contact group should still display the arrogance of power
by deciding to hold another of its secret meetings on Namibia on 9 and 10 June in Paris, in order to further its
member’s deceptive manoeuvres and intrigues.

44. During this debate, as in all previous ones on this
subject in the United Nations, one speaker after another
has singled out racist South Africa as the obstacle to Namibia’s independence. They have recalled its history of
defiance, non-compliance, intransigence and delaying tactics, which is older than the history of the United Nations
itself. During the past 37 years, it has resisted and prevented the implementation of the relevant resolutions and
decisions of the United Nations, notably those of the
Council.

37. This development, coming as it does immediately
after the end of this meeting, is diversionary and, in our’
view, destructive of the provisions of the latest resolution
of the Council.

45. The apartheid regime is an international outcast. It
remains suspended from General Assembly sessions. Had
it not been for protection through the Western power
of veto in the Council, the racist State would long ago
have been expelled from the United Nations. It is a
ruthless Fascist State, second only to Nazi Germany, whose
model of a racially-inspired repressive State the Afrikaner
leaders are trying very hard to emulate. The apartheid
system has long been condemned as a crime against humanity, and its inhuman practices of institutionalized racism
have inflicted and continue to inflict untold suffering
on the oppressed peoples both of Namibia and of South
Africa itself. All the African people consider that warmongering racist State to be their public enemy No. 1
because of its aggressive, violent and expansionist behaviour in Africa.

38. For our part, we most resolutely condemn and reject
any attempt on the part of those countries further to complicate the Namibian issue by introducing dangerous and
objectionable notions such as so-called general security
considerations or other regional problems in southern
Africa. Whether used euphemistically or explicitly, linkage in any form at all is totally repugnant and unacceptable to us and to all the African people.
39. We can therefore not afford to remain silent when
we see that outrageous schemes are being hatched by the
imperialist forces to delay Namibia’s independence and to
impose on an independent .Namibia impediments that
would make its sovereignty and territorial integrity a
mockery and give apartheid South Africa carte blanche to
commit aggression against Namibia under any conceivable pretext. For these reasons, SWAP0
is strongly
opposed to the notion of a “cycle of violence’*, which puts
the naked aggression of the racist Boer regime on the
same footing as the national resistance of an oppressed
people.
.
40. What SWAP0 would like to see is the members of
the so-called contact group-especially
the three permanent members of the Council-supporting
the efforts of
the Secretary-General as individual
Members of the
United Nations rather than constituting themselves a
mini-United
Nations.

46. Timeand
again, the African front-line States have
brought before the Council complaints against the racist
regime of Pretoria for its acts of destabilization, unprovoked aggression, subversion and insidious blackmail
against them.
47. Furthermore, apartheid South Africa has built up a
huge military machine in the region, while harbouring
hostile intentions against all the black people who inhabit
the African continent. Of all the dangers mentioned thus
far, the most serious is its introduction into Africa of
nuclear technology, if not nuclear weapons themselves,
considering the attendant threat to the peace and wellbeing of all the peoples there and the world over. Since
1915, the Namibian people have been languishing under
the military weight of the racist army of occupation,
which has recently reached the alarming strength of
100,000 men deployed throughout occupied Namibia.

41. In this regard, we urge- them to adhere to the letter
and spirit of resolution 435 (1978) and, in particular, the
provisions of the latest supplementary resolution of the
Council, which, in our view, is intended to, hasten Namibia’s independence.
42. At this juncture, allow me to respond, albeit briefly,
to the statement made in this body by the racist representative of the illegitimate r&me of apartheid South Africa.

48. Virtually all the Secretaries-General of the United
Nations have, in the pursuit of their duties and responsibilities, repeatedly encountered prevarication and defiance
by the racist gangsters in Pretoria. Nobody has ever said
anything good about the neo-Nazis of apartheid South

43. Even though this was the maiden speech by that
particular agent of the apartheid r&ime, his statement was
5

Africa in these meeting rooms, save for the occasional
lonely voice of one of its major Western trading partners.

implement
that, resolution. Any semblance of cooperation on its part with the United Nations was
intended only as a public relations show to fit a given
situation at a particular time.

49. The whole world stands resolutely opposed to everything that racist South Africa stands for. The African
masses of Namibia and South Africa are demanding their
birthright: freedom, justice and national independence.
Happily, they have the whole world standing behind them
in solidarity, and we are convinced that the South Africa
racists, like all the others throughout history, are doomed.
They have become their own worst enemies. We shall
continue to use all the means at our disposal to sharpen
the contradictions within their ranks and create favourable conditions for the seizure of power by our people in
our beloved fatherland.

56. As far as our struggle is concerned, no amount of
threats or aggression will deter us from intensifying the
struggle for the total liberation of Namibia. This is our
resolve, this is our determination and this is the dedication we must continue to uphold, under the banner of
SWAPO, for a free and genuinely independent Namibia.
57. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America):
We have been joined in these important proceedings by
many distinguished diplomats from many parts of the
world, particularly from the continent of Africa, and, not
least, by your distinguished Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. President, and our former esteemed colleague. All of
us owe you and him thanks for guiding these deliberations with a sure yet flexible hand and with unfailing courtesy and judiciousness. Beyond even yourselves and your
country, you have reflected great credit on the Council.

50. I do not have much to say beyond this point, except
to dismiss with the contempt it deserves the statement
delivered here on 24 May 1983 by the spokesman of the
non-representative racist State of South Africa. He had
the audacity to try to lecture the Council on the legal
history of Namibia and other salient issues relating to the
decolonization process in Namibia.

58. The United States is pleased to-have been able to
vote for the resolution we adopted this morning. We
share the common objective of all members of the Council: the swiftest possible attainment of Namibian independence; and we believe that this resolution will make a
positive contribution to that end. The United States must
point out that the third preambular paragraph refers to
several resolutions, among which there was one-Council
resolution 435 (1978)-which the United States did not
support. Our affirmative vote on the present resolution
does not imply any change in the United States position
on resolution 435 (1978). With regard to the fifth preambular paragraph, in echoing the comments of the representative of the United Kingdom, I would also note that
my Government, although represented at the International Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence, held in Paris, was not a
party to its decisions. Together with other members of the
contact group, the United States informed the SecretaryGeneral that it would not participate in the decisions of
the Conference in view of its role as a member of the
contact group in the negotiations aimed at achieving Namibia’s independence.

51. True to type, he tried to turn reality on its head by
using diatribe, omission and invention as he sought to
propagate a distorted version of history to suit his racist
and colonial interests. Certainly, nobody was either interested in or persuaded by his futile antics.
52. To begin with, the statement put us back to square
one in that we were reminded that the Botha regime did
not accept the legal authority of the United Nations over
Namibia. It follows from this that the rbgime is still claiming to be administering the Territory “in conformity with
the spirit of the lapsed Mandate” [244&h meeting, para.
711.
53. In this connection, there is no way in the world this
can be true, when 100,000 troops and police are occupying our country. As regards the lapsed Mandate, its terms
explicitly directed the Mandatory Power to promote to
the utmost the political interest, material and moral wellbeing and social progress of the Namibians, while creating
the necessary conditions for them to accede to full independence through the exercise of their inalienable right to
self-determination. Of course, this is no longer a contentious point. South Africa’s presence in Namibia is illegal
following the termination of the Mandate in 1966.

59. Over the past two years and longer, my Government
has been deeply involved in the search for a settlement of
the Namibia problem. We understand the frustration felt
because Namibian independence has not in fact yet been
achieved. However, in addition to the very substantial
progress that has been made in developing the framework
of Council resolution 435 (1978), we believe a great deal
has also been accomplished towards establishing an environment in which all parties are able to take the political
decisions, necessary to implement the United Nations
plan. If there, is to be a lasting settlement, we need to
create the conditions in which all countries in the regionmost particularly South Africa and Angola-can
feel
secure and turn their energies to their own development.
This would of. necessity involve not only complete respect

54. Contrary to the false claims being made by the Boer
regime, it is the Pretoria rbgime which has obstructed and
continues to obstruct Namibia’s independence because of
its inordinate fear of a SWAP0 victory, which in any case
is inevitable. It is just a matter of time. It will even be
sooner than later.
55. Once again the Council has unanimously agreed
that it is the illegal regime of Pretoria that is directly
responsible for the non-implementation
of resolution 435
(1978). This rbgime has never shown good faith, nor has it
really made an unequivocal and firm ‘commitment
to
6

for territorial integrity by all countries within the region;
it must also involve the withdrawal of all foreign forces in
the region. Creating the secure conditions that in turn
may provide a climate of confidence will be an essential
part of this settlement which we all devoutly wish and
towards which we are all earnestly working.

of the ‘Namibian people; respect for the territorial integrity of Namibia; assistance to the front-line States; denunciation of those who by their support strengthen South
Africa; the reminder that Namibia is a direct responsibility of the United Nations; and rejection of the linkage
between the independence of Namibia and the withdrawal
of Cuban forces from Angola. The Government of
Gabon wholeheartedly supports those principles.

60. The PRESIDENT
(interprerationfrom
Freti&): The
next speaker is the representative of Gabon. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

68. It was on 27 October 1966 that the General Assembly adopted resolution 2145 (XXI) terminating the Mandate that authorized South Africa to administer Namibia
and placed that Territory under the direct responsibility
of the United Nations. Sixteen years have elapsed since
that time, but South Africa, in defiance of that decision
and in disregard of international law, continues illegally
to occupy the Territory of Namibia and systematically
opposes, on the most fallacious pretexts, all proposals for
a peaceful settlement that have been made to it. In this
way it is doing everything in its power to drive its negotiating partners to extremes and make them, in desperation,
acquiesce in confrontation, which provides South Africa
with its pretext for complaining about the attacks -of
SWAP0 and the front-line States. One can only wonder
whether such an attitude is pure Machiavellianism or the
most perverse masochism.

61. Mr. DAVIN (Gabon) (interpretation from French):
Permit me first of all to thank you, Mr. President, and the
other members of the Council for having been good
enough to allow the delegation of Gabon to take part in
the debate on the situation in Namibia.
62. I wish now to fulfil the most pleasant duty of extending to you, Sir, my warmest congratulations on the remarkable way in which you have performed the extremely
delicate functions of President of the Council for the
month of May. We have appreciated your diplomatic talents, as well as the manner, rigorous and fair, in which
you have conducted our proceedings.
63. I wish also to take this opportunity to pay a welldeserved tribute to Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick, the representative of the United States, for the way in which she
conducted the Council’s proceeding last month.

69. Namibia is a geographical entity which forms a
whole with Walvis Bay and the offshore islands. But
South Africa lives under an apartheid r&ime which
delights only in the systematic dividing of peoples according to the good old method of “divide and rule”. Thus,
Pretoria has introduced into Namibia a whole repressive
arsenal of terror composed of arbitrary and racist laws
directly modelled on the apartheid system itself and a military and police machine marked by ruthless brutality,
arbitrary arrests, humiliation,
bullying and harassment,
and tortures of every description. South Africa is bent on
exacerbating ethnic differences the better to be able to
manipulate the inhabitants and win them over to its
cause. Obviously those tactics are aimed at one objective,
that is, doing away once and for all with SWAPO, which
is recognized by the international community as the sole
authentic representative of the Namibian people. Once
SWAP0 was out of its way, South Africa would then be
in a position to tighten its grip finally on Namibia through
its puppets.

64. The delegation of Gabon welcomes the unanimous
adoption by the member of the Council at this morning’s
meeting of resolution 532 (1983). It is a significant step on
the path towards a rapid and satisfactory settlement of the
Namibian problem.
65. Although we agree with the thrust of this resolution,
the adoption of which, in principle; marks the end of the
consideration of this agenda item, my delegation believes
that the debate is not over, the subject is far from
exhausted, and we wish therefore to reaffirm our position
here.
66. We have been meeting once again to debate the
situation in Namibia. This series of Council meetings was
held shortly after the International Conference in Support
of the Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence,
held in Paris from 25 to 29 April. The Conference, in
which many States participated-almost
all of them
represented in this room-set as its objectives the examination of the situation in and relating to Namibia; solidarity with the Namibian
people in its struggle for
self-determination and national independence in a united
Namibia under the leadership of SWAPO; solidarity with
and assistance to the front-line States; and measures to be
taken to ensure the rapid implementation
of the United
Nations plan for Namibia in accordarice with Council
resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978).

70. Thus we have a policy of annexation and the expansionist ambitions of a country ivhich poses as the defender
of democracy and Western values. One can only wonder
what the world’s democrats think about this: whether
they are flattered by so much solicitude or else offended
by such unabashed cynicism.
71. Although they live in a country very rich in natural
resources, the Namibians are reduced to servitude and
poverty. In fact, they are lucky if they receive a tiny proportion of the vast profits earned from the riches of their
own soil, profits which serve only further to enrich South
Africa, its allies and partners, in flagrant violation of
Decree No. 1 for the Protection of the Natural Resources
of Namibia.’

67. Africa was, on the whole, satisfied with the results of
the Conference because certain principles that it cherishes
were reaffIrmed, namely, the right to self-determination
7

72. One would be tempted to think that, in its typical
spirit of constant defiance and arrogance, South Africa
actually contrives to feed the media and deliberately tries
to be on the front of the stage whenever it is put in the
dock. That is its own special way of manifesting the disregard and scorn in which it holds the entire international
community. That is its own particular way of making
anyone who still has any doubts on the subject understand that South Africa has not the slightest intention of
obeying international law or associating itself with any
genuine process of negotiation aiming at peaceful and
equitable solutions.
*
73. Thus, at the thirty-sixth session when the General
Assembly was busy considering the question of the policy
of apartheid, South Africa carried out a destabilization
operation against Seychelles by means of mercenaries for
whom gold is more valuable than African lives.

important part of Angolan territory. So we reach a paradoxical situation in which the aggressor, after invading
and confiscating the land of others, is crying for help and
calling for protection, while the victim is cast in the role of
.the accused and is supposed to make even more
concessions.

74. During the thirty-seventh session, when the General
Assembly was about to debate the question of Namibia,
South Africa launched an unjustifiable and murderous
attack against the peaceful Lesotho.

81. The United Nations should no longer tolerate South
Africa’s continuing illegal occupation of Namibia or the
fact that it is launching from that Territory acts of armed
aggression against neighbouring independent States. The
Council should compel South Africa to put an end to its
dangerous adventurist policy, if necessary by coercive
measures such as the mandatory and comprehensive sanctions provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations.

80. The Council, which is the most authoritative organ
of the Organization, cannot in all decency endorse any
further this spurious argument of linkage without damaging its own credibility. In the whole of Africa there are
about a half a billion men and women watching us, and
we should constantly bear that fact in mind. We are not
talking about a rather abstract subject on which we have
been invited to make speeches. We are talking about
human lives, the lives of men, women and children, who
are supposed to be protected by the international law of
which the Organization is the very expression.

75. Today, with the bombing of Matola, it was the turn
of Mozambique to be once again the victim of an act of
armed aggression by the infuriated racists of Pretoria,
who have no respect whatsoever for the sovereignty of
States or for the lives of the peaceful peoples that they
victimize.

82. Faced with the aggressive and brutal policy of South
Africa and the continuance of the illegal occupation of
Namibia by the Pretoria rdgime, this is a responsibility
that the members .of the Council should have no hesitation in shouldering, particularly those that are members
of the contact group charged with implementing the settlement plan for Namibia. It is incumbent upon them to
prevail upon South Africa to comply with the provisions
of the settlement plan approved in resolution 435 (1978),
which, accepted by all, provides, inter alia, for elections
under the supervision of the United Nations, to elect a
Constituent Assembly; the withdrawal of South African
troops from Namibia; and the freeing of political prisoners and the abolition of racist laws. This plan remains the
sole valid basis for a Peaceful settlement, and that is why
we call for its immediate and unconditional application.

76. One is entitled to wonder about the real feelings of
the powerful defenders of South Africa, whose benevolent
understanding, if not more or less avowed solidarity,
assures Pretoria of impunity and deficto immunity. It is
not surprising, therefore, that South Africa should evince
such scornful arrogance towards the international community as a whole and such sovereign disdain for the
resolutions of the United Nations.
77. This is the ease with resolution 435 (1978), which
approves a settlement plan for Namibia, the spirit and
letter of which South Africa is trying to distort by attempting to establish a linkage between the implementation
of
that plan and the presence of Cuban troops in Angola.

83. Violence, which as everyone knows breeds violence,
has lasted too long and it is high time that it was ended.
South Africa must withdraw immediately from Namibia.
Whether it likes it or not, it must leave sooner or later.
This is the bidding of history, and Pretoria, in spite of the
strength of its support and the power of its arms, cannot
oppose this inevitable evolution.

78. The delegation of Gabon categorically repudiates
the theory whereby the independence of Namibia would
’ be subordinated to the withdrawal of Cuban troops from
Angola. The presence of these troops results from an
agreement which is perfectly valid in international law
between Cuba and Angola. Therefore, the linking of the
independence of Namibia to the withdrawal of Cuban
troops constitutes, in the view of my delegation, pure and
simple interference in the internal affairs of Angola.

84.. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Viet Nam. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

79. Attempts are being made to persuade us that the
purpose of this link is to safeguard security, but whose
security7 The security of South Africa? For, in.spite of the
presence of Cuban troops on its soil, Angola does not
occupy a single square inch of South African territory; it
is, on the contrary, South Africa that is occupying an

85. Mr. LE KIM CHUNG (Viet Nam) (interpretation
from French): My delegation has already had an opportunity, Sir, of expressing its warmest congratulations to you
on your assumption of the important ofice of President
8

of the Council for the month of May. it is a-great pleasure
for me to reiterate these congrat.ulations today and to say
once more how earnestly we desire the successful fulfilment of your important and noble mission.

of resolution 435 (1978). We also consider that this time
the Council must draw up a precise time-table for the
implementation
of resolution 435 (1978) and continue
actively to deal with this question until the process has
been successfully completed.

86. It is also a great pleasure and a great honour for me
to welcome among us such an impressive number of Ministers for Foreign Affairs and other eminent persons, particularly the President of SWAPO, Mr. Sam Nujoma, and
the President of the United Nations Council for Namibia,
Mr. Paul Lusaka.

91. As was rightly pointed out by the President of
SWAPO, the question of Namibia calls for “positive
action now, not mere exhortations or empty promises”
12439th meeting, para. IllI.
92. The people and Government of Viet Nam have consistently &en the cause of Namibia their deep understanding and unreserved support, since the objectives and
circumstances of this cause are similar, if not identical, to
those of the struggle which the people of Viet Nam waged
against colonialism and imperialism in order to attain
their fundamental national rights, namely, independence,
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity.

87. I have listened very closely and with great respect to
the statements made here since 23 May, particularly those
of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the front-line and
non-aligned countries. I fully endorse the analysis of the
prevailing situation in and around Namibia and the
evaluation of the background and nature of the question
of Namibia as presented here so clearly and in such an
exhaustive and judicious manner.

93. When a mission of consultation from the United
Nations Council for Namibia visited Viet Nam in August
1981, the Government of Viet Nam solemnly reaffirmed
in a joint communique

88. My delegation would like to stress ‘forcefully the
exceptional seriousness of the continuing illegal occupation of Namibia by the South African racist regime, which
thus far has managed impudently to defy the international
legal system, to flout the authority of the United Nations
and to treat with contempt the wishes of the international
community concerning the achievement .of independence
by Namibia.

“its principled position of total support for the legitimate struggle of the Namibian
people for selfdetermination,
freedom and genuine independence,
under the leadership of SWAPO, which is the sole and
authentic representative of the Namibian people. The
Government of Viet Nam strongly supports the struggle of the Namibian people by all available means
including armed struggle, the legitimacy of which has
been solemnly proclaimed by resolutions of the General Assembly”.s

89. My delegation would like in particular to associate
itself with the indignation of the President of SWAP0
who, before the Council the other day, assailed the apartheid junta, which, through its persistent policy of savage
repression against the people of Namibia and its policy of
aggression and terrorism against neighbouring States, has
in cold blood committed a dual crime against humanity
and against peace, more than ever justifying immediate
and concerted punishment: We also share his indignation
at the self-centred and hypocritical policy of the United
States and other North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) countries, which have publicly espoused the
cause of the South African racist State and thereby have
become its shameless and notorious accomplices, and
must be held directly responsible for the. obduracy of the
Pretoria r&me and for the impasse that the Namibian
question has now reached. .

94. Government and State leaders and the widest circles
of the population and opinion in Viet Nam follow with
great concern the situation in and around Namibia and
sincerely desire the prompt attainment of independence
for Namibia, an end to the unspeakable suffering of the
brother people of Namibia and an end to the sacrifices
unjustly imposed upon the front-line countries, neighbours of Namibia.
95. We have always taken an active part in the work of
international
bodies dealing with the question of Namibia, as we did just recently at the Seventh Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries
and the International Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence.

90. In accordance with the decisions taken at the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, held last March- at New Delhi
[see S/15675 and Corr. 1 and 2, annex, sect. I. paras. 40521, and the International Conference in Support of the
Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence, held
in Paris in A~ril,~ my delegation also feels that the United
Nations plan for the independence of Namibia, set forth
in resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978), must be implemented without delay, and for this to be done effectively,
the question of Namibia must be brought back fully into
the context of the United Nations and placed in the hands
of the Council, so that the latter, as a priority, may exercise its authority without foreign interference and again
assume full responsibility for the prompt implementation

96. We have strongly condemned all acts of aggression
and destabilization perpetrated by Pretoria against the
front-line countries since the illegal occupation in August
1981 of part of Angolan territory, including various criminal raids of Mozambique in January 1981, against Lesotho in December 1982 and again against Mozambique on
23 May, the very day on which the first of the current
meetings of the Council devoted to the question of Namibia was held. The spokesman for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam on 24 May roundly condemned
the South African apartheid regime for savagely bombing
9

the densely populated districts of Maputo,,and expressed
his conviction that all the criminal adventures of the Pretoria regime would be severely punished.
97. The internal situation in Namibia, as recently presented to us by the President of SWAPO, shows that the
“illegal occupiers there have no intention whatsoever of
permitting Namibia’s accession to independence for ‘a
very long time to come”. [Bid, para. 222.1

oppressed peoples. My delegation therefore wishes fully
to support the President of SWAP0 when he said on 23
May that -unless the Security Council acts decisively to
secure the withdrawal of South Africa from the international -Territory of Namibia the people of Namibia will
have no alternative but to continue the armed struggle
with greater intensity. [Ibid, para. 253.1
102. It is precisely in that spirit that my delegation ends
its statement by declaring its firm support for the urgent
appeal made by the Secretary-General in his report when
he said:

98. While listening to Mr. Sam Nujoma, my delegation
recalled the blackest moments of the long and painful war
of resistance waged by the Vietnamese people against the
United States imperialists for the salvation of their
homeland-in
fact, similar adversaries, similar criminal
designs, almost identical manoeuvres and plans of action.
As in the case of South Viet Nam at that time, the enemy
of the Namibian people is now seeking at all costs to hold
on to Namibia as a neo-colony and to make it a vast
garrison, a huge fortress, an immense military base, to
serve both as an infernal machine for perpetuating the
illegal occupation of the country by the most atrocious
repressive terror and as a platform for launching armed
attacks against independent African countries, such as
Angola, Lesotho, Mozambique, Seychelles, Zambia and
Zimbabwe.

“I call urgently on all concerned to strengthen and
concert their efforts within the framework of the
United Nations and to demonstrate the necessary political will to bring about the early independence of Namibia in accordance with the United Nations plan.”
[S/15776, para. 20.1
(inferpretafiunfrom French): The
103. The PRESIDENT
next speaker is the representative of the German Democratic Republic. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
104. Mr. OTT (German Democratic Republic): Sir, the
delegation of the German Democratic Republic would
like to join others in expressing its congratulations on
your able handling of the presidency of the Council in the
month of May. Your great diplomatic skills and experience have undoubtedly contributed to the accomplishment of the responsible tasks facing the Council.

99. So the obstacle still looms large on the road to the
independence and freedom of the Namibian people. Facts
have amply shown that verbal condemnations are not
enough to overcome the intransigence of the Pretoria
apartheid criminals or their protectors and accomplices. It
is high time that the international community took energetic action.

105. The delegation of. the German Democratic Republic has followed with great interest this important and
impressive debate, the importance of which is, furthermore, emphasized by the presence and participation of
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs and representatives of a
large number of States, as well as chairmen of important
United Nations bodies.

100. In deciding to keep actively before it the question
of Namibia until the United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia has been fully executed, the Council
will have to strengthen the powers of the SecretaryGeneral in order to enable him to carry out with greater
intensity a whole range of complex and delicate diplomatic moves, while seriously preparing itself for the imposition of comprehensive mandatory sanctions pursuant to
Chapter VII of the Charter should the Pretoria regime
persist in not hearing reason. The Conference in Paris
wisely considered that sanctions are the only means available to the United Nations to make South Africa abide by
its decisions.

106. The President of SWAPO, Mr. Nujoma, has convincingly and impressively described the dangers for stability in the region of southern Africa and for peace and
security in the world at large arising out of the unsolved
problem of Namibia. The delegation of the German Democratic Republic shares the opinion of the overwhelming
majority of speakers that the situation in southern Africa
has further deteriorated as a result of the escalation of the
policy of aggression and terror pursued by the racist
regime in South Africa. The apartheid regime has been
almost unanimously condemned during the debate. At
the same time, numerous representatives pointed to the
responsibility of the so-called contact group for the persistent delay in the implementation
of Council resolution
435 (1978) and revealed the underlying motives for its
manoeuvres. The representatives of only a few States
made an attempt to conceal the true causes, to distract
attention from the nature of the question and to justify
their policy directed against the legitimate interests of the
people of Namibia.

101. However, my delegation considers that it is necessary that the community of States determine to broaden
its assistance of all kinds, including military assistance, to
the sole legitimate and authentic representative of the
people of Namibia, SWAPO, and to the front-line States
in order to strengthen the power of the armed resistance
of the people of Namibia on the battlefield and the power
of the front-line States to retaliate against the repeated
acts of aggression by Pretoria. Our people’s experience
has been that the forces of international reaction, whether
colonialism, imperialism, expansionism or hegemonism,
like to use force to terrorize peoples and teach them lessons. We must therefore be ready to meet violence with
violence, because that is the cost of final victory for the
10

107. On the occasion of a friendly visit paid a few days
ago by the Prime Minister of Zimbabwe, Mr. Robert
Mugabe, to the German Democratic Republic, the Chairman of the Council of State of the German Democratic
Republic, Mr. Erich Honecker, stated:

111. Todav the Territorv of Namibia has alreadv been
transformed into a huge military camp. The report-of the
United Nations Council for Namibia, entitled “The military situation in and relating to Namibia”P
reveals the
share that the NATO States have in the creation of this
large military potential. This document, furthermore,
gives evidence of the fact that more than 100,000 soldiers
of the South African racist regime and thousands of mercenaries from the United States and other Western countries are operating in Namibia with the aim of oppressing
the people of Namibia and of launching aggressive actions
against southern African States. As can be seen from the
document entitled “Activities of foreign economic interests operating in Namibia”,’
53 out of the 88 transnational corporations directly involved in the plundering of
Namibia have their head offices in capitals of States of the
so-called contact group. One can understand only too
well why, in view of these facts, many speakers during the
debate have voiced doubts about the integrity of the
declared intentions of those States.

“Africa is a rising continent. It .becomes clearly visible there that the advance of the forces of peace and
national liberation, despite temporary difficulties, cannot be stopped. Therefore, it cannot cause surprise that
the most aggressive imperialist
circles make the
attempt also on the African continent to turn back the
wheel of history. But they will not succeed in doing so.
. . . The reasons for the tense situation in southern
Africa lie in South Africa’s policy of violence. As a part
of imperialist global confrontation politics, and with
the backing of the United States, this policy aims to
subject anew the States and peoples of that region to
the old domination.”
108. It has also been confiied
during this debate that
the dangerous situation in southern Africa is caused by
the plotting of imperialist States with the uparrheidregime
in South Africa. While, here at the United Nations, representatives of those States have expressed in high-sounding
phrases their desire for a .peaceful settlement of the Namibian issue, it is from those same States that weapons
and equipment are being supplied for the merciless war
that is being waged by the racists against the people of
Namibia fighting for their freedom. While representatives
of some States members of NATO make statements
about the evil of apartheid, the transnational corporations
of those very States have stepped up their exploitation of
the people and the natural resources of Namibia and are
drawing millions of dollars of profit from the sweat and
tears that result from apartheid.

112. The world public has followed with great concern
the escalation of the aggression perpetrated by South
Africa from the illegally occupied Territory of Namibia
against Angola and other States of the region. Gangs
financed and equipped by Pretoria terror& the population in the front-line States and perpetrate acts of sabotage against industrial installations and communication
systems. Assassinations of members of the liberation
movements are on the increase.
113. The German Democratic Republic strongly demands the immediate termination of the undeclared war
against Angola and the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of the racist forces from the territory of that
sovereign State.
114. The Government and people of the German Democratic Republic strongly condemn the most recent acts of
aggression against the capital of Mozambique. In a special statement [S/15802, annex], that barbaric raid is
denounced as a new expression of the aggressive policy of
the South African racist regime against the free peoples of
southern Africa.
I

109. To give only one example to p&e this, the United
States gets from Namibia 98 per cent of its imports of
cobalt, 80 per cent of its platinum, 100 per cent of its
industrial diamonds, 58 per cent of its uranium, and other
important strategic raw materials.
110. Thus the South African racists are simply being
encouraged by the open political, military, economic and
nuclear assistance given by the United States, Israel, Taiwan and a number of other Western States to continue
the illegal occupation of Namibia and to disregard the
decisions of the General Assembly and the Security Council. Many speakers have quite rightly pointed to the fact
that the United States Administration’s
course of socalled constructive engagement with Pretoria is aimed at
the preservation of the military, strategic and economic
interests of imperialism and the destabilization of progressive States in the region. Moreover, it is no secret that
plans exist for the deployment of medium-range missiles
in South Africa, as is intended in Western Europe. The
carrying-out of such plans would even further worsen the
already tense situation in the region and would have disastrous consequences for world peace and international
security.

115. The German Democratic Republic supports all
those States which demand that South Africa be forced at
last to give up its policy, which endangers peace and security. The imposing of effective sanctions by the Security
Council against the aparrheid r&me, the strengthening of
the arms embargo and strict control of its implementation
and the prevention of all manoeuvres by the racists to find
a so-called internal settlement have become much more
urgent than ever before.
116. The Seventh Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held in New
Delhi in March and the International ‘Conference in Sup
port of the Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence, held in Paris in April,.as well as the present debate,
have made it very clear that the activities of the selfappointed so-called contact group of Western States have
in no way changed the dreadful fate of the oppressed
11

Namibian people. The racist r&ime instead has been
given a five-year period to escalate its repressive machinery and expand its military and nuclear potential. This has
contributed to the aggravation of the situation in Namibia
and in the whole region.

.for allowing me the opportunity to take part in the Council’s deliberations on the question of Namibia, a question
to which Bulgaria, faithful to its consistent policy of support for the’right of colonial peoples to self-determination
and independence, attaches great importance.

117. In this connection, the demand for the strengthening of the role of the United Nations is absolutely justitied..Above all, the Council should assume full and direct
responsibility for the earliest possible settlement of the
question of Namibia.

125. I should like also to congratulate you most cordially on your assumption of the important post of President of the Council for the month of May and to express
our satisfaction at the excellent ‘results obtained by the
Council under your competent leadership.

118. The German Democratic Republic trusts that the
Council will take the relevant measures in order to ensure
the immediate implementation
of United Nations resolutions on Namibia in their entirety, including resolution
435 (1978).
. .
119. My delegation considers the resolution adopted
today to be a first step in that direction. The delegation of
the German Democratic Republic, furthermore, supports
the constructive proposals to that end made by the President of SWAPO, Sam Nujoma, and many other representatives of States. My delegation also deems it urgent to
determine a precise time-frame for the implementation
of
further measures aimed at the granting of independence
to the Namibian people.

126. For years the people of Namibia, under the leadership of their sole legitimate representative, SWAPO, have
been waging their struggle to exercise their right to selfdetermination and national independence. The legitimacy
of that struggle and the aspirations of the people have
recognized and reiterated in many General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions and by the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries and the Organization of African
Unity (OAU). Without the generous economic, political
and military assistance given South Africa by some Westem countries, first and foremost the United States, Namibia could have joined the community of independent
States a long time ago as a full member.

120. We reject very strongly the attempts of the United
States Administration to interfere in the internal affairs of
sovereign States through a policy of linkage and to raise
new obstacles to a settlement of the Namibian problem.
121. The German Democratic Republic advocates the
independence of Namibia, with the preservation of its territorial integrity, including Walvis Bay and the adjacent
islands. It is high time for power to be put into the hands
of the Namibian people, represented by SWAPO, the recognized sole and authentic representative- of that people.
Assistance in solidarity with the struggle of the Namibian
people under the leadership of SWAP0 is part of the
responsibility of all States Members of the United Nations
for the independence of Namibia. It serves to eliminate a
dangerous hotbed of tension and promotes the maintenance and strengthening of world peace.

127. The Bulgarian delegation endorses the objective
and thorough analysis of the present context of the problem of Namibia that was made in the statement by the
President of SWAPO, Sam Nujoma, and we welcome his
personal participation in the work of the Council. The
illegal occupation of the Territory is still going on and its
militarization
by the racist regime is reaching record proportions. The oppression of its people, the detentions, the
torture and the arbitrary assassination of patriots continue and grow in number. In its aggressive war against
the people of Namibia, Pretoria makes increasing use of
the services of mercenaries whom it recruits in several
Western countries and incorporates into, the racist army.
Recently the illegal regime has been taking action to “Namibianize” the war in the Territory, by imposing compulsory ‘military service on. the population.
.
128. South Africa is intensifying its acts of aggression
against independent African States. The front-line countries are the main target of such actions. By striving to
destabilize their Governments, Pretoria is seeking to
create in southern Africa a situation where the people of
Namibia would be isolated in their struggle, cut off from
the support of their African brothers in the region. The
barbarous attack on, the capital of Mozambique, Maputo,
resulting in casualties among the civilian population of
the city, is a recent example of this. The racists continue
to occupy part of the territory of Angola and constantly
carry out criminal raids against the people of that sovereign State, which has a legitimate Government. The
aggression against Angola is also characterized by the fact
that it clearly shows the. convergence of the aims and
interests of Pretoria and of United States imperialism.
While South Africa was bringing direct economic and
military pressure to bear on Angola, the United States
openly stated that the racists had alleged legitimate security interests. The United States Administration
has con-

122. In conclusion, Sir, permit me to reaffirm that the
German Democratic Republic will continue to stand
alongside the peoples and Statesof Africa as a true friend
and reliable ally. Accordingly, the German Democratic
Republic will continue to give political, diplomatic and
material assistance. to SWAPO, the sole legitimate representative of the Namibian people.
2
123. The PRESIDENT
(inferprerarionfrom French): The
next speaker is the representative of Bulgaria, whom I
invite to take a place at the Council table and to make a
statement.
,124. Mr. TSVETKOV
(Bulgaria) (inter~~retution from
Fre&):Mr.
President, first of all I should like to thank
you and, through you, the other members of the Council.,
12

sistently spared no efforts to link the question of Namibian-independence
with the withdrawal of the Cuban
troops who are in Angola at the invitation of that country’s Government. .A11these artificially-created obstacles
on the path to a just settlement of this problem are not
accidental. or surprising. For decades the transnational
companies of certain Western States have been taking
part with Pretoria on an equal footing in the pitiless
plundering of the r&natural
resources of Namibia. The
illegal occupation of the Territory and the inhuman system of apartheid, which is rife there, are regarded by the
transnational
companies as favourable circumstances
that enable them to derive as much profit as possible, to
the detriment of the people of the Territory.

132. Bulgaria is an active member of the United Nations
Council for Namibia, which was set up as the sole legitimate Administering Authority for the Territory until its
independence. We shall continue to contribute actively to
the Council’s efforts to achieve the independence of Namibia, in conformity with United Nations resolutions.
133. We welcome the efforts of the Secretary-General to
solve the problem of Namibia in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the world Organization.
134. In his address to the participants in the International Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence, held at the end of April in
Paris, the President of the Council of State of the People’s
Republic of Bulgaria, Todor Zhivkov, stated:

129. Furthermore, the international community is well
aware that the policy of confrontation in international
relations and of escalation in the arms race that has been
pursued in recent years by imperialist and reactionary circles is also, alas, becoming clear in the case of the Namibian problem and is hampering efforts to solve it in the
interest of the people of Namibia. It is precisely thii policy
of imperialism that is encouraging Pretoria in its obstinate
opposition to the will of the international community, as
unanimously expressed in the relevant United Nations
resolutions.

“Before this lofty forum, the People’s Republic of
Bulgaria proclaims, once again, its deep solidarity with
the courageous struggle of Namibia and its vanguard,
SWAPO, while expressing its conviction that the
United Nations will not hesitate to redouble its efforts
to bring about an equitable solution to the Namibian
problem as soon as possible.“E
135. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationj?om French): The
next speaker is the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make .his statement.

130. The desired basis for achieving genuine independence for Namibia is clearly set forth in appropriate
United Nations resolutions. My delegation is deeply convinced that the question of Namibia can be resolved only
by the immediate cessation of the illegal occupation and
by strict respect for all resolutions, particularly Council
resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978). However, as has
been stressed by several previous speakers, we have realixed that the activities of the so-called contact group, far
from providing a solution to the Namibian question, have
in practice given Pretoria the chance to delay.and erect
more and more obstacles on the path to solution.

136. Mr. SERAJZADEH
(Islamic Republic of Iran):
The question of Namibia has been discussed in the Council many times. Some negotiations, through direct and
indirect channels, on the right of self-determination and
independence of the Namibian people have been in process and the agreements on a just solution and peaceful
settlement have been recognixed by most Members of the
United Nations. Unfortunately, .no concrete action concerning the withdrawal of South African forces from Namibia has been taken so far.

131. The Bulgarian delegation is deeply convinced that
the Council must step up its efforts to achieve, as soon as
possible, the exercise of the inalienable rights of the Namibian people to self-determination and national independence. The international community has already realized
that South Africa has repeatedly demonstrated its contempt for the decisions of the United Nations. Its policy
has been rightly described by the United Nations. as a
threat to international peace and security. That is why, in
the opinion of my delegation, the Council should, in any
decision it takes, set a time-limit for the implementation by
Pretoria of resolution 435 (1978) and take all the measures
provided for under the Charter of the United Nations,
including, if necessary, the application of comprehensive,
mandatory sanctions in accordance with Chapter VII of
the Charter. This is the way to force the criminal @me
to respect the will of the international community and
give the people of Namibia the chance to determine their
own future freely. My country fully supports the decisions
of the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Govern-.
ment of Non-Aligned Countries, held recently at New
Delhi, and the decisions of the OAU on. this question.

137. The lack of harmonious co-operation and a united
determination, caused by differences in perspective and
goals among the various groups and States, has created a
prolonged stalemate regarding the achievement of independence for Namibia. The ineffectiveness of decisionmaking in the Council has caused the racist regime of
South Africa to ignore Council resolutions 385 (1976) and
435 (1978), which have been accepted by its members
unanimously.
138. The vast economic and military co-operation of the
United States with the apartheid Government has strengthened the position of South Africa against the oppressed
people of Namibia. the United Kingdom’s sale of radar
equipment .to the treacherous regime of South Africa to
monitor the rightful activities of .the Namibian people
against the usurper forces of the white regime postpones
their independence. The provision of nuclear reactor facilities by the French colonialists also shows that the use of
rhetoric is preferred to .any attempt to bring about a
peaceful settlement in Namibia.
13

139. Along with the contradictory
conduct of the
members ofthe contact group, the military ties and intelligence links between the Zionist regime of Israel, an imperialist partner, and the racist Government of South Africa
preclude a just solution of the problem of Namibia.
140. The Islamic Republic of Iran, with its independent
foreign policy based on “neither East nor West”, has
closely observed the struggle of the Namibian people for
independence as well as international
negotiations to
establish an independent State in the last African colony,
Namibia. In the past 15 years, United States Administrations have successfully attempted to protect South Africa
because of its minerals and its strategic location on the sea
lane.
141. President Nixon and Mr. Kissinger had a systematic, gradual approach towards Africa in general and
southern Africa in particular. By subordinating the interests of black Africa and increasing their important ties
with white regimes in southern Africa-the former Southem Rhodesia and South Africa-they benefited from the
natural resources of those countries for the economic survival of the United States. The revolutions in Angola and
Mozambique in 1975, which followed the end of Portuguese colonial power in those countries, brought new realities to southern Africa. The shifting balance of power in
southern Africa caused President Carter to adopt his socalled humanitarian
policy in dealing with the black
majority, who were, and still are, active in liberation
movements, particularly in southern Africa-namely,
in
Namibia and South Africa.

145. In the view of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
aforementioned
negotiations and political approaches
will only delay the prompt establishment of an independent State and self-determination
for the Namibian
people. An impartial settlement is only attainable through
co-operation among the members of the OAU, the NonAligned Movement and SWAP0
and the front-line
States, within the framework of the immediate implementation of resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978). Furthermore, the removal of South Africa from membership in
the United Nations would guarantee progress in the
attainment of independence by Namibia.
146. The PRESIDENT’ (interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Canada. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
147. Mr. PELLETIER
(Canada) (interpretation from
French): I am grateful to you, Sir, and to the Council for
having given Canada the opportunity of participating in
this debate, the subject of which is of crucial importance
not only for the people of Namibia but also for the future
of the whole of southern Africa. It is a particular pleasure
for me to be able to participate under your presidency, in
view of the long-standing co-operation between our two
countries. I am confident that you will succeed in enabling
the Council to produce constructive results and to bring
us closer to our objective: freedom and independence for
Namibia.
[2’7zespeaker continued in English.]

142. The Carter policy, in co-operation with the multinational corporations,
worked only to appease the
oppressed movements fighting against the apartheid
r&ime of South Africa in order further to guarantee the
industrial and economic survival of the United States.

148. Before turning to that issue, I want to join earlier
speakers in expressing dismay at the recent South African
attack on targets in Mozambique. Canada condemns that
attack in violation of Mozambique’s sovereignty, just as it
condemns the recent act of violence in South Africa. Both
involved loss of life and injury to innocent victims. This
pattern must be broken. We know change must and will
come in South Africa; we hope it comes soon and in
peace. For acts of terrorism and raids across national
boundaries can only lead to the. heightening of tension in
the region and the risk of broader conflict.

143. Now the military and linkage policy of the Reagan
Administration,
with its irrelevant pm-conditions, has
created a new obstacle to a justified settlement of the
Namibian independence. That Administration
has continued to further its own interests in South Africa by the
strengthening of military, economic and intelligence ties,
thereby supporting the racist regime’s aggressiveness and
its continued domination of the Namibian people through
overt and shameless intervention in Namibia.

149. For us in the Council, these events must also underline the urgent need to end the. conflict in Namibia and to
implement the United Nations settlement plan.
150. As one of the initiators and drafters of the United
Nations settlement plan for Namibia in 1978, Canada
deeply regrets that the Council is still seiied of the issue
five years later and that the people of Namibia are still
unable to exercise their right to self-determination. We
appreciate and share the concerns of the international
community which have prompted the call for this series of
Council meetings.

144. The colonialist and imperialist forces, along with
the racist usurpers, have for years dominated and plundered the human and natural resources of the African
people. The inhuman policies of the “civilized” colonizers, mainly arising from their racist attitude and their
superiority complexes, must be taken seriously into
account. It is time that all elements, forces and Govemments dedicated to the freedom and independence of
oppressed peoples condemned the illegal occupation and
domination of Namibia by the apartheid r&me and all its
imperialist and Zionist cohorts, and whole-heartedly sup
ported the just and heroic struggle of the Namibian
people.

151. Earlier this week, the representative of the United
Kingdom, Sir John Thomson, gave a comprehensive
account of the negotiating hiitory of this issue [2439th
meeting]. He outlined the special initiatives that led to the
14

defined-and,
secondly, some technical questions related
to the composition
of the military
component of
UNTAG.

formulation of the United Nations settlement plan and
Council resolution 435 (1978). He spelled out the committed effort undertaken by the contact group following the
setback at Geneva to resolve the remaining problems and
to clear the way for the implementation
of the United
Nations plan. I shall not therefore deal at length with the
history of the issue. Suffice it to say that the intensive
efforts which have been devoted to these negotiations during the past five years have resulted in a substantial body
of agreement.

158. In the light of the progress made, representatives of
the front-line States, Nigeria, SWAP0 and the contact
group met the Secretary-General on 24 September 1982 to
report on the understandings that had been reached and
to indicate what remained to be done. It was common to
all that insuperable obstacles remained in the context of
resolution 435 (1978).

152. That body of agreement has unfortunately fallen
short till now of what is needed to secure implementation
of a plan which no one challenges in itself. As Sir John
suggested, this is not, however, the time to falter in our
commitment or our efforts. It is rather a time to persist, to
build on what we have already achieved and to succeed.

159. Over the years of these negotiations, many issues
have been addressed by one side or the other. Many obstacles have been overcome through discussions involving
the United Nations, the front-line States, SWAPO, South
Africa and the contact group. The legitimate interests of
all the parties involved in the settlement plan have been
weighed and taken into account.

153. I should like in this context to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his recent report, [S/25774, which summarizes the activities of those involved in the negotiations for
a settlement over the past two years. All members are well
aware that when the Secretary-General took office he
identified Namibia as one of his highest priorities. His
frequent consultations and expressions of concern for the
issue have added to the international
pressure for a
solution.

160. These efforts have been made against the background of South Africa’s illegal occupation of the Territory. What remains to be achieved is its acquiescence and
participation in the implementation of the United Nations
plan.
161. As the Secretary-General has pointed out, South
Africa has raised another issue in the region-outside
the
mandate of the contact group-a condition for the implementation of resolution 435 (1978). These two matters
have a relationship only in so far as one of the parties
chooses to draw them together. Canada for its part does
not accept the concept that the resolution of one should
be conditional upon the resolution of the other. It is none
the less evident that these regional security concerns exist
and pose an obstacle. We understand they are being dealt
with separately in bilateral talks. We hope that they may
be resolved quickly with full respect for the sovereignty of
the States concerned and that the people of Namibia may
be given the opportunity to exercise their right to selfdetermination.

154. Recognition should also be given to the dedication
shown by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Namibia, Mr. Martti Ahtisaari, and the Secretariat as a whole. The work they have done in preparing
for the civilian and military components of the United
Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) has contributed immensely to the readiness of the United Nations
to undertake the task which will face it on the day of
implementation.
155. The special contribution
of the front-line States
and Nigeria also deserves recognition. They have been
unceasing in their efforts and have afforded close cooperation in the negotiations aimed at the early implementation of resolution 435 (1978). The constructive attitude
of our African partners has been important throughout
our latest talks.

162. Our regret at past delays in the implementation
of
resolution 435 (1978) does little to comfort those who
must still face dislocation, conflict and the denial of political and human rights in Namibia. It is against this background that I should like to make three points.

156. Their co-operation enabled substantial progres to
be made during the intensive consultations last summer.
During those consultations, difficult issues were addressed and resolved to the satisfaction of those involved in
the negotiating process in Washington and New York.
Understandings were reached on how to ensure the fairness and impartiality of the settlement process and on the
deployment of UNTAG.
All parties agreed to a set of
principles concerning the Constituent Assembly and the
Constitution for an independent Namibia. These have
been published in a Council document [S/.ZXX’j.

163. The first is that an immediate peaceful settlement is
unquestionably in the best interests of all of the people of
Namibia and of the countries bordering Namibia, including South Africa. That must be our guiding consideration.
There is no other factor that can have equal weight with
my Government or with the Council.
164. Secondly, it is not a question of whether Namibia
will achieve independence. It is a question of how soon it
will do so and under what conditions. Canada will continue to exert its best efforts to ensure that the transition
to independence comes soon and in conditions of peace.

157. As a result of these consultations, the only issues
which remain outstanding are, first, the electoral system
to be employed in choosing the members of the Constituent Assembly-and
the context of the decision has been

165. That brings me to my third point. The people of
Namibia have suffered in recent years not only from con15

tinuing conflict but also from conditions of uncertainty
and protracted drought.-They will face many challenges
following independence, including the momentous challenge of developing their country and bringing benefits to
all of its people. My Government’s hope is that they may
be enabled to address those challenges in the context of
co-operation within the region and with the support of all
the countries. which have shown a lively interest in the
future of Namibia.
166. So far as Canada is concerned, I wish to leave no
doubt that we should be happy to develop measures of
economic co-operation with ,an independent Namibia, as
we have with Zimbabwe and other countries following
their independence. We look forward to that opportunity
and also to the prospect of stability in the region. For we
believe that the establishment of an independent and fully
representative Government in Namibia and the end of
conflict will also increase opportunities for economic cooperation throughout the region.
[The speaker resumed in French.]
167. Finally, I would say to all those who have been
following the debate that we envisage for this region a
future that will make it possible to strengthen peace and
security in southern Africa, despite the fears and the mistrusts that today are impeding progress. Those of us who
have sought a peaceful and negotiated solution in Namibia will not lose interest once that objective has been
attained. I should like to recall in this context that the
Commonwealth Heads of Government in 1975 stated that
they were ready to have Namibia join them after independence. I am convinced that they would be only too happy
soon to receive a reply to their invitation from the
Government of a free and independent Namibia. Bearing
in mind the very special responsibility borne by the
United Nations and the Council with regard to Namibia,
my Government hopes ‘that this debate and the already
assured adoption of a constructive resolution will speed
up the implementation
of resolution 435 (1978). The
people of Namibia deserves peace and independence.
They must be allowed to decide their own fate as soon as
possible.
168. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfiom
French): The’
next speaker is the representative of Mexico. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
169. Mr. MSJNOZ LED0 (Mexico) (interpretation from
Spanish): It is fortunate that this debate is taking place
under the presidency of a distinguished and eminent African whose diplomatic gifts have earned him the esteem
and respect of the United Nations. We should like to
thank him most fraternally-as
well as the other members
of the Council-for
giving us the opportunity to speak
today.

heid, as well as our>fforts to isolate the Pretoria regime in
order to ensure respect for human rights in that country
and the freedom of the peoples of southern Africa.
171. We have repeatedly denounced the flagrant violation ‘of the .international legal order represented by the
occupation of Namibia and the consequent defence of
the authority of the United Nations and affront to
Member States, particularly those which have accepted
the responsibility of being members of the United Nations
Council for Namibia, which, in spite of its efforts, has not
succeeded in fulfilling its functions as the Administering
Authority for the Territory.
172. My country has scrupulously observed the oil
embargo; we have striven to make the arms embargo
effective and have come out in favour of the application
of appropriate measures to end the support and supplies
enjoyed by the Pretoria regime.
173. As far back as last September, we ‘came to the
Council to ask for the adoption of the conclusions and
recommendations of the report submitted in 1980 by the
Security Council Committee established by resolution 421
(1977) concerning the question of South Africa [S/14179),
over which my delegation had the honour of presiding.
Unfortunately, our request was not granted and with the
continuance of the violation of the embargoes there has
been a strengthening of South Africa’s impunity, which
lies at the very base of its occupation of Namibia.
174. The impatience of the international community at
the slow pace of the Namibian independence process is
more than justified. The optimism aroused by the adop
tion of resolution 435 (1978) has now turned into general
frustration. There is every ground for believing that the
path taken so far should be substantially changed and
that respect for the will of the Council should be enforced
through the means provided for in the Charter, of the
United Nations.
175. The delegation of.Mexico has taken this stand for
some years now. In May 1980, at the extraordinary plenary meetings of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, held at Algiers, we pointed out that the timelimits we had granted to the Pretoria r&ime had expired
and that South Africa must without delay comply with
the resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council. We asserted that there was no longer any reason
for waiting and we should not wait.
176. It was clear then that the.Pretoria regime had set in
train and alternative strategy aimed at replacing the
United Nations plan by another of a neo-colonialist type,
based on the exclusion of the authentic fighters for independence and the strengthening of its regional hegemony.
177. In June 1980, we referred in this forum to the web
of international complicity developed by South Africa and
the great success it had achieved in managing to have its
own interests.included in global strategies and fears. We
observed that, thanks to that support, the Pretoria regime

170. Mexico’s militancy in the matter of the struggle for
decolonization has been a comer-stone of its foreign policy, hence our active participation in efforts to secure the
independence of Namibia and the elimination of apart16

had demonstrated its hostility to the United Nations plan
and had increased its efforts to consolidate its illegal occupation. [See 2229th meeting, paras. 10 and ZZ.]
178. In January 1981, in the face of the failure of the
Geneva pa-implementation
meeting, we suggested here
that the South African Government perhaps had some
grounds for supposing that there did not exist a genuine
commitment on the part of all Member States to the independence plan. Three months later [227&h meeting], we
stated that the limits of tolerance had already been
exceeded and called on the Council to take immediate
decisions to safeguard its honour and future.

185. In May of that same year, in the course of the
‘International
Conference on Sanctions against South
Africa, held in Paris, we stressed the need to avoid the
raising of considerations of a global nature which distorted the actual nature of the problem. We said that the
issue was that of putting an end to colonialism in Africa,
which should in no way be allowed to be confused with
super-Power rivalry. The best way of maintaining intemational security, we added, was by saving the peoples and
territories of the third world from conflicts which were
alien to them.
186. In September 1981, at the eighth emergency special
session of the General Assembly, we rejected the theses
that attempt to reduce revolutionary movements of developing countries to mere conspiracies or mechanical reflections of the East-West confrontation. We repeated our
warning against hegemonic solutions: we came out in
favour of the peaceful way of resisting conflicts in southern Africa, the Middle East and Central America, while
safeguarding in all cases the principles of the Charter and
the competence of the United Nationsi

179. At that time we were facing the danger of acceptance of a thesis-the
London memorandum-which
referred to measures giving “greater confidence to all of
the parties on the future of an independent Namibia*’
[S/I&57,
annex]. Acceptance of that argument would
mean contradicting
squarely the principle
of selfdetermination
and supporting a correlation of forces
favourable to the occupying country.
180. There were two options facing the Council: to
grant further concessions to South Africa or to exert effective pressure on South Africa. It was indispensable to
make it clear to the Pretoria r&gime that the flexibility of
the front-line States and SWAP0 was not to be taken as a
sign of weakness and that the action recommended to the
Western Powers was not susceptible of any ambiguity.

187. We have ventured to offer this summary of the
facts and positions because we believe that in this case,
history is particularly illuminating.
The path of concessions to South Africa clearly was not leading to the independence of Namibia, and this problem, whose origins
are as clear as its nature is undisputed, has thus become
blurred; indeed, it has been diverted into a struggle for
world dominance.

181. When our appeal was not heeded and decisions
called for by the events were not taken, the Council gave
an equivocal sign of greater tolerance towards South
Africa and opened up a new chapter in the occupation,
based now on allegedly ideological reasons.
:

188. The decisions adopted by the General Assembly
and by the Security Council do not admit of interpretations and commit all States. On few occasions has right
and morality been so clearly defined in a matter of selfdetermination.
Whatever element or condition may be
added to the resolutions adopted, it is just a pretext for
prolonging colonial domination.

182. In ‘March 1981, in the plenary General Assembly,
my delegation referred to the growing~practice of seeking
to impose unilateral solutions on problems that were
within the competence of the Organization. It was necessary, we said, to adopt a new course of action and to bring
to bear all the means at our disposal to exert constant
pressure ‘on Pretoria and those States which were encouraging and supporting the South African regime in its
obstinate defiance of the international community.9
,

189. We still have time to change our course. My delegation welcomes the decision adopted by the Non-Aligned
Movement, which initiated this debate. We also welcome
the overwhelming participation of Member States and the
high quality of their statements, which without any doubt
reflect the will of the international community.
190. The report of the Secretary-General [S/Z57763 is
proof of his interest in the subject and his good judgement. It contains observations which warrant our serious
consideration, in particular his expression of regret that
the process has been set back by the emergence of other
issues which were neither raised nor envisaged at the time
resolution 435 (1978) was adopted, or in the subsequent
negotiations, and that factors outside the scope of that
resolution should hamper its implementation.

183. We asserted that the presence of South Africa in
Namibia was something which had been acquiesced in by
those who could have prevailed upon South Africa to
cease its occupation. We thought the time had come to
make a decision: either to comply with the principles of
the Organixation, or to sacrifice a few States on the altar
,of expediency.‘O
184. We also pointed out that the battle for decolonization should, not be affected by a narrow bipolar concep
tion of the world, and that the recrudescence of
international tensions were having a very severe effect on
the activities of the United Nations, in this and other
regions, which suddenly found themselves raised to the
rank of strategic border tones.ii
:

191. My Government is pleased that the SecretaryGeneral considers the question of Namibia as a special
responsibility in the tight of its importance to intemational peace and security. In so doing, he is renewing the
commitment to bring to bear his authority in the peace17

ful solution of controversies and in support of efforts at
negotiation to be undertaken by Member States in keep
ing with the Charter.

mitment to the early attainment of independence by Namibia. We hope we can anticipate the same from those
who have yet to speak. Nearly all of us have spoken in a
measured and restrained tone. However, let no one misread our restraint as a sign of weakening in our support
for the struggle of the Namibian people for independence.
We stated that we had not come here for confrontation.
We stated that all of us should join together in finding
ways to implement the United Nations plan on Namibia.

192. The resolution unanimously adopted this morning
contains elements that are indispensable for initiating a
new course of action. We trust that a correct reading of it
will serve to reject any idea of linkage or parallelism with
regional or global situations, arguments that have been
used as an excuse for continuing to violate adopted
decisions.

200. In resolution 532 (1983), adopted by the Council
this morning, the Council decided to mandate the
Secretary-General to undertake consultations with the
parties concerned with a view to securing the speedy
implementation
of resolution 435 (1978). The Council
requested the Secretary-General to report to it on the
results of these consultations not later than 31 August
1983. The resolution further called upon South Africa to
co-operate forthwith and fully with the Secretary-General
in order to expedite the implementation
of resolution 435
(1978) for the early independence of Namibia.

193. My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to
congratulate the United Nations Council for Namibia
upon its efforts, so far inconclusive, and to repeat our
firm solidarity with the Governments and peoples of
Africa, which, in spite of acts of aggression, interference
and reprisals, have persisted in their heroic struggle
against domination.
194. The Security Council should remain vigilant, ever
prepared to take the necessary measures if its resolutions
are not promptly complied with. It is essential to prevent
the prevailing neocolonialist designs and ambitions from
becoming the norm in relations between powerful States
and their neighbours. It is necessary to avoid, in this and
other regions of conflict in the world, a ,situation where
hegemonic interests are pursued in defiance of the norms
of international law and the will of the United Nations.

201. A review of the statements made in the Council in
favour of Namibia’s independence shows that they contain a common element. There is unanimity with regard
to the essentials> concerning’ the implementation
of the
United Nations plan on Namibia, which every one of us
has accepted as the only basis for an internationallyrecognized settlement. This unanimity of views is also
reflected in the assessment as to how the implementation
of the United Nations plan has hindered by issues that are
extraneous to the plan itself.

195. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
last speaker is the representative of the United Nations
Council for Namibia, to whom the Security Council
issued an invitation at its 2439th meeting. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

202. I wish to refer to two statements made in the course
of this debate. The representative of the United Kingdom
stated that .his Government agreed with the SecretaryGeneral in reporting that “-as far as the United Nations
is concerned the only outstanding issues are the choice of
the electoral system and the settlement of some final problems relating to UNTAG and its composition”. [2#39th
meeting, para. 55.1 He also categorically stated that
“These are indeed the only outstanding problems under
resolution 435 (1978).” [Ibid]

196. Mr. LUSAKA: Mr. President. I thank vou once
more for calling on me. Our debate-on the question of
Namibia is now coming to a close. May I also thank your
Minister for Foreign Affairs and you personally for the
efficient way in which both of you have guided our deliberations. We have all benefited from your wisdom and
experience.

203. The second statement I should like to refer to is
that of the representative of the United States. She stated:

197. Our thanks go also to the delegations that joined us
in these deliberations, especially the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs who have travelled to New York to participate in
the debate. The level and quality of participation, not to
mention the number’ of speakers, have demonstrated the
global importance of the question of Namibia.

“Because of the substantial progress that has been
made over the past two years, only two major issues
remain to be resolved in preparation for the implementation of resolution 435 (1978). These are: the choice of
the electoral system to be employed in the elections,
which all parties are agreed must be settled in accordance with the provisions of resolution 435 (1978) and in
a manner that does not cause delay; and final technical
matters concerning the composition of the military
component of UNTAG.

198. When I addressed this Council at its 2439th meeting, on 23 May, I stated that our major objective for
coming to the Council was to call on it to reassert its
authority in the implementation
of the United Nations
plan for Namibia as approved in resolutions 385 (1976)
and 435 (1978). We urged that all consultations on the
implementation
of this plan should be conducted within
the United Nations framework.

“. . .

199. Nearly all of the speakers who have addressed the
Council during our deliberations have stated, their com-

“We share the concern that the factors relating to
the regional situation in southern Africa, which are,
18

They, like us in the United Nations Council for Namibia,
have called for an immediate end to the illegal occupation
of Namibia. They, like us, have called on Pretoria to
make a firm commitment as to its readiness to comply
with Security Council resolution 435 (1978). They, lie us,
have called for the fullest measure of co-operation with
the Secretary-General in order to expedite the implementation of resolution 435 (1978). As we anxiously await the
report of the Secretary-General to this body by 31
August, we shall remain vigilant. In our painful vigil we
shall draw comfort from the fact that the question of
Namibia is now back where it belongs internationally:
within the United Nations framework.

however, outside the scope of the mandate of the contact group have not yet permitted implementation
of
the United Nations plan.” [2443rd meeting, paras. I86
and 189.3
204. In these remarks we perceive a clear acceptance by
the United States of the fact that extraneous issues that
are irrelevant to the question of Namibia are hindering
the progress towards the attainment of independence by
Namibia.
205. Both the United Kingdom and the United States
representatives referred to the suffering of the people of
Namibia and to the sense of frustration, So, if they do
indeed sympathize with the people of Namibia in their
quest for liberation, they should translate this sympathy
into action, and do so now.

The meeting rose at 6.50 p.m

NOTES

206. No one in history has succeeded for long in sup
pressing the yearnings for freedom that emanate from
oppressed people. There are those who in the not-toodistant past vowed that freedom for the people they
oppressed would not come in their lifetime. Yet they have
lived to see themselves being proved wrong. What has
happened elsewhere will certainly happen in Namibia.

’ See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 1.
s Legal Consequences for Srates of the Continued Presence of South
Afn’ca in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Council
Resolution 276 (1970). Advisory Opinion, I.C.J. Reports 1971. 9. 16.
3 See OfficiaI Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fifrh Session,
Supplement No. 24, Vol. I, annex II.
4 See Report of the International Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian PeopIe for Independence, Paris, 25-29 April 1983
(A/CONF.120/13),
part three.
s See Offial Records of the Genera2 Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session,
Supplement No. 24, part three, chap. II, sect. 5(b), para. 11.
6 A/CONF.120/3-A/AC.131191
and Corr. 1 and 2.
’ A/CONF.l20/4-A1AC.131192.
* See Report of the International Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian PeopIe for Independence, Paris, 25-29 April 1983
(A/CONF.120/13).
annex IV, sect. A.l.
’ OflciaI Records of the GeneraI Assembiy, Thirty-fifth Session, PIenary Meetings, 109th meeting, paras. 173 and 175.
lo Ibid.. paras. 182 and 183.
‘I Ibid., paras. 192-194.
‘s Ibid., Eighth Emergency SpeciaI Session, Plenary Meetings. 9th
meeting, paras. 30-39.

207. But it is our duty to see that the independence of
Namibia does not cause more bloodshed, more refugees,
more suffering, more loss of life. We have a plan, the
United Nations plan, that guarantees a peaceful transition
of Namibia to independence. We all accept it and agree
on its essentials. What then are we waiting for? If we are
collectively to shoulder our responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations we must act together now
in the interest of the liberation of Namibia.
208. Nearly three score speakers have come before the
Council to manifest how peace and freedom fcir Namibia
are an integral part of international peace and security.

19

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations.
Sales Section.
New

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente
du monde entier.
Informez-vous
auprts
de votre
Section
des ventes,
New York ou Cenirve.

KAK

I-lOJlYYMTb

M-Jnatrnn
H arerircr6ax
Mara3WHe
nponaxre

COMO

M3JlAHMII

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

LJIES

dans les librairies
et les agences
depositsires
libraire
ou adressez-vous
a : Natrons
Unir$.

OPI-AHM3AUMM

Oprami3atttm
O6%.emiHeHHblX
Haunt7
no ncex panonax
Mupa.
Hasonnre
HJIH nWUIWTe
no allpecy:
OpraHH3aUWI
nsnarrwt4,
HbH)-fiopX
HUH )KeHesa.

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York
o Ginebra.

DES NATIONS

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

OI7bElDlHEHHbIX

HAlJMti

MO~HO
Xynmb
a KHwicHblX
stara3mia~
cnpasrn
06 n3nairmrx
B natue\r
KHU~HOM
06%eDHHeHHbIX
Hauki.
CeKUWI
no

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Unidas
estiin en venta en librerias
y casas distribuidoras
en
a su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones
Unidas.
Section
de Ventas.

I
Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

00400

90-60205-April

1991~-2,O
