S/2020/1113

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 November 2020
Original: English

Situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 16 of Security Council
resolution 2540 (2020) and paragraph 37 of Council resolution 2520 (2020). It
provides updates on the implementation of those resolutions, including on the
mandates of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and the
United Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS), and covers significant
developments in Somalia during the period from 5 August to 4 November 2020.

II. Political, security and economic overview
A.

Political developments
2.
Consultations between the Federal Government and the leaders of all the federal
member states, which began with a series of meetings in Dhuusamarreeb during July,
concluded in Mogadishu on 17 September with an agreement on the electoral model.
3.
The agreed model is similar to the electoral model of 2016, retaining clan -based
constituencies and selection of voting delegates. The election process will be
implemented by newly appointed federal and state electoral implementation
committees in lieu of the National Independent Electoral Commission. In comparison
with 2016, the voting franchise is expanded under the new mode l from 51 to 101
delegates per Member of Parliament in the House of the People. Delegates are to be
selected by traditional elders, state governments and civil society representatives.
Voting will take place in Mogadishu and in two population centres in ea ch federal
member state, as compared with one location per state in 2016. Under the agreement,
the 30 per cent quota for the representation of women in Parliament is also
guaranteed. The legislative bodies of the federal member states will select the
members of the Upper House, and the voting for parliamentarians representing
“Somaliland” will take place in Mogadishu.
4.
On 26 September, the two houses of the Federal Parliament ratified the proposed
electoral model at a joint sitting. The model was generally welcomed by the main
political parties and civil society organizations, which emphasized the importance of
timely elections and the imperative to protect the stability and unity of Somalia.
Consultations among the federal and state leaders continued in M ogadishu, and on

20-15083 (E)

201120

*2015083*

S/2020/1113

1 October they announced further details of the modalities, including a timetable for
implementing the model.
5.
Political dialogue between the Federal Government and all federal member
states was restored, ending a two-year impasse. The Special Representative for
Somalia, in coordination with international partners, continued to support efforts to
facilitate dialogue and advocate collaborative relations on national priorities. He
engaged with the President of Somalia, Mohamed Abdullahi Moh amed “Farmajo”,
and the acting Prime Minister, conveyed messages to all the leaders of the federal
member states, and coordinated joint advocacy and statements reflecting the common
positions of many members of the international community and urging stakeh olders
to reach a broad consensus on the electoral model.
6.
On 17 September, Mr. Farmajo nominated Mohamed Hussein Roble as the new
Prime Minister and requested him to form a cabinet and expedite electoral
preparations. The Prime Minister-designate was sworn in on 23 September after
securing a vote of confidence from Parliament. On 19 October, the Prime Minister
announced his new Cabinet, comprising a Deputy Prime Minister, 26 ministers
(including 4 women), 17 state ministers and 26 deputy ministers. The D eputy Prime
Minister and 14 ministers from the outgoing cabinet retained their positions.
7.
Despite improved communication between Mr. Farmajo and the President of
Jubbaland, Ahmed Mohamed Islam “Madobe”, the deployment of Somali National
Army forces in Gedo Region remained a point of contention between the two leaders,
with the potential to affect federal elections in the state. Mr. Madobe continued to
demand the withdrawal of Somali National Army troops from Gedo, while some
elements of the local administration insisted that they did not recognize him as the
state President.
8.
The Galmudug administration continued to strengthen state institutions by
introducing new tariffs, disarming clan militias and forming a district council in south
Gaalkacyo. Against a backdrop of increasing Al-Shabaab activity near
Dhuusamarreeb, the administration accelerated efforts to build its state police and
continued to consult clan stakeholders and leaders of the disbanded Ahl al -Sunna wal
Jama‘a.
9.
In Hirshabelle, the administration focused on preparations for the state regional
assembly elections, scheduled for November, which will culminate in a state
presidential election. On 28 August, the President of Hirshabelle, Mohamed Abdi
Ware, established an 11-member electoral committee to oversee the election process.
On 6 October, in the face of persistent disagreement concerning the timing of
elections, Mr. Ware instructed that the elections should be preceded by a
reconciliation process and that women should be appointed to the electoral
committee.
10. “Somaliland” progressed towards holding the delayed parliamentary and local
elections, now expected to be held in mid-2021. The composition of the National
Electoral Commission was agreed, and it began work on voter registratio n in early
September, while the House of Representatives passed a revised electoral law, which
contained no quotas for female or minority clan representation.

B.

Security developments
11. The security situation remained volatile, with an average of 27 0 incidents
recorded per month. Most incidents were Al-Shabaab attacks, including those carried
out using improvised explosive devices.

2/18

20-15083

S/2020/1113

12. The downward trend in the number of mortar attacks continued countrywide,
with a total of 16 reported between August and October, down from 22 between May
and July, and 28 between February and April. The attacks mainly targeted African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and local security forces in Juba Hoose,
Shabelle Hoose and Shabelle Dhexe Regions. On 31 October, mortar rounds were
launched towards the AMISOM base in Baidoa, Bay Region, where the United
Nations office is located; the rounds landed outside the base, with no casualties.
Al-Shabaab continued to demonstrate its ability to coordinate attacks in Mogadishu.
Concurrent hand grenade attacks were carried out in four districts on 13 August.
Between 9 and 11 simultaneous explosions were also recorded near Villa Somalia on
10 September, while high-level meetings were taking place.
13. On 10 August, 4 Custodial Corps personnel and 14 prisoners were killed in an
incident at Mogadishu Central Prison. Investigators reported that weapons had been
smuggled into the prison on 8 and 10 August. Twelve Custodial Corps personnel,
including the prison’s commander and deputy commander, six civilians and nine
prisoners were detained on charges of facilitating the smuggling of weapons into the
prison.
14. Al-Shabaab increased the use of high-profile suicide attacks. Suicide vehicleborne improvised explosive devices targeted Somali National Army bases in the
Warta Nabada district of Mogadishu on 8 August and in Jana Cabdalle, Juba Hoose,
on 7 September. Five personnel from the Somali security forces were killed and an
unconfirmed number were injured. One member of the United States military
personnel was also injured. Somali forces had captured the Jana Cabdalle base a day
before the attack. On 16 August, Al-Shabaab carried out a complex attack on the Elite
Hotel in Mogadishu, the first such attack in the capital in 2020, which resul ted in 20
fatalities. On 17 August, Al-Shabaab carried out another complex attack on the Somali
National Army base in Gofgadud Burey, Bay Region. Al-Shabaab held the base for
three days. Suicide bombers carried out attacks near Villa Somalia in Mogadishu o n
9 September, against National Intelligence and Security Agency soldiers in the
Howlwadaag district of Mogadishu on 1 October, and in Kismaayo on 11 September;
in the latter attack, the Chairman of the Jubbaland Chamber of Commerce was killed.
On 20 October, the Director of the Immigration and Naturalization Department
survived an assassination attempt, when a remote-controlled improvised explosive
device targeted his convoy in Mogadishu. On 31 October, the Qansaxdheere District
Commissioner also survived an under-vehicle improvised explosive device attack in
Bay Region. However, three other people were killed, including a local
non-governmental organization worker.
15. While security operations have been ongoing in Shabelle Hoose since the
resumption of Operation Badbaado in March, Al-Shabaab has remained undeterred in
attacking Somali National Army and AMISOM forces in recovered areas. Pressure on
Al-Shabaab in Shabelle Hoose appears to have forced the group to adapt and intensify
its activity in Hirshabelle and Galmudug. Two state ministers were assassinated in
Jawhar, on 17 August and 17 September. On 8 September, Al-Shabaab attacked
Somali National Army bases in Balcad and temporarily took control of the police
station and the District Commissioner’s office. In Hiraan Region, an increased
incidence of improvised explosive device attacks against Somali National Army and
AMISOM bases was recorded. In Beledweyne, explosive device attacks, grenade
attacks and assassinations also increased. Improvised explosive device attacks, armed
clashes with security forces and AMISOM and four indirect fire attacks were reported
in the Dhuusamarreeb area, which has historically seen a low level of Al -Shabaab
activity. One of the mortar attacks, on 2 November, targeted but missed the aeroplane
of the President of Galmudug, which had just taken off from the Dhuusamarreeb
airstrip.
20-15083

3/18

S/2020/1113

16. No attacks were attributed to pro-Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
elements. Five air strikes in August, three in September and two in October were
recorded in Juba Dhexe, Juba Hoose, Shabelle Hoose, Gedo and Bay Regions,
targeting Al-Shabaab. This brought the total number of air strikes in 2020 so far to 55.

C.

Economic developments
17. Somalia continued to grapple with the triple shock of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, desert locusts and floods, although its economy has proven
more resilient than expected. According to World Bank estimates from September,
gross domestic product was projected to decline by 1.5 per cent in 2020. Previous
estimates from June had indicated that a decline of 2.5 per cent was anticipated. The
Federal Government lifted restrictions on movement and travel in August. While
overall import levels have been stable, food imports have fallen, and food insecurity
is expected to rise. Exports, in particular of livestock, have fallen, with a year-on-year
decline of 22 per cent in the first half of 2020. Remittances are stabilizing transfers
for households and businesses.
18. The first International Monetary Fund review mission under the Extended Credit
Facility took place from 12 to 22 September. It found that Somalia had met all
structural benchmarks for the first review and had made progress on the floating
completion point triggers under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative.
Somalia met all but one quantitative performance criterion, which related to domestic
revenue. The Federal Government collected $99 million in domestic revenue up to
the end of June, against a programme target of $109 million. The 2020 federal
supplemental budget was approved on 3 August and reflected an anticipated reduction
in tax revenues and greater spending on social benefits and intergovernmental grants,
largely financed through an increase in official development assistance.
19. A supplemental Development Policy Financing operation from the World Bank
to support the triple crisis enhanced the fiscal space to facilitate transfers from the
Federal Government to the federal member states and “Somaliland ”. Those transfers
were made in October to most of the federal member states, with concerns expressed
by international partners over associated delays.
20. On 10 September, the Federal Cabinet approved the national climate change
policy, establishing environmental management policies, including on environmental
governance, and mainstreaming climate change in public investments. The following
day, the Federal Government revised upwards the nationally determined contributions
of Somalia to climate change mitigation and environmental protection under the Paris
Agreement, establishing a baseline for Sustainable Development Goal monitoring.

III. Support for peacebuilding and State-building efforts
A.

Establishment of a functional federal state

1.

Preparations for elections
21. On 1 October, the National Consultative Council, comprising the leaders of the
Federal Government and the federal member states and the Governor of the Banaadir
Regional Administration, announced the electoral timetable and published procedures
to guide the implementation of the agreement for the 2020/21 elections. A 25-member
federal electoral implementation committee will be established to oversee the
implementation of the electoral process. A federal member state electoral
management committee comprising 11 members will be established in each state. The

4/18

20-15083

S/2020/1113

procedure for the establishment of a 21-member independent dispute resolution
mechanism was also outlined. A committee will be established to manage the election
of parliamentarians representing “Somaliland” at the national level.
22. Under the announced timetable, elections for the Upper House are to take place
from 1 to 10 December, followed by those for the House of the People from 10 to
27 December. The election of the two Speakers of Parliament and the President will
take place between 1 January and 8 February 2021. Candidate fees for the Upper
House will be $20,000 per candidate and for the House of the People, $10,000. The
30 per cent quota for women is to be applied to all committees as well as to
parliamentary seats. The National Consultative Council also committed to
commencing preparations for the holding of one-person-one-vote elections in
2024/25.
23. The Somali Police Commissioner unveiled the draft national election security
plan. The draft plan is based on that of 2016 but is aligned with the agreed 2020/21
electoral model. The draft plan details the division of responsibility between police,
military and other forces and makes election security the top priority for federal and
state security forces.
2.

Deepening federalism
24. The Ministry of the Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation and the Ministry
of Constitutional Affairs jointly prepared the draft national decentralization policy.
The draft policy describes the objectives and scope of decentralization in Somalia in
the long term and identifies tasks and activities to enable the transfer of
responsibilities from federal and subnational tiers to local government over the next
five years.
25. The United Nations, together with its international partners, continued
engagement with federal member states to encourage continued dialogue and
cooperation between the two levels of government. On 14 and 27 October,
representatives of the United Nations, the African Union, the European Union a nd the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development met with the President of South -West
State, Abdiaziz Hassan Mohamed “Laftagareen”, in Baidoa and the President of
Galmadug State, Ahmed Abdi Kariye “Qoor Qoor”, in Dhuusamarreeb to discuss the
importance of constructive collaboration and compromise between the Federal
Government and the federal member states, governance and security priorities and
reconciliation. The discussions focused on the electoral preparations, including the
importance of implementing the 30 per cent quota for women and of ensuring that the
electoral process was underpinned by transparency, fairness and inclusivity, as well
as the need to focus on democratic reforms beyond the elections, such as steps to
advance the constitutional review process.

3.

Constitutional review
26. Consultations on the margins of the summit between the leaders of the Federal
Government and the federal member states from 15 to 18 August resulted in a
commitment by the state constitutional affairs ministries to cooperate in the
constitutional review process to build on previous consultations held in Galmudug,
Hirshabelle and South-West State. On 5 August, the joint parliamentary Oversight
Committee presented to the House of the People its report on the chapter s of the
provisional Federal Constitution that had undergone a technical review. A series of
meetings followed between the two Speakers of Parliament to discuss ways to adopt
the completed, non-contentious articles of the Constitution before the dissolutio n of
the tenth session of the Federal Parliament.

20-15083

5/18

S/2020/1113

27. The constitutional review process encountered delays owing to the absence of a
political dialogue between federal and state leaders and financial constraints
impeding the finalization of consultations in some federal member states. On 15 and
24 September, the Special Representative convened meetings that brought together
donors, the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs, the Oversight Committee and the
Independent Constitutional Review and Implementation Co mmission to seek
solutions to the funding constraints. The donors indicated their readiness to support
the outstanding activities.
4.

Prevention and resolution of conflicts
28. In line with the National Reconciliation Framework and the National
Reconciliation Plan, the Ministry of the Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation
initiated a collaborative exercise on conflict mapping in close coordination with
federal member states, designed to build the capacity of the Ministry’s reconciliation
department and similar departments in state ministries. The staff of the Ministry and
their state-level counterparts will be trained in cataloguing and analysing active
conflicts in the country at the district, regional and national levels, so as to inform the
Ministry and state line ministries about the scale and nature of the conflicts, root
causes, drivers, trends, main actors, perpetrators and victims.

B.

Cross-cutting issues

1.

Gender equality and the empowerment of women
29. The Federal Government committed to allocate specific seats for a women-only
contest, to secure the 30 per cent quota under the agreed electoral model. On
3 September and 19 October, UNSOM consulted women leaders on actions needed to
achieve the 30 per cent quota and to enhance women’s political participation beyond
the elections. Meanwhile, on 27 September, the “Somaliland” House of Representatives
voted to remove a 22 per cent quota for women from the “Somaliland” draft electoral
law.
30. In preparation for the forthcoming elections, the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), jointly with the
Ministry for Women and civil society organizations and with financial assistance from
the multi-partner trust fund, organized training for 200 women leaders and political
aspirants in Gaalkacyo, Baidoa, Garoowe and Hargeysa, which was held from
30 September to 4 October. The training focused on transformational leadership,
campaigning and advocacy skills. Following a recent assessment on violence against
women during elections in Somalia, UN-Women facilitated training for 100
representatives of civil society organizations on the monitoring and reporting of
election-related violence, in Hargeysa and Garoowe, on 30 September and 4 October,
respectively.
31. On 21 and 22 October, the Somali Women’s Leadership Initiative held a forum
on the political empowerment of women. The forum was attended by about 150
participants, including members of parliaments, the Chairperson of the National
Independent Electoral Commission and prominent women leaders from federal
member states, Banaadir Region and Mogadishu, who discussed and examined
options for the implementation of the 30 per cent quota for women. Women leaders
issued a communiqué urging the Somali leadership and international partners to
uphold and achieve the 30 per cent quota for women in the 2020/21 elections and
support women goodwill ambassadors, who played a critical role in the electoral
process in 2016.

6/18

20-15083

S/2020/1113

32. On 27 August, UNSOM concluded a three-day training on legal standards
relating to gender equality for 11 members of staff of the Hirshabelle Ministry of
Justice. On 8 September, the Joint Justice Programme of the multi -partner trust fund
supported the South-West State Ministry of Justice in commencing legal literacy
classes for 15 women leaders and 10 women police officers.
33. From 16 to 18 September, the Ministry of Justice, in partnership with
UN-Women and with financial assistance from the Joint Justice Programme,
organized training on legislation and court procedures for 40 women lawyers and
representatives of Puntland women’s associations to enhance their capacity and
prepare them to take up higher roles in the judiciary, so as to ensure gender parity and
increased access to justice for women.
2.

Youth empowerment
34. To mark International Youth Day, the United Nations inter-agency working
group and the United Nations Somalia Youth Advisory Board organized a virtual
forum on 11 August to raise awareness of the need to include young people in key
decision-making processes and formal and informal civic spaces. A total of 169 young
people participated, together with the Minister for Youth and Sports, the Mayor of
Mogadishu, parliamentarians and senior civil servants, my De puty Special
Representative for Somalia and United Nations Resident and Humanitarian
Coordinator, and the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) Representative for
Somalia.
35. The Puntland Youth Peer Network, with the support of UNFPA Somalia,
conducted mentoring from 22 to 24 August for 30 young girls to help them to speak
out against the harmful effects of female genital mutilation and to mentor others to
speak out against the practice. The training offered the girls an opportunity to become
activists and break the silence surrounding female genital mutilation. Fifteen young
trainers in Mogadishu underwent intensive learning from 6 to 16 September to create
and facilitate theatre forums aimed at empowering youth in targeted communities to
change negative norms and adopt beliefs and practices that protect girls and women
against violence.
36. On 21 September, 150 young people in Gaalkacyo, with the support of UNFPA
and in partnership with the Puntland Youth Peer Network, commemorated the
International Day of Peace by organizing a talk show on storytelling as a tool for
healing and peacebuilding. The panellists, led by youth from the two sides of the
divided city, discussed the role of young people in building sustainable peace in the
community by discussing their personal experiences of war, the resilience they had
shown to overcome adversity and how young people could promote social cohesion
and integration to address and reduce inter-clan conflict in Gaalkacyo.

C.

Development coordination
37. Following extensive consultations with the Federal Government and other
stakeholders, the United Nations in Somalia and the Federal Government signed the
United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework, which will guide
the collective support provided by United Nations system entities for the next five
years, in line with the priorities of the ninth national development plan of Somalia.
The priorities of the Framework will directly mirror the four pillars of the national
development plan and the associated aid coordination architecture to ensure
maximum alignment and coherence.

20-15083

7/18

S/2020/1113

38. The revised aid architecture for Somalia is being operationalized. Under the
Somalia Development and Reconstruction Facility, the working groups for the
economic and social pillars convened their first meetings in September.

IV. Human rights and protection
A.

Human rights
39. UNSOM recorded 257 Somali civilian casualties in the reporting period,
comprising 124 killed and 133 injured, compared with 138 killed and 181 injured
during the previous period. Al-Shabaab continued to be the main perpetrator,
responsible for 63 per cent of recorded civilian casualties (163), followed by unknown
actors with 17 per cent (44), State security forces with 13 per cent (32) and clan
militias with 6 per cent (16). AMISOM was responsible for one casualty, and one
casualty was caused by foreign forces.
40. Violations of the right to freedom of expression continued with the arrest of five
journalists in connection with their work: two in Puntland, t wo in “Somaliland” and
one in Mogadishu. On 26 August, Mr. Farmajo signed an amended version of the
media bill into law. Somali media groups expressed concerns regarding several
provisions that could pose challenges to freedom of expression and the indepen dence
of the media. In a related development, the Office of the Attorney General appointed
a special prosecutor on 8 September to investigate killings of journalists in the
country.
41. The Somali authorities arbitrarily arrested and/or detained 40 indivi duals
(including 24 Al-Shabaab suspects and 2 ISIL suspects), mostly in the context of
security operations. This constituted a 53 per cent decrease from the previous
reporting period, when 85 individuals were arbitrarily arrested and/or detained. Of
the 40 individuals, 20 were released without charge or appearing before a court.
Al-Shabaab abducted 54 civilians, 50 in Hirshabelle and 4 in Jubbaland, who were
accused of failing to obey the group’s orders. Of the 54 abductees, 50 were released
after 15 days, while 4 remain in captivity.
42. UNSOM, in partnership with the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), UN-Women, UNFPA and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF),
engaged in joint advocacy with national and international partners in support of t he
original Rape and Sexual Offences Act of 2018. The new draft federal law on sexual
intercourse-related crimes remains a serious concern, as it contains a number of
troubling provisions that violate protections against child marriage and forced
marriage and is not in conformity with the international human rights commitments
of Somalia. Similar concerns over non-compliance with international human rights
standards were expressed regarding the Rape, Fornication and other Sexual Offences
Bill, passed by the “Somaliland” House of Representatives on 25 August, as well as
concerns regarding provisions that criminalize homosexuality, permit sexual assault
within marriage and require force for an act to be considered rape, and regarding the
application of the death penalty for witchcraft.
43. On 18 October, the Federal Government submitted its first report on the
implementation of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to the
Human Rights Committee, a milestone in the country’s increasing engagem ent with
international human rights mechanisms.

8/18

20-15083

S/2020/1113

B.

Compliance with the human rights due diligence policy
44. Support was provided by UNSOM to the United Nations Office for Project
Services (UNOPS) and the Mine Action Service to strengthen the monitoring,
documentation and follow-up of human rights violations and provide specific tools
for tracking incidents and the progress of mitigation measures. The leveraging of
biometric registration to integrate human rights into training, in line with the human
rights due diligence policy, was agreed with UNOPS in August. UNSOM met the
Commander of AMISOM sector 6 and his team in Kismaayo and reviewed the action
taken to prevent violations. Emphasis was placed on the need for more training,
information-sharing and monitoring of measures to prevent violations, as well as
action on the rules of engagement in relation to human rights and humanitarian law.
It was noted that the issuance of operational orders and tightened command and
control had strengthened accountability. Sector focal points for the human rights due
diligence policy were also identified.

C.

Children in armed conflict
45. For the period from 5 August to 4 November, the country task force on
monitoring and reporting on grave violations against children in armed conflict
documented 945 grave violations affecting 1,254 children (1,017 boys and 237 girls),
11 attacks on schools, 1 attack on a hospital and 1 case of denial of humanitarian
access. A total of 543 children were abducted, 288 were victims of killing and
maiming, 601 were victims of recruitment and use and 146 were victims of conflict related sexual violence. The violations were attributed to Al-Shabaab (74.3 per cent),
unknown armed elements (12.5 per cent), clan militias (4.35 per c ent) and federal and
state armed forces (8.9 per cent). A total of 32 incidents of deprivation of liberty
affecting 69 boys and 1 girl were recorded, with 19 boys and 1 girl detained by
Jubbaland state forces, 30 boys by the Somali Police Force, 13 boys by the Somali
National Army, 3 boys by Jubbaland Police and 2 boys by Puntland state and police
forces.
46. On 14 August, Somali security forces rescued 33 boys from an Al -Shabaab
madrasa in Kurtunwaarey, Shabelle Hoose, during a security operation. All the
children were subsequently reunited with their parents. On 18 August, two men
convicted by a South-West State court in Baidoa on 21 July for sexually assaulting an
11-year-old boy were publicly executed.

D.

Prevention of sexual and gender-based violence
47. A total of 68 incidents affecting 71 victims and survivors of conflict -related
sexual violence were documented during the reporting period. Apart from two boys,
the majority of reported incidents affected women and girls (64 minors and 5 adults).
Most of the perpetrators (39) were described as unidentified armed men, while 12
cases were attributed to clan militias, 9 to Al-Shabaab, 4 to the Somali National Army,
2 to Jubbaland forces, 4 to the Somali Police Force and 1 to South -West State forces.
The incidents comprised 48 cases of rape, 2 gang rapes, 7 cases of forced marriage, 6
cases of attempted rape and 5 cases of sexual assault. Access to support services for
victims and survivors is diminishing; the police reportedly closed the one -stop centre
of the Somali Women’s Development Centre in Madina Hospital. The centre, which
was supported by the United Nations, had been providing critical services, including
medical and legal aid.

20-15083

9/18

S/2020/1113

48. On 11 September, a 19-year-old girl was reportedly gang-raped and murdered
by a group of men in the Waberi district of Mogadishu. UNSOM is working closely
with the Office of the Attorney General to ensure that the perpetrators are held
accountable. Twelve suspects have been arrested and are under investigation by the
police.
49. On 28 and 29 September, UNSOM, AMISOM and UNFPA facilitated a two -day
capacity-building training programme for 36 participants from the Somali Police
Force and all five state police services, focusing on knowledge and skills for
responding to survivors of gender-based violence. An action plan was developed after
the training to improve information-sharing between the police and special women’s
units on survivor-centred approaches and principles, to conduct community
discussions on the prevention of gender-based violence and the protection of women
and girls from such violence through a community policing approach, and to establish
links with service providers. The plan included protocols for receiving and managing
survivors.

V. Humanitarian situation
50. Humanitarian needs in Somalia remained high, fuelled by a protracted conflict,
political and economic instability and recurrent climatic shocks, and exacerbated by
the triple threat of COVID-19, desert locusts and flooding.
51. As at 4 November, Somalia had recorded 4,229 cumulative COVID -19 cases.
These included 875 active cases, 3,247 recoveries and 107 deaths. Between 16 March
and 30 September, 191 health workers tested positive for COVID -19, including 52
doctors, negatively affecting response capacity in the context of limited health -care
services. Through the $256 million COVID-19 preparedness and response plan for
Somalia, launched in April, humanitarian partners have scaled up responses to
COVID-19. As at 14 October, $74 million had been received. About 10 million people
were reached with risk-communication messages. From 1 to 12 August, 569,000
households were visited by community health workers for case-finding.
52. Across Somalia, 2.6 million people remained displaced, most living in 2,300
congested settlements, often at risk of eviction by landlords, in violation of the right
to housing and property. Between January and August 2020, more than 102,300
people were evicted from their homes. Humanitarian partners have advocated a threemonth moratorium on evictions of internally displaced persons; as a result, lease
agreements were extended for 19 sites for internally displaced persons (1,407
households), and 1,139 households were protected from for ced evictions.
53. Displacement due to climatic shocks continued, with 630,000 people displaced
by seasonal floods as at 22 September. More than 132,000 hectares of agricultural
land was destroyed in southern and central Somalia. Floods have also elevated the
risk of water- and vector-borne diseases. At least 5,690 cholera cases, with 30 deaths,
had been reported in 29 districts as at 20 September. In September, the Somalia
Humanitarian Fund Advisory Board endorsed a $9.26 million reserve allocation for
flood responses in the most affected locations.
54. On 30 August, a measles and polio vaccination campaign was launched,
reaching nearly 408,000 children aged 6 months to 5 years (92 per cent of targeted
children) in Banaadir. A further polio immunization cam paign, implemented from 20
to 23 September in southern and central Somalia, reached nearly 1.6 million children
under 5 years, out of 1.65 million targeted, with 42,000 vaccinated for the first time.
In early September, one case of vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 was reported in
Banaadir, the fourth such case reported in Somalia in 2020.

10/18

20-15083

S/2020/1113

55. To contain desert locusts in “Somaliland”, Puntland and Galmudug, the Federal
Government and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
sprayed 39,608 hectares of affected land with biopesticides from 1 August to
31 October. This protected 90,388 metric tons of food valued at $27.1 million and
was sufficient to meet the cereal needs of 602,589 people for a year and to provide
pasture for 41,959 households for a year. Aerial and ground operations are continuing.
Of the $56.9 million required for locust response, $49.5 million had been received as
at 5 October.
56. Despite operational and access challenges, humanitarian partners reached an
average of 1.5 million people monthly, or 50 per cent, out of a target of 3 million
during the reporting period. Needs are expected to rise throughout 2021 owing to
ongoing armed conflict, insufficient funding, an expected below -average cereal
harvest in the period from April to June, the socioeconomic impact of COVID-19,
locusts, floods and anticipated below-average rainfall from October to December.
While $618 million (61 per cent) had been received for activities under the
$1.01 billion 2020 Somalia humanitarian response plan as at 5 October, the
distribution of funding among the AMISOM sectors remains uneven, as more than
half of the humanitarian clusters have received less than 35 per cent of the required
funding.
57. Security remains a major constraint on humanitarian operations. During the
period from 5 August to 28 October, 44 incidents against humanitarian operations
were recorded, in which two humanitarian workers were killed and one was injured.
On 27 October, two Somali humanitarian workers supporting an ongoing polio
vaccination campaign organized by UNICEF, the World Health Organization and the
federal Ministry of Health were killed by suspected Al-Shabaab militants during a
vehicle hijacking in Mogadishu.

VI. Comprehensive approach to security
58. The United Nations continued to engage with senior officials in the Federal
Government, including in the Office of the Prime Minister, to encourage the
authorities to convene the high-level Security and Justice Committee as part of the
comprehensive approach to security, in order for the technical -level committees
addressing the different strands of the approach to receive strategic guidance.
Meetings of the strand 2A (defence) committee have been convened on a weekly
basis, with the committees for strands 2B (sub-working group on police), 2C (rule of
law), 3 (stabilization) and 4 (prevention and countering of violent extremism) meeting
on a quarterly basis, thus ensuring that important operational and programmatic
activities have continued during the review of the Somalia transition plan.

A.

Operations
59. The Somali-led update of the transition plan is ongoing, under the direction of
the National Security Adviser, to provide the political and strategic vision, as well as
operational priorities that will set the conditions for the security transition in Somalia
in 2021 and beyond. Consultations were held with the federal member states and key
international security partners, and progress was made in developing a document that
could be formally endorsed by the high-level Security and Justice Committee, chaired
by the Prime Minister.
60. Transition operations remained stalled during the reporting period owing to a
lack of Somali National Army, police and Darwish forces to support operatio ns.
Somali security forces and AMISOM continued sporadic activities to disrupt

20-15083

11/18

S/2020/1113

Al-Shabaab across Shabelle Hoose and Juba Hoose, supported by UNSOS. Air strikes
by the United States Africa Command increased in support of bilateral operations
with Jubbaland security forces.
61. The conference of AMISOM sector commanders, held from 5 to 8 October,
which included participation by representatives of the Somali National Army,
proposed a phased forces reconfiguration plan that is intended to generate AMISOM
mobile forces. The plan identifies AMISOM forward bases that would close or be
handed over to Somali security forces, as well as new bases. It was also proposed that
a joint mission planning and coordination cell be established to strengthen the
planning and conduct of operations and engagement with partners.
62. The Mine Action Service supported AMISOM and Somali security forces in
improvised explosive device threat analysis, studies of vulnerable points in supply
routes and improvised explosive device awareness reports. During the reporting
period, 26 improvised explosive devices targeted AMISOM, resulting in 24
casualties, compared with 27 improvised explosive devices during the previous
reporting period.
63. The deployment of Federal Darwish Police and South-West State Police to
Shabelle Hoose is on hold, pending the provision of weapons by the Federal
Government. The Somali Darwish Police concept and the Federal Darwish Police
generation plan are under review.

B.

Institutional capacity building
64. The United Nations supported the Galmudug Administration in re -establishing
the state police by coordinating training for 700 police officers on human rights and
community policing and advised the Galmudug Ministry of Security on the
integration of regional forces into the state Darwish police.
65. The executive board of the joint police programme amended the programme
document to allow donors to earmark contributions for the Darwish branches of
federal and state police services. An initial pledge of €5 million was made for that
purpose.
66. On 1 September, the Commissioner of the Somali Police Force appointed five
officers to develop a strategic federal police plan to transform the Somali Police Force
into a federal service. The Police Professional Developme nt Board approved the
Somali police community policing policy on 29 September. The policy was developed
by all Somali police services, with international support for the transition to
community-oriented policing in Somalia.
67. The Mine Action Service trained 39 Somali Police Force personnel (28 men and
11 women) for six weeks under the mobile vehicle checkpoint project, as part of
efforts to equip Somali security forces to assume responsibility for security.
Participants acquired skills to plan and launch successful mobile vehicle checkpoint
operations. The mobile vehicle checkpoint teams commenced limited operations in
Mogadishu on 30 August.
68. At the joint justice programme and joint corrections programme steering
committee meeting on 21 September, the Ministry of Justice and international cochairs approved a revised workplan for the joint justice programme and extended both
programmes to the end of 2021.
69. The joint security sector governance programme continued to build the
institutional capacity of federal and state security sector governance institutions.
From 31 August to 2 September, UNSOM and UNDP delivered virtual training

12/18

20-15083

S/2020/1113

modules to 19 Federal Government officials (5 women and 14 men) on security sector
reform, gender awareness, the women and peace and security agenda, human rights
and child protection. A virtual workshop on institutional development and capacity building was delivered on 25 and 26 August to six participants (one woman and five
men) from the Ministry of Security of Hirshabelle.
70. From 31 August to 2 September, UNSOM organized a three-day training course
for staff of the defector rehabilitation programme (10 men and 3 women) from
Mogadishu, Baidoa and Kismaayo, to increase capacity to review the defector
rehabilitation programme strategy. Consultative meetings on implementing the
amnesty policy were held in August, and stakeholders endorsed the road map and
action plan for the amnesty bill.
71. On 24 September, World Maritime Day, a high-level conference was held in
Mogadishu on the theme for 2020, “Sustainable shipping for a sustainable planet”,
which was attended by senators, ministers and senior security force officials, with
federal representatives joining virtually. The event provided an opportunity to
increase awareness of the development of the Somali Maritime Administration and of
wider environmental and climate security issues and allowed stakeholders to agree on
benchmarks to increase women’s engagement in the maritime sector.

C.

Supporting activities
72. From 5 August to 4 October, the Mine Action Service, observing COVID-19
preventive measures, provided explosive ordnance risk education to 2,142 women,
2,039 men, 1,025 girls and 1,792 boys from the civilian population.
73. A report on lessons learned from the collective efforts of stabilization actors in
Shabelle Hoose during the 2019–2020 period was released on 2 October by the
Ministry of the Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation, identifying practical
recommendations. The report highlights the need for improved planning between
civilian stabilization actors and security stakeholders.
74. On 2 September, the United Nations steering committee on the prevention and
countering of violent extremism was presented with the results of research on the
impact on target audiences of stories of victims of and defectors from violent
extremist groups. The results will be used to scale up a communication strategy as
part of efforts to inform wider audiences about victims’ stories and rights,
encouraging social healing. The coordination unit for the prevention and countering
of violent extremism in the Office of the Prime Minister and line ministries, with the
support of the United Nations, organized multiple events to commemorate the victims
of the attack of 14 October 2017 under the slogan “Names, not numbers”.
75. During the reporting period, 248 male and 226 female beneficiaries undertook
the defector rehabilitation programme, receiving support at the three centres for men
and two for women. UNSOM and the International Organization for Migration
continued to implement the female defectors project, which has been leveraging the
strength of women in peacebuilding by promoting the safe and sustainable integration
of women formerly associated with Al-Shabaab. As at October, 181 women were
receiving vocational training at rehabilitation centres, and women -led civil society
organizations continued to provide them with community-based reintegration
services.

20-15083

13/18

S/2020/1113

VII. United Nations Support Office in Somalia support for the
African Union Mission in Somalia and the Somali
security forces
A.

Support for African Union Mission in Somalia operations
76. UNSOS continued to enable the operational capacity of AMISOM, including by
facilitating the deployment of the Ugandan military aviation unit, comprising a crew
of 140 personnel and four helicopters, to a camp constructed by UNSOS in Baledogle.
In addition, UNSOS continued to provide AMISOM with COVID -19 personal
protective equipment and 10-person tents for use as isolation facilities.
77. AMISOM requested UNSOS to airlift contingent-owned equipment from
Mogadishu to Baidoa for the Ghana Formed Police Unit, following a long delay due
to unsuccessful attempts to organize a convoy by road. The airlift was conducted from
9 September to 18 October but excluded eight pieces of oversized and overweight
equipment that could not be airlifted. UNSOS has arranged to provide alternative
capacity to address the absence of the undelivered equipment.
78. Following the partial resumption of rotation of AMISOM and United Nations
uniformed personnel, UNSOS supported the rotation of 600 Ethiopian National
Defence Forces troops, 160 Sierra Leone Formed Police Unit troops and 1,842
Uganda People’s Defence Forces troops. UNSOS also supported the rotation of 625
United Nations Guard Unit troops from Uganda. Quarantine facilities have been
established for incoming and outgoing AMISOM troops in Mogadishu, with a
capacity for 300 personnel, and in Baledogle, for 400 personnel.
79. On 19 August, the Federal Government, AMISOM and the United Nations
agreed on standard operating procedures covering AMISOM environmental
management practices. UNSOS leadership continued to engage with the host country,
as well as with AMISOM and its troop- and police-contributors and with international
partners, on UNSOS support for AMISOM and the Somali security forces, including
to advocate donations to trust funds for support.
80. UNSOS capacity to exercise optimum oversight and implement accountability
measures for the effective delivery of support to AMISOM, including contingent owned equipment certification and inspection, remained constrained owing to the
travel restrictions related to COVID-19. As a result, UNSOS was unable to conduct
its quarterly contingent-owned equipment inspections for the past two quarters and is
currently relying on the contingent’s serviceability reports. By 30 September, UNSOS
had made reimbursements totalling approximately $35 million to AMISOM troop and police-contributing countries.
81. The Mine Action Service, with support from UNSOS, continued to support
AMISOM security operations and stabilization efforts by providing advice, analysis,
training and mentoring concerning the use of specialized equipment, explosive
detection dogs, community liaison officers and explosive ordnance clearance teams.
From 5 August to 5 October, the Mine Action Service delivered training to 365
AMISOM uniformed personnel to enhance their capability to find and destroy
improvised explosive devices and to operate safely within that threat environment.
The Mine Action Service contributed to the safety and security of strategic
infrastructure through the deployment of 24 teams working with 24 detection dogs to
conduct searches of 21,192 pieces of luggage, 56,896 ve hicles, 175 buildings,
117,191 square metres of building areas and 6,910,780 square metres of open areas
throughout the sectors.

14/18

20-15083

S/2020/1113

82. As at 14 October, the balance of the United Nations trust fund in support of
AMISOM amounted to $2.5 million. The AMISOM equipment review requested by
the Security Council in resolutions 2472 (2019) and 2520 (2020) has been delayed
because AMISOM has indicated that it is awaiting the outcome of the Somalia
transition plan update, its own reconfiguration planning and the relaxation of
COVID-19 restrictions on field visits. On 14 October, the African Union Commission
requested UNSOS to share all available field-level data and reports on the status of
AMISOM equipment, with the stated intention of recommencing work on the review.

B.

Support for Somalia national armed forces operations
83. UNSOS continued to provide logistical support to 10,900 Somali National Army
personnel, within the ceiling of 13,900 eligible Somali security forces authorized
under resolution 2520 (2020). The Federal Government asked for additional support
within that ceiling to be provided to 2,000 Somali National Army personnel and 1,000
Darwish officers of the Somali Police Force. Further details are being sought from
the Federal Government, including an understanding of any planned support for statelevel police.
84. UNSOS continued to assist the Somali National Army in building its secure
communications systems capacity. The programme involves remote coaching and
mentoring to enable the Somali National Army to complete Mo torola VHF network
installations in Kismaayo, Cadaado, Janaale and Marka.
85. As at 14 October, the balance of the United Nations trust fund in support of the
Somali security forces was $5.2 million. This is sufficient to enable support to be
provided to 10,900 Somali security forces personnel for the next four months.
86. UNSOS continued to provide support to its clients without interruption,
including supplying over 3 million tons of cargo to both AMISOM and the Somali
National Army.

VIII. United Nations presence in Somalia
87. United Nations entities maintained a presence in Baidoa, Beledweyne, Berbera,
Boosaaso, Dhooble, Dhuusamarreeb, Doolow, Gaalkacyo, Garoowe, Hargeysa,
Jawhar, Kismaayo and Mogadishu. As at 4 November, 330 international staff and
1,385 national staff were deployed throughout Somalia. The United Nations
COVID-19 crisis management task force for Somalia continued to coordinate efforts
with AMISOM and partners to support rapid implementation of preventive, mitigation
and treatment measures.

IX. Observations
88. While the agreed electoral model for 2020/21 fell short of the previous
commitment of the leaders of Somalia to hold one-person-one-vote elections in 2020,
there is a general sense of relief across all segments of Somali society that leaders of
the Federal Government and all federal member states finally resumed their dialogue
to reach consensus on the modalities for the federal vote. The model was accepted by
all key Somali stakeholders, including political parties and civil society, and was
ratified by the Federal Parliament, replacing the previously enacted electoral law.
89. Looking ahead, there is a need to clarify key aspects of the model, including the
modalities for choosing members of the committees that select voting delegates,
modalities for guaranteeing the attainment of the agreed 30 per cent quota for women
20-15083

15/18

S/2020/1113

and the finalization of the electoral security plan. It is also imperative to ensure that
the model is implemented in a secure, peaceful, transparent and inclusive manner. It
is important to compensate for the shortfalls of this indirect electoral model by taking
parallel measures that are critical for the advancement of democratization in Somalia.
These include the development of an agreed pathway to one-person-one-vote
elections in 2024/25, the adoption of the chapters of the provisional Federal
Constitution that have been reviewed so far and on which consensus could be secured,
and the establishment of the Constitutional Court, the Judicial Service Commission
and the National Human Rights Commission. UNSOM, with UNDP and ot her
international partners, is in discussion with the Somali authorities on how to support
the implementation of the agreed electoral model and further democratic reforms.
90. I welcome the continued dialogue among the federal and state leaders. It is now
essential to institutionalize their consultations to ensure that they meet regularly and
to avoid the disruption witnessed between 2018 and mid -2020. Sustained dialogue
and consultation through the National Consultative Council is important not only to
keep the electoral process on track, but also to deepen federalism and advance other
pressing national priorities, including cooperation on security operations and the
transition, measures to deal with the COVID-19 pandemic and measures to advance
governance, judicial, economic and security reforms.
91. I take note of the appointment of Mohamed Hussein Roble as Prime Minister on
17 September 2020. As the country focuses on elections, I urge the Prime Minister
and his new Cabinet to continue to build on the gains achieved over the past four
years in respect of political, economic and security priorities. These include
demonstrating commitment to the protection of human rights, advancing dialogue
with “Somaliland”, strengthening cooperation with the international partners of
Somalia and cultivating mutually beneficial relations between Somalia and its
neighbours and the wider subregion.
92. Somali-led efforts, supported by AMISOM, the United Nations and
international partners, to update the 2018 transition plan ar e important to guide the
transition to the end of 2021 and beyond. Once finalized, the revised strategic
priorities and operational objectives of the plan must be delivered on the ground to
continue the sustained transfer of security responsibilities, so a s to enable Somali
security forces and institutions to take the leading role on security by the end of 2021.
It will be important for these efforts to be accompanied by a continued commitment
to a comprehensive approach to security that encompasses institution-building and
supporting activities alongside military operations.
93. A successful transition requires appropriate institutions and direction, the
generation of forces and the enhancement of the oversight, management and
sustainment capacities of the Somali security services, including through financial,
operational and logistical support. Accelerated efforts to that end are needed,
including through the integration of regional forces into the Somali National Army
and state police, in line with the national security architecture. Coordination between
the Federal Government and the federal member states will also be important to
identify and make maximum use of the additional numbers of Somali security forces
authorized by the Security Council to receive logistical support from UNSOS.
94. I thank those Member States that have made contributions to the trust funds for
AMISOM and the Somali security forces. It is critical that donors continue to provide
flexible and generous funding to those trust funds to support key functions performed
by AMISOM, and in particular to ensure that the Somali security forces continue to
be provided with essential logistical support, training, mentoring and equipment to
counter the threat of improvised explosive devices.

16/18

20-15083

S/2020/1113

95. I reiterate my call for the reintroduction of the sexual offences bill of 2018 in
Parliament, which if passed into law will serve to counter sexual and gender-based
violence. It is also important that the “Somaliland” authorities support the Rape and
Sexual Offences Act of 2018 and reject the regressive Rape, Fornication and Other
Sexual Offences Bill, which contravenes established regional and international
human rights standards.
96. Somalia is again bracing for potential drought conditions in 2021, follow ing a
serious humanitarian situation resulting from the triple threat of COVID -19, locust
infestation and floods. The continued and generous support of the international
community will be necessary in response to the situation. Additional efforts, includin g
those that build on the commitment of Somalia to promote the humanitarian development-peace nexus, are needed to mitigate the now-routine spikes in
humanitarian needs and strengthen resilience.
97. I condemn in the strongest possible terms the continuing Al-Shabaab attacks on
civilians, government officials, security forces, AMISOM and the international
presence in Somalia. The increase in suicide attacks in Mogadishu, which target
government and security forces personnel and often result in civilian casu alties, is of
great concern, as are targeted assassinations of government officials, as well as the
potential for Al-Shabaab to disrupt the ongoing electoral processes. I commend the
Somali people for their resolve and resilience in the face of these heino us and
cowardly attacks.
98. I thank the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
the European Union, Member States, non-governmental organizations and other
partners for their invaluable support for peacebuilding and State -building in Somalia.
I honour the efforts and sacrifices of AMISOM and the Somali security forces in the
pursuit of peace and stability to protect the lives of the Somali people.
99. I also thank my Special Representative for Somalia and Head of UNSOM, James
Swan, for his leadership, and commend all United Nations staff in Somalia and those
working from outside the country following the outbreak of COVID -19 for their
steadfast commitment and hard work in support of Somalia and its people.

20-15083

17/18

S/2020/1113

18/18

20-15083
