A/72/361–S/2017/821

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
24 August 2017
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventy-first session
Item 69 (a) of the provisional agenda*
Promotion and protection of the rights of children:
Promotion and protection of the rights of children

Security Council
Seventy-second year

Children and armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, which covers the period from January to December 2016,
is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2225 (2015). It highlights
trends regarding the impact of armed conflict on children and provides information
on violations committed in 2016, as well as related protection concerns. Where
possible, violations are attributed to parties to conflict and, in line with the
resolutions of the Council, the annexes to the report include a list of parties that, in
violation of international law, engage in the recruitment and use of children, the
killing and maiming of children, rape and other forms of sexual violence against
children, attacks on schools and/or hospitals and attacks or threats of attacks against
protected personnel, 1 and the abduction of children.
2.
All the information provided in the report has been vetted for accuracy by the
United Nations. In situations where the ability to obtain or verify information was
hampered by factors such as insecurity or access restrictions, it is qualified as such.
In this regard, the information contained in the report is only indicative and does not
always represent the full scale of incidents committed in 2016. In addition, some
incidents, in particular instances of recruitment and use of children, abduction of
children and sexual violence against children, were verified in 2016 but may have
commenced earlier.
3.
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1612 (2005) and in identifying
situations that fall within the scope of the mandate, my Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict has adopted a pragmatic approach aimed at ensuring
broad and effective protection for children. Accordingly, the present report
documents situations in which apparent violations of international norms and
__________________

* A/72/150.
1
In accordance with Security Council resolutions, “protected personnel” are considered to be
teachers, doctors, other educational personnel, students and patients.

17-14707 (E)

051017

*1714707*

A/72/361
S/2017/821

standards for the protection of children affected by conflict are considered to be of
such gravity as to warrant international concern. In characterizing the facts
described below as grave violations, it is the aim of my Special Representative to
bring these situations to the attention of national Governments, which bear the
primary responsibility in providing effective protection and relief to all affected
children, and to encourage them to take remedial measures. However, reference to a
situation is not a legal determination and reference to a non-State actor does not
affect its legal status.
4.
The preparation of the report involved broad consultations within the United
Nations, at Headquarters and in the field. The preparation of the present also reflects
a new approach of enhanced engagement with Member States. Over the past six
months, consultations with parties to conflict noted in the report focused on gaining
a greater commitment to prevent violations against children. Where significant
progress was achieved or ongoing conduct gave rise to concern, this is highlighted
in country-specific sections.

II. Addressing the impact of armed conflict on children
A.

Overview of the situation of children and armed conflict
5.
While in some country situations the impact of armed conflict on children was
low in 2016 and few violations were documented, in other country situations
incidents affecting children continued at high levels. In 2016, there were at least
4,000 verified violations by government forces and more than 11,500 verified
violations by the range of non-State armed groups.
6.
The recruitment and use of children documented in Somalia and the Syrian
Arab Republic more than doubled compared with 2015. In South Sudan,
1,022 children were recruited and used. Children continued to be exposed to an
unacceptable risk of killing and maiming in a number of country situations. In
Afghanistan, the United Nations verified 3,512 child casualties, the highest number
ever recorded. In Yemen, the United Nations verified 1,340 child casualties. The
cross-border activities of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), coupled with
responses to that group, also led to significant child casualties, with over
2,000 children documented as killed or maimed in Iraq and the Syrian Arab
Republic. The number of child casualties in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
was also the highest recorded since 2012.
7.
In the Lake Chad basin, Boko Haram activities continued to expand from
Nigeria into neighbouring countries and attacks against civilians were perpetrated
across the region. Sexual violence against girls was prevalent in Nigeria, as well as
in other country situations, such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Sudan, Somalia, South Sudan and the Syrian Arab Republic.

B.

Concerns regarding the increasing disrespect for international law
and its impact on children
8.
The ever-changing and complex nature of certain conflicts, as well as
continually shifting allegiances, posed challenges for the protection of children in
situations of armed conflict. In addition, the troubling trends presented above are a
clear manifestation of the use of abhorrent tactics of warfare by a number of parties
to conflict.

2/41

17-14707

A/72/361
S/2017/821

9.
Asymmetric attacks by non-State armed groups had a severe impact on
children in Afghanistan, Iraq, Somalia and the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as in
Nigeria and neighbouring countries, including forcing children to be suicide
bombers. The number of violations committed by Al-Shabaab, Boko Haram, ISIL
and the Taliban totalled more than 6,800. Responses to the actions of these groups
led to high levels of child casualties, largely owing to their cross-border nature and
presence in densely populated areas.
10. The denial of humanitarian access to children was also a troubling trend in
certain contexts. Children were trapped in besieged areas or deprived of access to
food, water and medical assistance, including vaccines. This is a deeply troubling
issue that compounds the direct impact of hostilities and has devastating
consequences for children, particularly in their formative stages.
11. The increasing number of non-State armed groups that were used to fight on
behalf of Governments as well as ongoing air strikes by multiple entities, including
international coalitions, were once again a particular concern. While these actors are
bound by applicable obligations under international law, their composition, structure
or cross-border nature can hamper the implementation of important safeguards, such
as applying precautionary measures, and reduces the clarity of command structures,
resulting in violations against children. I urge Member States, acting alone or as part
of a coalition, to increase efforts to prevent such violations.
12. Given the number of incidents of killing and maiming of children documented
in the present report, I also call for a renewed focus to ensure respect for the
principles of distinction, proportionality and precaution under international
humanitarian law. Specifically, when making operational decisions, armed forces
need to take into account that, in situations where armed groups hold territory, a
significant number of children may be in close proximity to military positions or
may even be used as human shields.
13. Enhanced implementation of these essential principles will also help to
prevent the destruction of vital civilian infrastructure. In 2016, in nearly all the
countries mentioned in the present report, schools and hospitals were subjected to
air strikes as well as ground operations. I urge parties to conflict to be cognizant of
the long-term impact of conducting hostilities in heavily populated or residential
areas, such as the persistence of explosive remnants of war.
14. The “security screening” of civilians in areas formerly held by non-State
armed groups, undertaken by government security forces or pro-government
militias, has been an emerging concern related to the deprivation of liberty of
children. While it is the responsibility of Governments to ensure the safety of
civilians, authorities in conflict-affected areas are urged to use civilian child
protection actors to carry out such screening, and to adhere to the principles of last
resort and shortest possible time for deprivation of liberty of children, in accordance
with the Convention on the Rights of the Child. I also encourage the adoption of
protocols for the handover of children associated with, or in areas formerly held by,
armed groups to civilian child protection actors.
15. Regarding displacement, disregard for the fundamental principles of
international law is a significant incentive for civilians to flee. The unprecedented
number of refugee children and internally displaced children is not the result of
conflict alone but of the brutality with which parties conduct hostilities, including
by directly targeting children. Increased efforts must be made by the international
community to enhance the protection of civilians and respect for international
humanitarian law, including through ending impunity. These efforts also need to be
coupled with conflict resolution and prevention initiatives.

17-14707

3/41

A/72/361
S/2017/821

C.

Positive developments regarding engagement with parties to conflict
16. Notwithstanding the challenges to ending violations, there has been clear
progress to protect children through dialogue and efforts to achieve conflict
resolution and prevention. The United Nations has continued to utilize the
“Children, not soldiers” campaign and to leverage peace processes to engage with a
wide range of parties in order to gain commitments to protect children.
17. In this regard, the Security Council continues to have a crucial role to play to
facilitate and encourage dialogue on child protection. When these efforts are fruitful
and political space is opened, the protection needs of children can be addressed in
negotiations and mainstreamed in peace agreements. The importance of this work
has been demonstrated during the reporting period, with the continued direct
engagement of the United Nations in support of the talks between the Government
of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia — Ejército del
Pueblo (FARC-EP). This important development builds on previous interactions,
which have proved that engagement on issues such as the separation, release and
handover of children can provide an entry point for difficult or protracted
negotiations.
18. Other engagements by the United Nations with non-State armed groups
resulted in the signing of two new action plans in Mali and the Sudan, while in the
Central African Republic 3,897 children were separated from armed groups and in
the Philippines more than 1,850 children were separated from the military wing of
the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF).
19. Moving forward, the progress achieved through the “Children, not soldiers”
campaign to strengthen national capacity has helped to lay the foundations in a
number of countries for strengthened engagement with non-State armed groups. I
urge concerned Member States to support engagement with non-State actors on
child protection and note that these initiatives can strongly contribute to
peacemaking and conflict prevention efforts.

III. Information on violations committed against children
during armed conflict and progress made by parties on
dialogue, action plans and other measures to halt and
prevent violations against children
A.

Situations on the agenda of the Security Council
Afghanistan
20. The security situation in Afghanistan deteriorated in 2016, with intensifying
armed clashes between the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces and the
Taliban affecting children throughout the country. The United Nations verified
3,512 child casualties, the highest number ever recorded in the country and an
increase of 24 per cent compared with 2015; almost 1 in 3 civilian casualties was a
child casualty.
Grave violations
21. The United Nations verified 96 cases of child recruitment and use of children,
double the number of cases verified in 2015. Armed groups remained the main
perpetrators of recruitment and use of children, with 84 verified cases, of which 69
(including 1 girl) were attributed to the Taliban (a threefold increase compared with

4/41

17-14707

A/72/361
S/2017/821

2015); 10 to ISIL-Khorasan Province (ISIL-KP), while 5 could not be attributed to a
specific group. In addition, there were unverified reports of recruitment affecting
more than 3,000 children, mostly by armed groups including Taliban and ISIL-KP.
22. A total of 11 verified cases of recruitment and use of children were attributed
to the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces, of which 7 were perpetrated by
the Afghan National Police; 2 by the Afghan Local Police; 1 by the Afghan National
Police and Afghan Local Police at a joint checkpoint; and 1 by the Afghan National
Army, while 1 verified case was attributed to pro-government militias. In addition to
being used as checkpoint guards or as bodyguards, 3 of the boys were reportedly
also sexually abused and exploited for the purposes of bacha bazi.
23. As at December, the Government reported that 167 boys were held in juvenile
rehabilitation centres on national security-related charges, including for association
with armed groups. The United Nations remains concerned about the detention of
these children in adult detention centres, particularly the large increase in children
detained in the maximum security detention facility in Parwan, where 133 juveniles
were held in December compared with 53 juveniles held in January.
24. The United Nations verified 3,512 child casualties in Afghanistan in 2016
(923 killed and 2,589 injured). Ground engagements and explosive remnants of war
were the leading causes.
25. Of these, 273 children were killed and 674 injured by the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces, 12 were killed and 41 injured by the pro-government
militias and 3 were injured in joint operations of Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces/pro-government militias. In addition, 87 casualties were attributed
to international military forces, 19 were attributed to joint operations involving
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces, pro-government militias or
international military forces and 19 were attributed to undetermined armed forces.
Trends of concern include a doubling of child casualties (200) resulting from air
strikes and a 33 per cent increase of child casualties attributed to pro-government
militias. In addition, 10 child casualties resulted from cross-border shelling from
Pakistan.
26. Armed groups perpetrated 1,447 child casualties, including 1,093 attributed to
the Taliban, 100 attributed to ISIL-KP, 4 attributed to Hizb-i Islami, 1 attributed to
the Haqqani Network, 7 attributed to two or more groups and 242 to undetermined
armed groups.
27. The United Nations verified 7 cases of sexual violence: 5 incidents were
attributed to the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces and 2 to the Taliban.
These incidents included children being raped at Afghan National Police and
Afghan Local Police checkpoints as well as the abduction and forced marriage of a
nine-year-old girl by the Taliban. As at early 2017, the United Nations had not
received any information regarding actions taken against the perpetrators.
28. Verified attacks on schools and education personnel decreased to 77 incidents,
compared with 132 in 2015. Intensive fighting between the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces and the Taliban led to schools being hit in crossfire. Of
the verified incidents, 51 were attributed to the Taliban, 7 to ISIL-KP and 12 to
undetermined armed groups; 23 incidents directly targeted girls’ education;
4 incidents were attributed to the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
(3 to the Afghan National Army, 1 undetermined); and 1 incident was jointly
attributed to the Afghan National Army and the Taliban.
29. The United Nations verified 118 incidents of attacks on health facilities and
personnel, of which 106 were attributed to armed groups, including 84 to the
Taliban, 1 to Hizb-i-Islami and 1 to ISIL-KP. The targeting of, and threats against,
17-14707

5/41

A/72/361
S/2017/821

polio workers by armed groups remained a particular concern. 2 In addition,
9 incidents were attributed to the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces,
1 was attributed to pro-government militias and 1 was jointly attributed to the
Afghan National Army and international military forces.
30. The United Nations also documented the military use of 34 schools and
13 health facilities by the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces. In
addition, 1 school was used by pro-government militias. Armed groups were
responsible for the military use of 7 schools and 10 health facilities. In a positive
development, in 2016 the Ministry of Education promulgated two directives
instructing the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces to stop using schools
for military purposes.
31. The United Nations verified 10 incidents of abduction affecting 20 boys and
1 girl. A total of 13 children were abducted by armed groups (11 by the Taliban and
2 by ISIL-KP), including on account of their perceived affiliation with the
Government; 1 verified incident was attributed to the Afghan National Army and
1 to the Afghan Local Police, affecting 8 children; and in September, the Afghan
National Army took 7 boys from a school to pressure the Taliban to release a
soldier.
32. Of 155 reported incidents of denial of humanitarian access, 98 were verified,
including 46 incidents of threats and 10 incidents of attacks against humanitarian
workers. Armed groups perpetrated 94 incidents, including the abduction of
humanitarian workers; 2 incidents were also attributed to the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces.
Developments and concerns
33. I commend the Government for the significant progress made in implementing
its action plan to end and prevent child recruitment and use of children by the
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces, notably through the establishment of
child protection units in Afghan National Police recruitment centres and the
issuance of ministerial directives, including the decision of the National Directorate
for Security prohibiting the transfer of children to the detention facility in Parwan.
34. Notwithstanding this progress, I am concerned that children continue to be
detained in the detention facility in Parwan, and I call upon the Government to
transfer them to juvenile rehabilitation centres in accordance with national
directives and in line with international obligations under international law and
international standards. Moreover, while important advances to strengthen age
assessment processes in Afghan National Police recruitment centres were realized,
the lack of corresponding procedures for Afghan Local Police recruitment, as well
as the continued reliance on pro-government militias for which no recruitment
oversight mechanisms are evident, remain cause for concern.
35. Lastly, regarding killing and maiming, I am deeply concerned about the
increase of child casualties and urge the Government and other parties to conflict to
take urgent action to better protect children.
Central African Republic
36. Notwithstanding a relatively stable election process in early 2016,
intercommunal violence and conflict persisted across the country. The Union pour la
paix en Centrafrique (UPC) extended its presence eastwards and opposed the
__________________
2

6/41

According to information provided by the World Health Organization, Afghanistan is one of
three remaining polio-endemic countries in the world.
17-14707

A/72/361
S/2017/821

ex-Séléka coalition reunification attempt by the Front populaire pour la renaissance
de la Centrafrique (FPRC).
37. Documented violations affecting children decreased by half compared with
2015, notwithstanding an increase in cases of recruitment and use of children.
Incidents of violations also grew at the end of 2016 as a result of clashes between
ex-Séléka and anti-balaka elements in Kaga Bandoro, as well as among ex-Séléka
elements in Ouaka and Haute-Kotto Prefectures.
Grave violations
38. The number of children recruited and used increased by almost 50 per cent, with
50 boys and 24 girls affected, including some children as young as nine. Cases were
attributed to the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) (56), FPRC (9), anti-balaka
elements (4), UPC (4) and the Mouvement patriotique pour la Centrafrique (MPC) (1).
39. A total of 66 children, including 27 girls, were killed (34) or maimed (32), the
youngest being two months old. Child casualties resulted from targeted and stray
bullets, stabbing and explosive remnants of war. FPRC, MPC and their coalition
were responsible for the killing of 10 and maiming of 13 children; 9 casualties were
attributed to anti-balaka elements, 7 each were attributed to UPC and the Retour,
réclamation et réhabilitation group, 5 were attributed to armed Fulani elements and
2 were attributed to LRA.
40. The United Nations verified that 55 girls were victims of rape and other forms
of sexual violence. Most incidents occurred in the Bangui PK5 neighbourhood,
Ouaka prefecture and other areas controlled by armed groups. Perpetrators included
anti-balaka elements (13), FPRC (6), MPC (6), PK5 self-defence group in
Bangui (5), undetermined ex-Séléka elements (5), LRA (4), the Révolution et justice
group (4) and UPC (3). There were also 2 incidents of sexual violence committed by
government elements and 1 incident of attempted rape and 2 incidents of rapes
committed by the Uganda People’s Defence Force.
41. The United Nations verified 8 attacks on schools and protected personnel by
LRA, MPC, RPRC, the FPRC/MPC coalition and anti-balaka elements. In October,
3 schoolteachers were killed by elements of the FPRC/MPC coalition who invaded a
school in Kaga Bandoro and 1 teacher was stabbed by ex-Séléka elements in
Bamou.
42. A total of 22 schools were used by armed groups, who claimed that the
facilities were disused. In September, the United Nations issued press releases
condemning the practice and, subsequently, MPC and FDPC vacated 6 schools,
while 3 other schools were vacated by UPC and FRPC but were later reused. United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) troops used 2 schools in late 2016 and early 2017. Once
informed, MINUSCA vacated the schools in accordance with its 2015 directive on
the protection of schools and universities.
43. A total of 16 attacks against hospitals and medical personnel were verified,
including by anti-balaka elements, LRA, FPRC, UPC, RPRC and the FPRC/MPC
coalition. For example, on 12 October, anti-balaka elements invaded a health centre
at a site for internally displaced persons in Kaga Bandoro, killed 1 mother and
1 baby and looted medical supplies.
44. The number of verified incidents of abduction almost doubled compared with
2015, with 38 incidents affecting 66 boys and 32 girls. LRA was responsible for the
abduction of 84 children, while 43 children escaped from LRA during 2016, some of
whom had been held in captivity since 2011. Following United Nations advocacy,
anti-balaka elements released 4 Fulani children abducted in 2013.
17-14707

7/41

A/72/361
S/2017/821

45. Denial of humanitarian access remained a concern, with 72 verified incidents
of killing, looting and threats against humanitarian workers. The majority of cases
were attributed to anti-balaka elements, FPRC and other unidentified ex-Séléka
elements. Moreover, LRA seemed to target non-governmental organizations for
communication equipment. The national police and gendarmerie also arbitrarily
arrested 5 humanitarian workers.
Developments and concerns
46. I urge MPC and FPRC to expeditiously fulfil their pledges to end and prevent
grave violations, identify associated children and negotiate action plans. In this
regard, I am encouraged that dialogue with anti-balaka local commanders, the
Groupe des patriotes, the Révolution et justice group, RPRC and FPRC resulted in
the handover of children.
47. A total of 2,691 boys and 1,206 girls, some as young as eight, were separated
from armed groups (70 per cent from anti-balaka elements). The community-based
nature of some groups represented a risk of re-recruitment for children and tailored
programmes sponsored by the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) were put
in place. However, lack of funding and the resumption of violence impeded
reintegration efforts.
48. Breaking the cycle of impunity in the Central African Republic must be
prioritized and I call on all parties and partners to support accountability efforts,
including the work of the Special Criminal Court, as well as through the framework
of the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation led by the African Union.
49. Sexual exploitation and abuse of children by peacekeepers, whether under the
command of the United Nations or other international arrangements, continued to be
a serious protection concern in the Central African Republic (for more information,
see A/71/818).
Colombia
50. The year 2016 was marked by the signing of a final peace agreement between
the Government and FARC-EP and preparations for dialogue with the Ejército de
Liberación Nacional (ELN). Armed violence between the Colombian military and
FARC-EP reached its lowest level in 50 years. Since FARC-EP committed itself to
ending child recruitment in the context of the peace talks, the overall number of
recruitment cases has dropped, although cases by ELN and dissident fronts of
FARC-EP were reported towards the end of the year. According to data provided by
the Government’s Victim Assistance and Comprehensive Reparation Unit,
displacement decreased compared with 2015 and affected approximately
70,000 victims, more than 45 per cent of whom were children. Despite a decline in
conflict intensity and the withdrawal of FARC-EP, the presence of non-State armed
groups, such as ELN and post-demobilization groups, as well as FARC-EP dissident
fronts, continued to pose child protection challenges.
Grave violations
51. The recruitment and use of 151 boys and 79 girls was verified. Most of these
children were recruited before 2016. The majority had been associated with
FARC-EP (105) and ELN (102). For example, in February, a 16-year-old boy was
handed over to humanitarian workers in Arauca, 11 months after his recruitment by
FARC-EP. In October in Cauca, the Colombian military handed over to the
Colombian Family Welfare Institute a pregnant girl of seventeen who had escaped
from ELN. Other cases were attributed to post-demobilization groups (11) and the
Ejército Popular de Liberación (3).
8/41

17-14707

A/72/361
S/2017/821

52. The United Nations verified the killing of 6 children and maiming of
2 children by landmines and unexploded ordnances, a sharp decrease following the
2015 demining agreement between the Government and FARC-EP. There were also
developments regarding the accountability of Colombian military members who had
killed children in the context of the armed conflict.
53. The number of verified cases of sexual violence remained low, with 3 girls
affected. The peace agreement indicated that sexual violence-related crimes would
not be subject to amnesty. Progress was made in fighting impunity, with a member
of the Colombian military sentenced to 14 years of imprisonment in January for
raping a 14 year-old girl in Cundinamarca in 2012.
54. The United Nations verified 6 attacks on schools and 3 cases of military use.
Damage to schools occurred during crossfire between the Colombian military and
ELN and as a result of landmines planted by unknown perpetrators. A school in
Arauca was also damaged in an aerial bombing by the Colombian military in
September. Allegations of teachers being threatened by armed groups, such as ELN
and the Autodefensas Gaitanistas de Colombia, were also received.
Developments and concerns
55. The final peace agreement between the Government and FARC-EP included an
important provision on the best interests of the child and the primacy of children’s
rights in all areas of implementation. Moreover, the amnesty law approved by
Congress in December included a special provision on children, requiring the State
not to prosecute those who were under eighteen when they committed acts in the
context of armed conflict.
56. I strongly commend the Government of Colombia and the FARC-EP
leadership for the signature of the peace agreement. I note that successful
implementation requires dedicated resources, sustained political will and effective
coordination to address remaining challenges. In particular, I encourage the
strengthening of institutional capacity at the local level and expansion of
community-level prevention programmes to address the root causes of recruitment
and use of children. I also call upon subregional organizations to support these
processes.
57. In related developments, a Constitutional Court decision in February
confirmed that all children recruited by armed groups, including
post-demobilization groups, were victims and as such were entitled to reparations
and reintegration support under the law on victims’ rights and land restitution.
58. As reflected in my country report on the situation of children in Colombia
(S/2016/837), one key achievement was the May agreement between the
Government and FARC-EP on the separation of children. In September, 13 children
were released by FARC-EP. In addition, presidential decree 1753 was issued in
November to ensure that armed groups prepare a list of children for separation.
Parties also agreed on the development of a special programme for the restoration of
rights, reintegration and reparations for all separated children under eighteen.
However, the operational modalities of the special programme remained to be
defined as at early 2017.
59. As stipulated in the peace agreement and at the request of the Government, a
United Nations political mission of observers was deployed to monitor and verify
the bilateral ceasefire and laying down of arms, as part of a tripartite monitoring and
verification mechanism. As FARC-EP are laying down arms, I urge parties to
continue to identify recruited children, prevent informal demobilization and ensure
an adequate child protection response to prevent retaliation or re-recruitment by
17-14707

9/41

A/72/361
S/2017/821

other groups, as well as to provide health and education services to the most
vulnerable communities.
60. I am concerned at the increasing numbers of cases of the recruitment and use
of children attributed to armed groups, in particular ELN, and I call on them to take
immediate steps to end this practice. Furthermore, I call upon the negotiating parties
to take the issue of child recruitment fully into consideration in the ongoing peace
talks between the Government and ELN.
Democratic Republic of the Congo
61. The security situation in the east of the country remained volatile and was
marked by military operations by the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (FARDC) against armed groups. The situation deteriorated in North
Kivu, with the appearance of new armed groups, as well as violence between the
Hutu and Nande communities. There were also clashes among Twa and Luba
communities in Tanganyika and between security forces and the Kamuina Nsapu
militia in the Kasai provinces. While information regarding violations committed in
the Kasai provinces was pending verification in early 2017, the magnitude and
nature of allegations received was alarming.
62. A total of 2,334 grave violations were verified. The number of child casualties
increased by 75 per cent compared with 2015 and was the highest since 2012.
Grave violations
63. The United Nations verified the new recruitment and use of 492 children
(including 63 girls) by armed groups, 82 per cent of which occurred in North Kivu;
129 of those children were under fifteen at the time of recruitment. The main
perpetrators were the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR) (141),
Nyatura (122), the Mai-Mai Mazembe (44) and the Force de résistance patriotique
de l’Ituri (FRPI) (40). Almost one third of the children were also victims of other
violations during their association. Verification of the number of children recruited
and used by militias of the Twa and Luba communities and by the Kamuina Nsapu
militia was ongoing as at early 2017. In addition, 28 boys were identified among the
Sudan People’s Liberation Army in Opposition elements extracted by the United
Nations from the Garamba National Park in September.
64. In 2016, FARDC handed over to the United Nations 193 children allegedly
associated with armed groups, including from Angenga prison, Mongala province,
some of whom had been detained by national authorities for up to one year. As at
early 2017, 21 boys were still detained by FARDC, including 3 for more than six
months.
65. At least 124 children were killed and 116 maimed, including 41 due to
crossfire and 34 due to unexploded ordnances. Mai-Mai Mazembe (49), FDLR (23)
and the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) (19) were the main perpetrators.
Furthermore, 110 children were allegedly killed and maimed by machete during the
Twa-Luba violence in Tanganyika Province, while 20 child casualties were
attributed to FARDC and 4 to the Congolese National Police. In December, the
outbreak of violence in the Kasai region resulted in the maiming of at least 4 boys
by FARDC and in the alleged killing of 1 baby boy by the Kamuina Nsapu militia.
More allegations were being verified as at early 2017.
66. The rape of 170 girls and 1 boy was verified, with 87 violations taking place in
North Kivu and 50 in Ituri. The main perpetrators among armed groups were
FRPI (42), FDLR (14) and Nyatura (10). FARDC was responsible for 64 cases,

10/41

17-14707

A/72/361
S/2017/821

including 1 boy in detention, the Congolese National Police for 12 cases and the
Agence nationale de renseignement for 1 case.
67. A total of 68 attacks on schools (51) and hospitals (17) were verified, a
significant increase compared with 2015. Perpetrators included Twa militia (13),
ADF (8), Mai-Mai Simba (4), Mai-Mai Raia Mutomboki (4) and FRPI (3). In
Butembo in October, an FARDC rocket hit a school and killed 2 girls and 2 teachers
and injured 4 children. In addition, 51 schools and a health centre were allegedly
damaged by militias from the Twa and Luba communities. The verification of
allegations of a high number of attacks on schools in the Kasai region by the
Kamuina Nsapu militia and FARDC was ongoing as at early 2017.
68. A total of 19 schools and 2 hospitals were used for up to several weeks by
FARDC (14), the Congolese National Police (1) and armed groups (6) in North
Kivu, Tanganyika and South Kivu.
69. A total of 137 boys and 56 girls were abducted, mostly by FDLR (29),
FRPI (26), LRA (25), ADF (23) and Nyatura (13), while 4 abductions, including 3
for sexual purposes, were attributed to FARDC. At least 114 children were abducted
for recruitment purposes.
70. In terms of denial of humanitarian access, 2 threats against humanitarian
workers by Nduma Défense du Congo-Rénové and the Agence nationale de
renseignement were verified. In addition, in North and South Kivu, at least
4 humanitarian workers lost their lives and 33 were kidnapped.
Developments and concerns
71. I commend the Government’s continued and strong commitment to the action
plan. While efforts need to be sustained to end and prevent sexual violence by
FARDC and to ensure accountability for perpetrators of grave violations, I welcome
the significant steps taken to fulfil the provisions of the action plan to end and
prevent the recruitment and use of children. This includes the establishment of an
additional joint technical working group, the validation of standard operating
procedures for age verification, the adoption of a Ministry of Defence directive for
the dissemination of those standard operating procedures within FARDC and the
screening of new recruits. I am encouraged that, for the second year in a row, no
new case of child recruitment and use by FARDC was documented. In terms of
accountability, the United Nations documented the arrest of at least 15 FARDC and
5 Congolese National Police officers, including for child recruitment and use of
children offences before 2016, while 41 individuals (23 FARDC, 11 Congolese
National Police, 1 Mouvement du 23 mars and 6 Nyatura) received sentences
ranging from three years of imprisonment to the death penalty for sexual violence
against children. The Government indicated that perpetrators of sexual violence
against children were sentenced in 129 instances.
72. In July, the Government also endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration. Lastly,
the Government provided multisectoral assistance to child victims of recruitment
and use and child survivors of sexual violence.
73. Despite these advances, I am concerned by the reported levels of killing and
maiming of children attributed to FARDC, particularly in the Kasai region where
there were allegations of the disproportionate use of force, and I urge the
Government to take immediate action to prevent child casualties and ensure
accountability for any criminal acts, in accordance with its obligations under
international law.
74. The United Nations provided technical support and screened more than
7,512 members of FARDC, the Congolese National Police, the Direction générale
17-14707

11/41

A/72/361
S/2017/821

de migration and the Agence nationale de renseignement, and separated
191 children in recruitment centres during the screening of new recruits. Awarenessraising by the United Nations and military pressure also contributed to the
separation of 1,662 children from armed groups (177 girls), including from
FDLR (585), Nyatura (354), FRPI (115) and Mai-Mai Raia Mutomboki (93). In
2016, the Alliance des patriotes pour un Congo libre et souverain signed a deed of
commitment to protect children in collaboration with the non-governmental
organization Geneva Call. However, the Alliance had not signed an action plan with
the United Nations as at early 2017.
Iraq
75. Conflict intensified throughout 2016, particularly in Anbar and Ninewa
Governorates, with large-scale operations to retake territory from ISIL in Fallujah
and Mosul. In addition, suicide and other asymmetric attacks by armed groups had a
significant impact on children.
Grave violations
76. At least 168 boys were reportedly recruited and used by parties to the conflict,
including ISIL, the People’s Defence Forces of the Kurdish Workers Party and the
popular mobilization forces. The United Nations verified 114 cases: 40 verified
cases were attributed to ISIL in Anbar, Babil, Baghdad, Diyala, Kirkuk and Ningwa,
with 28 boys recruited as fighters, 11 as suicide bombers and 1 as a spy. Children
were also allegedly used as human shields by ISIL. A total of 57 children were
recruited and used by groups operating under the umbrella of the popular
mobilization forces, most of whom received military training and were deployed for
combat, while 12 children were recruited by tribal mobilization groups, including
from internally displaced persons camps. Five boys were also recruited by the
People’s Defence Forces
77. As at December, at least 463 children, including 172 in the Kurdistan region of
Iraq, remained in detention on national security-related charges, including
association with armed groups. There have been allegations of detention and illtreatment of children by security forces during the screening of civilians from areas
formerly held by ISIL and the Government of Iraq requested United Nations
assistance to undertake training to prevent abuse of children during screening.
78. The killing and maiming of children remained the most prevalent grave
violation. The United Nations recorded 257 incidents, resulting in 834 child
casualties of which 138 were verified, resulting in the killing of 229 children
(145 boys, 58 girls, 26 sex unknown) and injuries to 181 children (129 boys,
44 girls, 8 sex unknown). ISIL was responsible for at least 13 incidents of targeted
attacks against children, including torture. A total of 66 verified incidents resulted
from the use of improvised explosive devices, particularly by ISIL, while public
areas, security forces and Shia ceremonies were also targeted: 32 incidents of killing
and maiming of children were attributed to Iraqi security forces and the
international counter-ISIL coalition (30), the Peshmerga (1) and the popular
mobilization forces (1), resulting from mortars and rocket attacks, air strikes and
artillery shelling. As at early 2017, the Government was working with the United
Nations Mine Action Service to remove mines from areas previously under the
control of ISIL.
79. One incident of sexual violence was verified, involving a 17-year-old boy who
was raped by a member of an unidentified armed group. While concerns of
widespread sexual violence perpetrated by ISIL persisted, the violation remained
underreported.
12/41

17-14707

A/72/361
S/2017/821

80. A total of 10 attacks on schools and education personnel were verified:
2 schools were damaged by air strikes in Mosul, 1 of which was used by ISIL;
3 other schools were damaged during fighting in Kirkuk and Ningwa; 4 teachers
were abducted, killed or injured; and teachers were threatened by ISIL in at least
1 other incident. Attacks on 8 health facilities and personnel were verified:
2 hospitals were damaged by air strikes in Ningwa; 3 by were damaged by mortars
in Anbar; and medical personnel were targeted in 3 incidents in Diyala and Salah
al-Din. Of the 18 verified attacks on education and health facilities and personnel,
8 were attributed to ISIL, 3 to air strikes by Iraqi or international forces and 1 to the
popular mobilization forces, while 6 could not be attributed. A further 18 attacks
were recorded but could not be verified.
81. The United Nations documented 41 incidents of the military use of schools
and hospitals: 34 schools were used by ISIL as military positions, depots and
training facilities in Anbar, Kirkuk and Ningwa; 3 schools were used by Iraqi
security forces as screening centres in Ningwa; 1 school was used by the popular
mobilization forces in Ningwa; and 2 hospitals were reportedly used by ISIL as
military positions.
82. The United Nations verified 8 incidents of abduction involving 9 boys and
3 girls: 7 cases were attributed to ISIL (6 boys in Ningwa and 1 girl in Salah
al-Din), while the perpetrators of the remaining cases in Diyala, Kerbala and Salah
al-Din could not be confirmed. A further 7 incidents of abduction involving
26 children were reported but could not be verified. Moreover, as at 31 December, it
is believed that approximately 1,700 women and children remained ISIL captives.
83. A total of 3 incidents of denial of humanitarian access to children were
verified: in 1 case in Ningwa, a boy died when ISIL denied him access to critical
medical assistance. In addition, it was reported that screening processes for civilians
leaving areas formerly held by ISIL in Ningwa and Salah al-Din were used to deny
access of children to assistance.
Developments and concerns
84. The continued level of violations by ISIL was gravely disturbing. I am also
gravely concerned by the recruitment and use of children by pro-government forces.
In this regard, the United Nations raised concerns with the Government and the
Kurdistan region of Iraq authorities regarding the recruitment and use of children by
the popular mobilization forces. Given that these forces formally came under the
purview of the Government at the end of 2016, I urge the authorities to ensure that
recruitment is in line with Law No. 3/2010, article 30 (2), to establish appropriate
age verification mechanisms and separate any children currently in the ranks, and to
pursue accountability for the recruitment and use of children and other violations
against children.
Israel and State of Palestine
85. The first half of 2016 was marked by continued levels of violence in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, with clashes between Palestinians and Israeli
security forces and a number of attacks against Israelis. Children in Israel and the
State of Palestine continued to be affected by violence, security responses and the
prevailing situation of military occupation and closure.
Grave violations
86. The United Nations did not receive reports of the recruitment and use of
children in 2016; however, this violation is difficult to document, particularly in
Gaza.
17-14707

13/41

A/72/361
S/2017/821

87. An increasing number of children from the West Bank were detained by Israeli
forces for alleged security violations. Monthly figures provided by the Israel Prison
Service indicated that the numbers of Palestinian children in military detention
reached the highest levels recorded since 2010, with 444 children (including
15 girls) detained as at the end of March, although this number had decreased to 271
as at September. In East Jerusalem, the United Nations documented 712 cases of
Palestinian children detained for security-related offences, including 15 children
under twelve, which is the age of criminal responsibility. Following the resumption
of the administrative detention of Palestinian children by Israeli authorities in 2015,
10 cases were documented in 2016. The United Nations also documented a total of
185 incidents of ill-treatment of children (175 boys, 10 girls) by Israeli forces
during arrests and detention.
88. A total of 36 children (35 Palestinian boys, 1 Israeli girl) were killed and
900 children (887 Palestinian, 13 Israeli) were injured, predominantly in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem.
89. In the West Bank, 31 Palestinian boys were killed and all but 1 of the killings
were attributed to Israeli forces: 15 children were killed while allegedly perpetrating
stabbing attacks, 3 while carrying out stabbing attacks, 11 during military and
search operations and 1 during demonstrations. Frequent use of live ammunition
was documented, killing 30 Palestinian children. A number of cases raise concerns
about excessive use of force. For example, on 20 September, an eyewitness stated
that Israeli forces continued shooting at a sixteen-year-old boy in Bani Na’im after
he had fallen to the ground following initial gunshots to his legs.
90. A total of 857 Palestinian children (797 boys, 60 girls) were injured in the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem: 465 children were injured by Israeli forces
during arrest operations or demonstrations, 356 during clashes and 4 in response to
stabbing or alleged stabbing attacks. In addition, 29 Palestinian children were
injured by Israeli settlers and 3 by unexploded ordnances.
91. In the Qiryat Arba‘ settlement, 1 thirteen-year-old Israeli girl was stabbed to
death by 1 seventeen-year-old Palestinian boy who was subsequently killed by an
Israeli settler, while in the West Bank 11 Israeli children were injured: 10 children
were injured by Palestinian civilians in incidents of stone-throwing (8) and
gunfire (2) towards vehicles and 1 child was injured by shrapnel from live
ammunition fired by Israeli forces.
92. In Gaza, 3 boys were killed by Israeli forces and 30 children (27 boys, 3 girls)
were injured: 25 children were injured by Israeli forces, 4 by unexploded ordnances
and 1 by crossfire. On 12 March, 1 six-year-old boy and 1 nine-year-old boy were
killed and their twelve-year-old brother was injured when Israeli security forces
fired missiles in response to rocket fire into Israel at a site reportedly used by the
Izz al-Din al-Qassam Brigades adjacent to their home in Baht Lahya.
93. In Israel, after he reportedly stabbed and injured an Israeli civilian,
1 seventeen-year-old Palestinian boy was killed in Petah Tiqua on 8 March. At least
2 Israeli children were injured in attacks by Palestinians conducted in Israel,
including in a suicide attack on a bus in West Jerusalem on 18 April, which Hamas
praised.
94. In the West Bank, the United Nations documented 74 incidents of attacks on
schools or protected persons in the context of operations by Israeli security forces,
clashes in and around schools or closure of schools as a result of attacks, with over
8,000 students affected, particularly in Bethlehem, Hebron, Nablus and Ramallah
Governorates. Incidents resulted in damage to 3 schools, injury and physical assault
of students: 68 incidents were attributed to Israeli security forces and 6 to Israeli
14/41

17-14707

A/72/361
S/2017/821

settlers. The United Nations also documented the disruption of access to education
resulting from the closure of schools, search operations, detention of students and
school personnel, as well as delays to the schedules of students and teachers caused
by checkpoints.
95. The United Nations documented the confiscation of a donor-funded mobile
health clinic by the Israeli authorities in December, which affected access to healthcare services for 93 children in the Markez and Halawah communities in Hebron
Governorate. In 2016, 26 per cent of child applications to cross the Erez checkpoint
out of Gaza for medical treatment were delayed, affecting 2,490 children
(1,026 girls, 1,464 boys), and 1 per cent were denied, affecting 87 children,
representing the highest percentage of delayed and denied applications since 2010.
Developments and concerns
96. I note with grave concern the ongoing killing and maiming of children in
Israel and the State of Palestine and voice my preoccupation regarding the potential
recruitment and use of children in Gaza. I urge all parties to abide by their
obligations under international law in order to protect children. I also call upon the
Government of Israel to reconsider its imposition of administrative detention for
children and to prioritize alternatives to detention in line with international juvenile
justice principles contained in, inter alia, the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners and the
United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice
(the Beijing Rules).
Lebanon
97. Heavy clashes in the north Biqa‘ valley and the Ein El-Helweh Palestine
refugee camp, bomb attacks and sporadic violence in border areas continued to have
an impact on children.
Grave violations
98. The United Nations documented the recruitment and use of children by armed
groups, with several dozen uniformed boys seen with arms in Arsal, north
Biqa‘ valley. Armed groups, including ISIL and the Nusrah Front (also known as
Jabhat Fath al-Sham) were active on the outskirts of Arsal in the reporting period.
Consistent with my previous reports, boys were reportedly trafficked to fight in the
Syrian Arab Republic. Children from northern Baalbek-Hermel Governorate
reportedly joined Hizbullah. Other children, mostly from Wadi Khalid in Akkar or
Arsal, allegedly joined ISIL. A total of 18 children, including 4 children from
twelve to fourteen years old, were also seen wearing uniforms and, in most cases,
holding weapons during patrols or celebrations in 2 Palestine refugee camps in
southern Lebanon.
99. Children continue to be held in pretrial detention under military jurisdiction on
charges relating to terrorism or national security, following their alleged association
with armed groups in Lebanon or the Syrian Arab Republic: 10 boys were arrested
during the reporting period and 6 remained in detention as at December, along with
3 others detained before 2016.
100. The United Nations verified 8 child casualties (4 boys, 4 girls) caused by stray
bullets, shrapnel during clashes and a car bomb. The majority of cases were
documented in Bekaa Governorate.
101. Two United Nations schools were damaged during violence between armed
factions in Ein el-Helweh Palestine refugee camp and 1 school in Beirut was damaged
17-14707

15/41

A/72/361
S/2017/821

by a car bomb explosion, while 4 cases of attacks on health services were verified in
Baalbek-Hermel Governorate (3) and the Ein el-Helweh refugee camp (1). On
27 June, 1 medical professional was killed and 1 ambulance was destroyed in multiple
suicide attacks on the village of al-Qaa in northern Biqa‘.
102. Following repeated armed clashes in the Ein el-Helweh camp, 19 United
Nations schools suspended classes for 1 to 10 days, with over 10,000 students
affected, while 2 United Nations health centres also suspended activities for 11 to
13 days.
Developments and concerns
103. In the light of the continued recruitment and use of children by armed groups
and the continued detention of children for alleged association with armed groups, I
reiterate my call for the Government to ratify the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict, to treat children associated with armed groups primarily as victims and to
use the detention of children as a last resort, pursuant to international juvenile
justice standards.
Libya
104. Conflict continued throughout Libya, particularly around Benghazi, Sabha,
Sirte and Tripoli. In May, forces affiliated with the Presidency Council began an
offensive to retake Sirte from ISIL, which lasted until early December. Monitoring
continued to be restricted by insecurity, with the majority of United Nations staff
remaining located outside Libya.
Grave violations
105. The recruitment and use of children by armed groups was documented. Groups
pledging allegiance to ISIL reportedly ran a training camp for children and
adolescents south of Sirte. On 4 January, a 15-year-old boy from Tripoli was
reportedly used by ISIL to conduct a suicide attack in Sidra‘. Children were also
deprived of liberty as a result of their alleged association with parties to conflict.
106. At least 51 children were reportedly killed and 68 injured by air strikes,
shelling, small arms fire, improvised explosive devices and explosive remnants of
war. The highest number of casualties was documented in Benghazi. The United
Nations documented a pattern of incidents involving the use of indiscriminate
weapons in heavily populated or residential areas.
107. The United Nations documented 14 incidents of attacks against health
facilities or personnel across Libya. Shelling, vehicle-borne improvised explosive
devices and air strikes killed at least 4 health-care personnel, damaged medical
facilities and caused their closure. The abduction of 4 nurses to treat fighters was
also documented.
108. The abduction of children continued to be reported, particularly in western
Libya. The United Nations verified incidents affecting at least 3 boys and 1 girl. For
example, on 4 November, the body of 1 four-year-old girl was found in the
al-Ma’mura neighbourhood of Warshafanah, 15 days after she was abducted by an
unidentified armed group.
109. The United Nations documented 1 incident of denial of humanitarian access:
in August, food assistance for families in Darnah was reportedly confiscated by
local authorities and redirected to Ajdabiya.

16/41

17-14707

A/72/361
S/2017/821

Developments and concerns
110. I am concerned about the impact of the volatile security situation on children
in Libya. In this regard, I welcome the agreement concluded between the
municipality of Zintan and the United Nations for the release and reintegration of
children involved in armed conflict and call for support for similar efforts
throughout Libya.
Mali
111. The lack of State authority in northern regions led to heightened security
threats, which expanded to central regions and caused child casualties and
displacement. Progress in the implementation of the 2015 peace accord was stalled
as fighting resumed in July between signatory armed groups. The reporting period
was also marked by attacks and threats against education personnel, intercommunal
tensions and an increase in asymmetric attacks against national and international
forces.
Grave violations
112. The presence of children among armed groups remained an issue of concern,
with 442 cases of recruitment and use of children, of which 78 were verified and
attributed to the Platform coalition of armed groups (54), Coordination des
mouvements de l’Azawad (CMA) (18) and Al Mourabitoun (3). This represents an
increase compared with the 27 cases verified in 2015, which may be attributed to
both improved monitoring and renewed fighting. The increase also affected girls.
For example, 14 girls were used in support roles by the Groupe d’autodéfense des
Touaregs Imghad et leurs alliés (GATIA)/the Platform coalition of armed groups in
Gao region. In some instances, signatory armed groups inflated their numbers with
children to benefit from disarmament, demobilization and reintegration packages. In
the context of registration and screening of Platform coalition of armed groups and
CMA combatants in Gao in December to establish mixed patrols, 10 children were
identified but had still not been handed over to child protection actors as at early
2017.
113. As at December, 5 of 13 children arrested and detained on security charges in
2016 remained in detention. The United Nations continued advocacy with the
national authorities to ensure their release in line with the handover protocol signed
in 2013.
114. The United Nations verified the killing of 12 children and the maiming of
35 children during rocket attacks and crossfire, as well as in improvised explosive
devices and explosive remnants of war incidents. Almost one third of the victims
were injured in Kidal and its vicinity during clashes between the Platform coalition
of armed groups and CMA in July and August.
115. Rape and other forms of sexual violence continued to be underreported:
6 cases were documented, of which 2 were verified, including 1 attempted rape of a
seven-year-old girl by a member of the Mouvement arabe de l’Azawad-Platform
coalition of armed groups and the attempted rape of 1 four-year-old girl by an
alleged element of Mouvement pour l’unification et le jihad en Afrique de l’ouest.
The 4 unverified cases concerned 4 girls associated with GATIA in the Gao region.
116. A total of 6 attacks and threats of attacks on schools and protected personnel
and 9 attacks against medical personnel were verified in Ménaka, Mopti and
Timbuktu, none of which could be attributed. On 4 April, an attack by armed
individuals against a medical team from Timbuktu led to the suspension of a
vaccination campaign. Attacks and threats against educational staff, students and
17-14707

17/41

A/72/361
S/2017/821

parents were prevalent, particularly in Mopti region. On 11 July, the director of a
school was killed by armed elements allegedly hostile to “Western education” and
State authorities. As at December, 367 schools remained closed in the conflictaffected regions.
117. In addition, 14 schools were militarily used by armed groups in Gao, Kidal
and Timbuktu, of which 2 were vacated by CMA and CMA/Haut Conseil pour
l’unité de l’Azawad. The military use of 8 schools by the Platform coalition of
armed groups and CMA in Gao and Timbuktu regions was under verification as at
March 2017, while 1 facility used by the Malian defence and security forces in
Ménaka region was vacated in early 2017.
118. A total of 7 boys from seven to fifteen years old were abducted in 5 verified
incidents, 2 of which were perpetrated by CMA: 4 of the incidents, affecting 5 boys
including a relative of a CMA commander, occurred in Kidal. In October, 2 other
boys under the age of ten, sons of a prominent figure in the peace process, were
abducted in Bamako and released three weeks later.
119. A total of 43 incidents of denial of humanitarian access were verified,
including armed robbery, carjacking and kidnapping of humanitarian workers, none
of which could be attributed. At least 2 entities were forced to temporarily suspend
their humanitarian programmes in Mopti and Timbuktu regions.
Developments and concerns
120. I welcome the signature by CMA of an action plan with the United Nations in
March 2017 to end and prevent grave violations against children, which I urge them
to swiftly implement. Moreover, in June, the Platform coalition of armed groups
signed a unilateral communiqué to address conflict-related sexual violence.
However, I am seriously concerned about the high level of cases of recruitment and
use of children attributed to the Platform coalition of armed groups, including
specifically to GATIA, and I urge the leadership to take immediate action and work
with the United Nations to release children and end this practice.
121. In December, following United Nations advocacy, a national disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme with child protection provisions was
adopted and a senior defence representative was appointed for women and child
protection issues within the newly established national disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration commission. I encourage all those involved in the cantonment
process to implement age assessment mechanisms and ensure that children are
identified and transferred to child protection actors. I further encourage subregional
organizations to support these efforts.
Myanmar
122. Despite the ongoing peace process between the Government and a number of
armed groups, conflict intensified in Kachin and Shan States, while sporadic
skirmishes continued in Kayin State and other parts of the south-east.
123. There were also significant outbreaks of violence affecting the Rohingya
community in Rakhine State, with the resumption of fighting between the Arakan
Army and the Tatmadaw and military operations following separate attacks on
border guard posts on 9 October. While the United Nations was not been granted
access to the affected areas, accounts of serious human rights violations by
government security forces, including killing and maiming of children and sexual
violence against children, have been documented.

18/41

17-14707

A/72/361
S/2017/821

Grave violations
124. The United Nations received 489 reports of the recruitment and use of children
and verified 127 cases (123 boys, 4 girls), 21 of which occurred in 2016: 2 verified
cases of use of children in the current reporting period were attributed to the
Tatmadaw and 4 cases of recruitment of children were under joint review as at early
2017. An additional 99 verified cases were attributed to the Tatmadaw but occurred
before 2016, while 17 verified cases were attributed to armed groups, comprising the
Kayan New Land Party (KNLP) (10) and the Kachin Independence Army (KIA) (7).
125. The United Nations documented 9 suspected cases of children held in military
detention for being absent without leave from the army: following notification, the
Tatmadaw returned them to their regiments pending age verification. In addition,
1 child used as a cook by the Restoration Council of Shan State/Shan State Army
was held in military detention following his capture and a number of children as
young as 10 have been held by the Border Guard Police in northern Rakhine State
on charges of “unlawful association” since November 2016, while 1 thirteen-year
old boy died in detention in February 2017.
126. The United Nations documented 51 incidents of killing and maiming of
children, of which 19 were verified (6 children killed, 13 injured): 6 verified
incidents were attributed to the Tatmadaw, including 2 targeted killings, and
2 incidents each were attributed to KIA and Ta’ang National Liberation Army, and
1 to the Arakan Army. At least 8 cases of the killing of children by security forces in
Rakhine State were also documented.
127. The United Nations verified 2 cases of sexual violence against 2 girls (four
and nine years old) by Tatmadaw soldiers. Both cases were referred to civilian
courts and judicial proceedings were initiated. In addition, at least 7 cases of sexual
violence were documented against Rohingya girls as young as eleven during
military operations in northern Rakhine State.
128. A total of 6 incidents of attacks on schools were reported, of which 2 could be
verified: 1 incident was attributed to the Tatmadaw and 1 incident was jointly
attributed to the Tatmadaw and the KIA during crossfire, resulting in the injury of
1 teacher. In addition, 2 cases of military use of schools by the Tatmadaw were
documented in Kachin and Rakhine States.
129. The United Nations received 30 reports of the abduction of children, an
increase compared with 2015. Verified incidents involved 20 children and were
attributed to KIA (5), KNLP (1) and the Tatmadaw (1).
130. Humanitarian access to conflict-affected areas decreased significantly in 2016,
especially in Kachin, northern Shan and Rakhine States, in particular following the
suspension in October of all access to Rakhine State. In August, the Tatmadaw
prevented the delivery of medicine to camps for internally displaced persons in
eastern Kachin State.
Developments and concerns
131. I note the steps taken by the Government towards implementing its action
plan, including through issuance of military directives; training on age assessment
guidelines; accountability measures taken against 440 military personnel, including
86 officers; and the release of 101 children and youth from the Tatmadaw in 2016. I
urge the Government to accelerate the joint age verification process to allow for the
expeditious release of child recruits, to continue collaboration on strengthening
accountability mechanisms for all perpetrators of grave violations and to finalize all
aspects of the joint action plan. In this regard, I encourage the swift passage of the

17-14707

19/41

A/72/361
S/2017/821

revised Child Law, which includes a chapter on children and armed conflict and
corresponding penalties.
132. During 2016, the United Nations engaged with all armed groups listed in the
annexes to the present report with a view to ending and preventing violations
against children and encouraging the development of action plans. I urge the
Government to facilitate the signature of action plans with armed groups, especially
those with which they have engaged in peace talks.
Somalia
133. The security situation remained highly volatile, with continued attacks by
Al-Shabaab on the Somali security forces, government officials and the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), as well as inter-clan clashes. The Somali
National Army and AMISOM continued joint offensives against Al-Shabaab.
Military forces of Ethiopia, Kenya and the United States of America also conducted
operations against the group.
Grave violations
134. The number of children recruited and used doubled (1,915) compared with
2015 as a result of a twofold increase in cases attributed to Al-Shabaab (1,206). In
September, Al-Shabaab compelled elders in the Galguduud region to persuade
children to join the group, leading to the recruitment of 100 boys. Children were
also recruited and used by clan militias (447), the Somali National Army (182) and
Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a (78). The use of 17 children by AMISOM was
documented.
135. Regarding detention, 386 children were held by the Government for their
alleged association with Al-Shabaab. As mentioned in my report on children and
armed conflict in Somalia (S/2016/1098), children were captured or arrested during
military and security operations, including mass security sweeps or house searches.
In May, the Galmudug Interim Administration handed over to child protection actors
44 children allegedly associated with Al-Shabaab whom the group had captured in
March. In October, the Puntland authorities also handed over 26 children from
twelve to fourteen years old.
136. The Puntland authorities treated as adults 40 other captured children from
fifteen to seventeen years old, in contravention of the obligations of Somalia under
the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights; they were given lengthy sentences of 10 to 20 years’
imprisonment or even sentenced to death. In January 2017, after sustained highlevel United Nations advocacy, the death sentences were commuted to 20 years of
imprisonment: at the time of preparation of the present report, those children had
been handed over to child protection actors and the United Nations continued to
engage with authorities on the legal status of the released children, whose prison
sentences remained in effect.
137. A total of 1,121 children were killed and maimed by unknown armed
elements (482), Al-Shabaab (290), the Somali National Army (146), clan
militias (143), Puntland armed forces (5) and Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a (1). Most
child casualties resulted from crossfire during military operations, mortar shelling,
improvised explosive devices and explosive remnants of war. Among the children
killed by Al-Shabaab, at least 30 were publicly executed on suspicion of spying.
Child casualties attributed to AMISOM (42) primarily occurred in operations
against Al-Shabaab or in indiscriminate fire responding to attacks. Child casualties
also resulted from air strikes by the Kenyan defence forces (11) and United States
armed forces (1).
20/41

17-14707

A/72/361
S/2017/821

138. The United Nations verified incidents of sexual violence affecting 310 girls
and 1 boy, attributed to unknown armed elements (96), clan militias (94), the Somali
National Army (81), Al-Shabaab (33), Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a (3) and Puntland
armed forces (1), while 3 cases were attributed to AMISOM. Rape and forced
marriage often occurred in the context of abductions; for example, on 16 June, a
sixteen-year-old girl, abducted from her house, was gang raped by 5 Somali
National Army soldiers in the Bakool region.
139. Attacks on 46 schools and 10 hospitals were verified. Attacks on schools were
attributed to Al-Shabaab (31), the Somali National Army (9), Ahl al-Sunna
wal-Jama’a and clan militias (2 each) and AMISOM (1). Attacks on hospitals were
attributed to Al-Shabaab (5) and clan militias (4). In addition, 1 school and
1 hospital were used by the Somali National Army and 1 health centre by
Al-Shabaab. In Gedo region, Ceel Adde secondary school was vacated by AMISOM
after being used for six days in January.
140. The number of abductions spiked compared with 2015: 950 children were
abducted, 87 per cent of them by Al-Shabaab (827) and most of the others by clan
militias (113). Of the cases involving Al-Shabaab, 548 children were abducted for
recruitment purposes.
141. Incidents of denial of humanitarian access to children were attributed to clan
militias (10), Al-Shabaab (5), the Somali National Army (2) and Puntland armed
forces (1). For example, in April in Gedo region, Al-Shabaab ambushed a truck
belonging to a non-governmental organization in Ced Adde and stole food,
including child nutrition products.
Developments and concerns
142. I welcome the release of children who had been detained for their alleged
association with Al-Shabaab in Puntland and Galmudug and I urge that the legal
status of the children released be swiftly resolved. Regarding reintegration, the
United Nations supported 604 separated children and provided technical assistance
to the Ministry of Defence Child Protection Unit. On 6 January, the Somali National
Army Chief of the Defence Forces issued a general staff order stating that an
individual must be at least eighteen to enlist. I urge subregional organizations to
work with my Special Representative to develop a regional dimension for child
protection efforts in Somalia.
143. During her visit to Somalia in July 2016, my Special Representative urged the
authorities to implement their 2012 action plans signed with the United Nations and
to treat children associated with armed groups primarily as victims, with the best
interests of the child and international protection standards as guiding principles.
My Special Representative also raised concerns with AMISOM about grave
violations.
South Sudan
144. The security situation deteriorated following clashes in Juba in July between
the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) and the Sudan People’s Liberation
Army in Opposition, as well as the subsequent split within the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army in Opposition. Overall in 2016, the level of violations against
children remained at a similar level to that of 2015 and displacement continued at
high levels.

17-14707

21/41

A/72/361
S/2017/821

Grave violations
145. The United Nations verified 169 incidents of recruitment and use affecting at
least 1,022 children, 61 per cent of which were attributed to SPLA (574) and other
government security forces (50). Children were also recruited and used by the
Sudan People’s Liberation Army in Opposition (115), the Sudan People’s Liberation
Army in Opposition allied with Taban Deng Gai (207), the South Sudan Democratic
Army-Cobra Faction (SSDA-CF) (32), Johnson Olony’s armed group (25), the
South Sudan People’s Patriotic Front (16) and the South Sudan National Liberation
Movement (SSNLM) (3). Children were observed wearing military uniforms and
carrying weapons in the greater Upper Nile, Equatoria and Bahr el-Ghazal regions.
The United Nations verified reports of children transported by SPLA from Jonglei,
Lakes and Unity states to other parts of the country for military training and
deployment. According to first-hand testimony, in one incident 100 boys were
affected, while 40 boys previously released by SSDA-CF were recruited again but
following United Nations advocacy all but two were released again.
146. A total of 101 incidents of killing and maiming of children, affecting 108 and
71 children, respectively, were verified, mostly in Western Bahr el-Ghazal and
Central Equatoria. Children were killed and maimed by SPLA (104), the Sudan
People’s Liberation Army in Opposition (6), the Sudan People’s Liberation Army in
Opposition allied to Taban Deng Gai (3) and the South Sudan National Police
Service (3). Children were also killed and maimed by crossfire and unexploded
ordnances (63). Some were deliberately fired at while fleeing SPLA, including at
close range.
147. The United Nations verified 142 cases of sexual violence against girls,
including 26 who were gang-raped. Most cases were documented in Unity and
Equatoria regions and were attributed to SPLA (114), South Sudan People’s
Patriotic Front (15), other government security forces (7) and the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army in Opposition (6). After the outbreak of conflict In Juba in July,
girls were raped as they left the protection of civilian sites or at checkpoints.
148. Attacks on 17 schools and hospitals were reported, including in protection of
civilian sites, carried out by SPLA (10) and the Sudan People’s Liberation Army in
Opposition (3).
149. Attacks on 28 health facilities and 2 medical personnel were verified, with the
majority of cases attributed to SPLA (19) and the Sudan People’s Liberation Army
in Opposition (5). More than two thirds of the attacks occurred in the Equatoria
region.
150. A total of 21 schools were newly used for military purposes, with the majority
of cases attributed to SPLA (10) and the Sudan People’s Liberation Army in
Opposition (7).
151. A total of 17 incidents of abduction were verified, affecting approximately
180 children mostly in Unity and Western Equatoria, with the majority attributed to
SPLA, SSPPF and the Sudan People’s Liberation Army in Opposition. In 1 largescale incident in Unity, approximately 100 boys as young as fourteen were abducted
by SPLA for recruitment purposes and transferred to Juba for military training.
152. A total of 445 incidents of denial of humanitarian access were verified, almost
twice as many as in 2015. Most incidents were attributed to SPLA (182) and
government security forces and institutions (179), followed by the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army in Opposition (54). Incidents included attacks on personnel and
compounds, looting of warehouses and humanitarian assets, and bureaucratic
constraints and restriction of movement. In a particularly troubling example in

22/41

17-14707

A/72/361
S/2017/821

Upper Nile in May, SPLA fired on humanitarian workers attempting to reach
populations in need.
Developments and concerns
153. The scale of violations affecting children in South Sudan continued to be
alarming. I urge leaders to abide by their responsibilities to protect children, I call
upon all parties to cooperate with the African Union in the implementation of the
peace agreement and I encourage the inclusion of child protection concerns in the
national dialogue.
154. I am concerned that the implementation of the action plan by SPLA and the
Sudan People’s Liberation Army in Opposition has stalled as a result of the ongoing
conflict. In this regard, I call upon these parties to resume the implementation of
their action plans and note that the action plan for the Sudan People’s Liberation
Army in Opposition applies equally to any splinter elements. It is encouraging,
however, that following United Nations advocacy, 32 boys in Unity, were released
by SPLA (25) and the South Sudan National Wildlife Service (7). In Jonglei,
148 boys were released, including 3 associated with SPLA, 120 associated with
SSDA-CF and 25 associated with the Sudan People’s Liberation Army in
Opposition.
Sudan
155. Hostilities continued in early 2016 but reduced in the second half of the year.
In Darfur, military operations by the Government focused on dislodging the Sudan
Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid from Jebel Mara. In June, the Government
announced a unilateral ceasefire in Darfur although skirmishes continued. At the
same time, there were confrontations between the Sudanese Armed Forces and the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North (SPLM-N) in Blue Nile and Southern
Kordofan States. In April and June, respectively, SPLM-N and the Government
announced ceasefires, which were still in place as at early 2017; however, hostilities
continued sporadically and access for the United Nations to areas under the control
of SPLM-N remained constrained. A detailed account of the effects of armed
conflict on children is available in my country report (S/2017/191).
Grave violations: Darfur
156. While allegations regarding the recruitment and use of 5 boys were received,
only 1 was verified and attributed to the former Liberation and Justice Movement in
Central Darfur.
157. A total of 109 incidents of killing and maiming affecting 199 children
(85 killed, 114 maimed) were verified, resulting mostly from shooting (94),
unexploded ordnances (55) and aerial bombardments (42): these were attributed to
government forces (39) (Sudanese Armed Forces, rapid support forces, national
police forces, popular defence forces, National Intelligence and Security Service),
pro-government militias (7) and unidentified armed men (37), while 24 incidents
related to unexploded ordnances.
158. Incidents of rape affecting 94 girls and 1 boy were verified and attributed to
government forces (20) (Sudanese Armed Forces, rapid support forces, Central
Reserve Police, national police forces, pro-government militias (18) and the SudanChad Joint Forces (1). Unidentified armed men were responsible for 30 incidents.
While efforts were made by the Government to address impunity for crimes of
sexual violence against children, only 9 cases resulted in the arrest and sentencing
of perpetrators.

17-14707

23/41

A/72/361
S/2017/821

159. A total of 20 schools and 6 hospitals were attacked, destroyed and/or looted by
the Sudanese Armed Forces (15), the rapid support forces (1), tribal militias (2) and
unidentified armed men (8), most as a result of aerial bombardments in Jebel Marra;
3 schools in Central Darfur were also reportedly used by the Sudanese Armed
Forces in 2016.
160. A total of 18 incidents of abduction affecting 15 boys and 6 girls were verified
and attributed to pro-government militias (10), the Sudanese Armed Forces (2) and
unidentified armed men (6).
161. A total of 14 incidents of denial of humanitarian access, such as attacks on
humanitarian workers and bureaucratic constraints and restriction of movement,
were verified, including 11 by the Sudanese Armed Forces and 1 by the Sudanese
Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid. Access continued to be severely impeded,
particularly in eastern Jebel Marra.
Grave violations: Southern Kordofan, Blue Nile and Abyei
162. The United Nations received allegations of recruitment and use of boys
between twelve and seventeen years old by government forces, particularly in Blue
Nile, and by the SPLM-N in the greater Upper Nile region, South Sudan, although
no cases could be verified.
163. The killing (2) and maiming (6) of 6 boys and 2 girls was verified and
attributed to SPLM-N (2), the Sudanese Armed Forces (1) and the rapid support
forces (1); 2 children were also affected by unexploded ordnances and 2 children
were affected by an explosion at a military garrison.
164. The rape of 4 girls between thirteen and fifteen years old by Sudanese Armed
Forces elements in Blue Nile was verified and reported to the police, resulting in the
arrest and sentencing of perpetrators.
165. A total of 4 allegations of attacks on schools (3) and hospitals (1) during air
strikes were received but could not be verified. In March, the military use of a
school in Kadugli, Southern Kordofan, by the National Intelligence and Security
Service was documented.
166. In March, 2 boys of twelve and sixteen were abducted by Misseriya militiamen
in Abyei. They were released and reunified with their families following
interventions by the United Nations and community networks.
Developments and concerns
167. I commend the Government’s ongoing commitment to the action plan signed
in March and the significant progress achieved, including through the formation of
high-level and technical committees and the development of a workplan. Command
orders for dissemination of the action plan were issued and focal points at the rank
of Inspector General were appointed to facilitate discussions on access. In March
2017, the Government granted access to the United Nations to areas of Blue Nile to
follow up allegations of child recruitment and use of children by its forces.
168. On 29 March, following extensive advocacy, the United Nations was granted
access to 21 children who had been detained by the National Intelligence and
Security Service for their alleged association with an armed group after their
apprehension in Darfur in 2015. The children were released in September, granted a
presidential pardon and reunited with their families.
169. Following engagement by my Special Representative and United Nations
partners, SPLM-N signed an action plan to end recruitment and use of children in
November. In December, SPLM-N issued a command order and appointed a high24/41

17-14707

A/72/361
S/2017/821

level focal point. In November, the United Nations also met with the leader of the
Justice and Equality Movement and a representative of the Sudan Liberation
Army/Minni Minawi, who both agreed to develop implementation plans to expedite
their action plans.
Syrian Arab Republic
170. Widespread conflict continued throughout the Syrian Arab Republic and
further escalated in the last quarter of 2016, with intense hostilities in eastern
Aleppo city and in Bab and Manbij in Aleppo Governorate. The intensification of
hostilities and continuing access restrictions posed considerable challenges for
monitoring.
Grave violations
171. The recruitment and use of children increased sharply: the number of verified
cases more than doubled compared with 2015. The United Nations verified
851 cases attributed to armed groups self-affiliated with the Free Syrian
Army (507), ISIL (133), pro-government militias (54), People’s Protection
Units (46), government forces (29), Army of Islam (28), Ahrar al-Sham (17), the
Nusrah Front (also known as Jabhat Fath al-Sham) (10), Nur al-Din al-Zanki (3) and
unidentified armed groups (24); 20 per cent of verified cases involved children
under the age of fifteen. Payment of salaries, ideology and family or community
influence continued to be incentives. As a result of their association with parties to
conflict, at least 37 children were killed and 17 injured.
172. Some 60 per cent of verified cases were attributed to groups affiliated with the
Free Syrian Army, a tenfold increase compared with 2015, with most cases
occurring in Aleppo, Dar‘a and Rif Dimastiq Governorates; 98 per cent of the boys
recruited by these groups were used for military functions, including front-line
combat. At least 103 children were used by ISIL for military functions, including to
conduct executions and suicide attacks. People’s Protection Units recruited and used
40 boys and 6 girls, who received military training and were used to patrol and
guard checkpoints. Children recruited and used by other armed groups (82)
predominantly guarded checkpoints.
173. The United Nations verified the association of 29 children with government
forces, 5 of whom were trained, armed and used in combat, while the others were
deployed at checkpoints, mostly unarmed. Pro-government militias recruited
54 boys, 20 of whom were used in combat and 34 to guard checkpoints. Coercion
and financial incentives were used to recruit children.
174. Children continued to be arrested and detained for their alleged association
with armed groups. The United Nations verified the arrest and detention of 12 boys
by government forces and popular committees. In at least 7 of these cases, children
were subjected to torture and ill-treatment.
175. Armed groups also deprived children of liberty for their alleged association
with opposing parties to conflict. For example, ISIL deprived 27 boys of their
liberty, some as young as ten, 9 of whom were executed and 17 remained
unaccounted for as at early 2017.
176. The United Nations verified the killing of 652 children (297 boys, 125 girls,
230 sex unknown) and the maiming of 647 (223 boys, 133 girls, 291 sex unknown)
during 2016. These casualties were attributed to government and pro-government
forces (708), ISIL (235), People’s Protection Units (8), groups affiliated with the
Free Syrian Army (5), other armed groups (10) and unidentified armed

17-14707

25/41

A/72/361
S/2017/821

groups (145). Verified violations were most prevalent in Aleppo, Rural Damascus,
Dar’a and Idlib.
177. A total of 533 of the verified child casualties were caused by air strikes, with
451 casualties attributed to government and pro-government forces and
82 casualties attributed to unidentified parties to conflict. Parties involved in aerial
operations in the Syrian Arab Republic included government forces, international
forces supporting the Government, members of the international counter-ISIL
coalition, Turkey and Israel.
178. A total of 243 of the verified child casualties were attributed to mortar, rocket
and improvised explosive device attacks by armed groups on government-held
areas. Children continued to be killed and maimed by suicide attacks (70),
executions (16), sniper attacks (17) and improvised explosive devices and
unexploded ordnances (130). In February, 3 children were publicly beheaded by
ISIL after being accused of “spying”. In addition, ISIL arrested 41 children for a
wide range of acts that it classifies as crimes, some of whom were executed or
subjected to amputation.
179. The United Nations verified 8 cases of sexual violence against girls, including
rape, forced marriage and sexual slavery: 7 cases were attributed to ISIL and 1 was
attributed to the pro-government Shu‘aytat militias. Accounts were received of ISIL
fighters demanding marriage of girls living in ISIL-held areas. In 1 verified case, a
fourteen-year-old girl was abducted and gang-raped by 6 ISIL fighters after her
family refused marriage. Reports also indicated that Yazidi girls captured in Iraq in
2014 continued to be trafficked into and within the Syrian Arab Republic and used
as sex slaves. Trauma from sexual violence and social stigma continued to deter
child survivors from coming forward.
180. The United Nations verified 76 attacks on schools and 11 attacks on education
personnel resulting in 28 casualties among education personnel, a 40 per cent
increase compared with 2015. These attacks were attributed to government and
pro-government forces (57, including 38 air strikes), ISIL (6), People’s Protection
Units (1) and unidentified armed groups (14). Verified attacks on schools caused
255 child casualties and mostly occurred in Aleppo and Idlib Governorates. For
example, in October the Kamal Qal‘aji school complex in Idlib Governorate was hit
by consecutive pro-government air strikes that killed 3 teachers and 19 children,
injured 61 children and severely damaged the school.
181. The United Nations verified 81 attacks on medical facilities and 30 incidents
of attacks on medical personnel resulting in 29 child casualties and 94 casualties
among medical personnel, a nearly threefold increase compared with 2015. These
attacks were attributed to government and pro-government forces (93, including
61 air strikes), ISIL (7), groups affiliated with the Free Syrian Army (2), Ahrar
al-Sham (1) and unidentified armed groups (3). The majority of verified violations
occurred in Aleppo and Idlib Governorates. In April, 13 children and 4 medical
personnel were killed when pro-government attacks hit the Quds hospital in Aleppo
Governorate.
182. A total of 9 incidents of military use of schools were attributed to groups
affiliated with the Free Syrian Army (5), ISIL (3) and government forces (1), with
2 of those schools subsequently attacked by opposing forces, while 4 incidents of
military use of medical facilities were attributed to ISIL.
183. The United Nations verified the abductions of 43 children that were attributed
to ISIL (34), People’s Protection Units (8), and government forces and
pro-government militias (1). People’s Protection Units abducted at least 8 children
for recruitment purposes.
26/41

17-14707

A/72/361
S/2017/821

184. Parties to the conflict continued to use siege and denial of access to water as
tactics of war, and as at end-2016, an estimated 292,000 children were trapped in
besieged areas. The Government was responsible for 80 per cent of the instances of
besiegement and ISIL was responsible for 17 per cent. Essential medicines were
removed or excluded from humanitarian convoys by government authorities, while
more than 411,000 children targeted by polio vaccination campaigns were not
reached due to deliberate denial of access by ISIL and the Nusrah Front.
185. The United Nations verified 90 instances of denial of humanitarian access,
including 37 cases of deliberate denial of humanitarian services, 32 attacks on
humanitarian facilities and related personnel and 21 acts of besiegement. Verified
cases were attributed to government and pro-government forces (59), ISIL (15),
Free Syrian Army-affiliated groups (2), the Nusrah Front (2), the Army of Islam (1)
and unidentified armed groups (5). In September, a United Nations and Syrian Arab
Red Crescent (SARC) humanitarian convoy was hit by air strikes in rural western
Aleppo, killing 17 staff and the head of the Urum al-Kubra branch of SARC.
Developments and concerns
186. The continued level of violations against children in the Syrian Arab Republic
remains highly alarming and I urge all parties to engage in the inclusive and Syrianled peace process under United Nations auspices aimed at ending conflict in the
Syrian Arab Republic. I also call upon all parties to abide by their obligations under
international law, and I urge the Government to take all possible measures to end
and prevent the recruitment and use of children by their armed forces and
pro-government militias.
Yemen
187. A cessation of hostilities was in effect from April until peace talks adjourned
in early August. During this period, while fighting continued in many locations,
there was a significant decrease in the number of child casualties, in particular those
resulting from air strikes, and in the number of attacks on schools and hospitals,
although the intensification of hostilities following the adjournment let to increased
violations. Throughout 2016, the documentation of violations against children was
constrained by access restrictions and insecurity.
Grave violations
188. The United Nations verified 517 cases of the recruitment and use of boys as
young as eleven, predominantly in Aden, Abyan, Amran, Sana’a and Ta‘izz. The
decrease in verified incidents compared with 2015 (917) reflects the challenges in
monitoring rather than a reduction in cases. A further 105 reported cases could not
be verified during 2016. The majority of verified cases (359) were attributed to the
Houthis and affiliated forces, while 50 cases were attributed to the pro-government
Popular Resistance, 29 to Ansar al-Sharia, 27 to Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula
and 26 to the Yemeni Armed Forces. Children were mainly used to guard
checkpoints and buildings, patrol areas and act as porters. In 69 verified cases,
mostly in Amran and Aden, boys were used in combat, while 2 boys were killed and
5 injured at checkpoints or on the battlefield. Recruits for the Popular Resistance
were often motivated by a desire to secure income for their families. In 1 verified
case on 19 June, 5 boys recruited by the Popular Resistance, who were armed and
wearing military uniforms, were queueing inside a government building in Jawf to
collect salaries.
189. The United Nations documented the arrest or detention of 10 boys on the basis
of their suspected association with an opposing party to conflict, 7 of which cases
17-14707

27/41

A/72/361
S/2017/821

were attributed to the Yemeni Armed Forces and 3 to the Popular Resistance. In
June, as part of a confidence-building measure during peace talks facilitated by the
United Nations, the coalition to restore legitimacy in Yemen led by Saudi Arabia
released 52 children who had reportedly been associated with parties to conflict.
The children were handed over to the Government of Yemen and some were
reunified with their families.
190. The killing and maiming of children remained the most prevalent violation.
The United Nations verified 1,340 child casualties, with 502 children killed
(345 boys, 152 girls, 5 sex unknown) and 838 injured (620 boys, 218 girls):
683 were attributed to the coalition, 414 to the Houthis and affiliated forces, 17 to
the Popular Resistance, 6 to the Yemeni Armed Forces, 6 to ISIL in Yemen and 1 to
Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula.
191. The highest number of child casualties was documented in Ta‘izz, where
72 per cent (343 of 474 casualties) were attributed to the Houthis, mainly resulting
from ground fighting. In 2016, ground fighting accounted for 39 per cent of all child
casualties, causing the death of 107 children and injuries to 421 children. Large
numbers of child casualties were also documented in Sa‘dah, where 91 per cent
(222 of 245 casualties) were attributed to air strikes by the coalition. In the
reporting period, air strikes were the cause of over half of all child casualties, with
at least 349 children killed and 334 children injured. For example, in October a
coalition air strike hit Salah Hall in Sana’a during a funeral, killing at least
24 children.
192. A total of 113 child casualties were also attributed to landmines and
unexploded ordnances, including in Aden, where armed groups allegedly planted
landmines as they retreated. In addition, a number of civilians were reportedly
killed in Saudi Arabia as a result of cross-border attacks.
193. The United Nations verified 52 incidents of attacks on schools and hospitals,
resulting in the partial or complete destruction of facilities (46), attacks on protected
personnel (3) and looting (3): 73 per cent of attacks were attributed to the coalition
(28 schools, 10 hospitals) and 15 per cent to the Houthis and affiliated forces
(4 schools; 4 hospitals). Attacks were also attributed to the Popular Resistance (2),
the Yemeni Armed Forces (1) and crossfire.
194. A total of 33 attacks on schools were verified, affecting 30 schools: the
majority of the incidents (28) resulted in the destruction of schools as a result of air
strikes by the coalition, while 4 incidents were attributed to the Houthis and 1 to the
Yemeni Armed Forces.
195. The United Nations verified 19 incidents of attacks on hospitals affecting
16 facilities, with hospitals being subjected to multiple attacks in Ta‘izz and Marib,
10 of which were attributed to air strikes by the coalition; for example, on
10 January in Sa’ada Governorate, 1 hospital was hit by an air strike, resulting in
4 deaths, 10 injuries and the destruction of several hospital buildings. Of the
remaining verified attacks, 4 were attributed to the Houthis in Ta‘izz and Jawf and
2 to the Popular Resistance.
196. A total of 12 incidents of the military use of schools were documented: 6 were
attributed to the Houthis, 4 to the Popular Resistance and 1 each to the Yemeni
Armed Forces and Ansar al-Sharia, while 5 of the schools used were subsequently
attacked. In addition, 2 incidents of the military use of hospitals occurred in Jawf
and were attributed to the Houthis and to the Popular Resistance.
197. During 2016, 4 boys were abducted, 3 by unidentified armed groups in Ma‘rib
and Hudaydah and 1 by AQAP in Bayda‘ for ransom.

28/41

17-14707

A/72/361
S/2017/821

198. The United Nations received 220 reports of incidents of denial of humanitarian
access, which involved bureaucratic constraints and restriction of movement (149),
violence against humanitarian workers, assets and facilities (43) and interference
with the implementation of humanitarian activities (28). The majority of incidents
were documented and verified in Hudaydah, Sana’a, Ta‘izz and Hajjah, and were
attributed to the Houthis (181), unidentified armed groups (17), the coalition (13)
and the Popular Resistance (9).
Developments and concerns
199. The action plan signed by the Government of Yemen in 2014 to end and
prevent the recruitment and use of children by the Yemeni Armed Forces remained
stalled owing to the ongoing conflict. However, the United Nations and its partners
provided support for reintegration to 100 children separated from armed groups in
Aden.
200. The United Nations also engaged in enhanced dialogue with parties to conflict,
including through several interactions between the Office of my Special
Representative and Saudi Arabia, as leader of the coalition to restore legitimacy in
Yemen, to address ongoing grave violations against children. The United Nations
was informed of measures taken by the coalition in 2016 to reduce the impact of
conflict on children, including through their rules of engagement and the
establishment of a joint incident assessment team mandated to review all incidents
involving civilian casualties and identify corrective actions. These initiatives are
steps in the right direction. Nevertheless, I urge the coalition to improve its
approach since, despite these measures, grave violations against children continued
at unacceptably high levels in 2016. In this regard, I remain deeply concerned about
the plight of children in Yemen and strongly request parties to take urgent measures
to end violations against children. Furthermore, I urge the coalition, in particular
Saudi Arabia as leader of the coalition, to continue to refine and fully implement the
preventive and corrective measures put in place in 2016 to protect children, and to
deepen its engagement with the United Nations and my Special Representative on
this issue. In this regard, I wish to note that at the time of preparation of the present
report, Saudi Arabia has created a child protection unit at the coalition headquarters.

B.

Situations not on the agenda of the Security Council or
other situations
India
201. Children continued to be affected by incidents of violence between armed
groups and the Government, in particular in Chhattisgarh and Jharkhand, as well as
tensions in Jammu and Kashmir.
Grave violations
202. The United Nations continued to receive reports of the recruitment and use of
children by armed groups, including the Naxalites, in particular in Chhattisgarh and
Jharkhand. Owing to access restrictions for monitoring and reporting, the United
Nations was unable to verify these incidents. Armed groups reportedly resorted to
abduction and threats against parents in order to recruit children, who subsequently
underwent military training and served as messengers, informants or guards in child
squads (bal dasta). In March, the police relocated 23 children under threat of
abduction by armed groups in Gumla district, Jharkhand, and supported their
enrolment in schools. However, unverified reports suggest that police may be using

17-14707

29/41

A/72/361
S/2017/821

children formerly associated with armed groups as informants, potentially making
them targets for retaliation.
203. Children continued to be killed and injured in the context of operations of
national security forces against Maoist armed groups. According to the Ministry of
Home Affairs, the number of civilians killed in these encounters increased to 213,
compared with 171 in 2015; however, no disaggregated data on children were
available.
204. According to government information, at least 30 schools were burned and
partially destroyed by armed groups in Jammu and Kashmir. In addition,
government reports confirmed the military use of 4 schools by security forces in
that region for several weeks. In a troubling development, Maoists were allegedly
running several schools in Chhattisgarh and included combat training as part of their
curriculum.
Developments and concerns
205. In the light of persistent reports of the recruitment and use of children by
armed groups, I call upon the Government to develop appropriate mechanisms to
protect children from recruitment, as well as to separate and reintegrate recruited
children. The United Nations stands ready to assist in this process. I also urge the
Government to ensure the protection of children from any form of violence in the
context of civil unrest or law and order operations.
Nigeria
206. With the loss of territory to the Nigerian security forces, Jama’atu Ahlis Sunna
Lidda’Awati Wal-Jihad, commonly known as Boko Haram, intensified attacks on
civilians in north-east Nigeria as well as in neighbouring countries, including
through suicide bombings, and in late 2016 split into two factions. In this context,
402 incidents of grave violations affecting 2,698 children were verified. A detailed
account of the impact of armed conflict on children in Nigeria is available in my
country report (S/2017/304).
Grave violations
207. The number of verified cases of the recruitment and use of children in 2016
(2,122) increased significantly compared with 2015 (278). The main perpetrators
were Boko Haram (1,947) and the Civilian Joint Task Force (175): 4 boys and
26 girls were used by Boko Haram to carry out suicide attacks in Nigeria (19) and in
Cameroon, Chad and the Niger (11). Children associated with the Civilian Joint
Task Force were mostly used in support functions.
208. In 2016, 237 children were detained for their alleged association with Boko
Haram, while 1,128 children were detained on the basis of their parent’s alleged
affiliation. While most were released, 336 children were still in detention as at
December, including 71 held since 2015.
209. The killing of 304 children and maiming of 184 children was verified, a 27 per
cent increase compared with 2015. More than half of the casualties were girls. The
majority of casualties resulted from suicide attacks, including children used in these
incidents, while internally displaced persons camps were the target of suicide
attacks in 7 incidents. Boko Haram was responsible for 97 per cent of child
casualties (475). The killing of suspected child suicide bombers by the Nigerian
security forces was also a growing concern, with 13 children killed in November
and December.

30/41

17-14707

A/72/361
S/2017/821

210. The rape or other forms of sexual violence perpetrated by Boko Haram against
51 girls as young as nine was verified. In addition, 3 girls between fourteen and
seventeen years old were raped by Nigerian security forces elements. Allegations
were also received of 19 cases of sexual abuse of girls in camps for internally
displaced persons, reportedly perpetrated by Nigerian security forces elements,
camp officials, the Civilian Joint Task Force and vigilantes. The investigation
ordered by the Government culminated in the arrest of 8 suspected perpetrators.
211. No attacks on schools and hospitals were documented in Nigeria in 2016;
however, Boko Haram perpetrated 3 attacks on schools and 5 on hospitals in the
Diffa region of the Niger; 1 attack on a medical centre resulted in the killing of a
health worker. A total of 7 schools were verified as militarily used by the Nigerian
security forces in Borno (5) and Yobe States (2), 2 of which were vacated in early
2017.
212. Boko Haram abducted 17 boys and 17 girls in 2016. In addition, 2,046 child
abductions from previous years were documented in liberated areas following
Nigerian security forces operations; 106 of the Chibok schoolgirls abducted in 2014
were freed, partly as a result of internationally supported negotiations between Boko
Haram and the Government.
213. A single incident of denial of humanitarian access was verified: on 28 July,
2 staff members were injured by unidentified assailants in an attack on a United
Nations humanitarian convoy returning to Maiduguri, following which United
Nations operations to Bama were suspended for 18 days.
Developments and concerns
214. I commend the efforts made by the Government to improve the protection of
children, including the development of a plan of action to implement the Safe
Schools Declaration, which was endorsed in 2015. Moreover, since April, the
United Nations has been granted access to children detained in Giwa barracks,
enabling the release and reintegration of 1,300 children.
215. Following the listing of the Civilian Joint Task Force for recruitment and use
in my previous report (A/70/836-S/2016/360), the United Nations initiated dialogue
with that group to develop an action plan to end and prevent recruitment and use of
children. In this regard, I welcome the fact that at the time of preparation of the
present report, the action plan had been signed.
216. Lastly, a total of 765 girl victims of sexual violence by Boko Haram were
provided with support in Maiduguri through a UNICEF-funded community-based
rehabilitation programme that aims to address negative community perceptions of
girls and women who have survived sexual violence. I encourage subregional
organizations to support these efforts.
Pakistan
217. Attacks by armed groups declined by 28 per cent in 2016, with 441 incidents
reported. The majority of the incidents were attributed to Tehrik-e Taliban
Pakistan (TTP). The security operation launched against armed groups in North
Waziristan in 2014 concluded in April 2016, although a significant military presence
remained.
Grave violations
218. Reports of the recruitment and use of children, including from madrassas,
continued to be a concern and incidents of the use of children by armed groups for
suicide bombings were reported. In a particularly troubling incident, on
17-14707

31/41

A/72/361
S/2017/821

12 November at least 52 people were killed and more than 100 wounded when a
teenage suicide bomber blew himself up at the Shah Noorani shrine in Balochistan.
219. Age-disaggregated data on civilian casualties were extremely limited but the
majority of incidents affecting children were reported in Balochistan. For example,
on 7 February at least 10 people, including 1 girl, were reportedly killed in a suicide
attack on a Pakistan Armed Forces vehicle in Quetta. Attacks also occurred in other
parts of the country. In Lahore, a suicide attack on 27 March in a public park
claimed the lives of 74 people, including 29 children. On 17 October, at least 1 child
was killed in a bomb attack at an imambargah in Karachi, which was claimed by
Lashkarh-e Jhangvi al-Alami.
220. A total of 6 attacks were carried out on educational institutions in the
Federally Administered Tribal Areas and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. On 20 February in
South Waziristan, armed elements blew up part of a newly constructed government
school, while on 25 November, TTP claimed responsibility for a bomb attack on a
government primary school in Mohmand Agency, reportedly for promoting
“Western values”.
221. Attacks on health care by armed groups continued in 2016, including direct
attacks on and threats and intimidation against polio vaccinators, which was
condemned by the Government. The majority of incidents occurred in Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa and the Federally Administered Tribal Areas and led to the killing of
at least 1 vaccinator.
Developments and concerns
222. In November, Pakistan ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict. I welcome this
important step and urge the Government to uphold its obligations under the Optional
Protocol, particularly by criminalizing the recruitment and use of children in
hostilities.
Philippines
223. Children continued to be affected by low-intensity armed engagements, as well
as large-scale military operations conducted by government forces against armed
groups, primarily in Mindanao. Owing to the intensification of activities of armed
groups in Basilan, Lanao del Sur, Maguindanao and Sulu, access for monitoring was
challenging. Following the resumption of peace talks between the Government and
the National Democratic Front of the Philippines/New People’s Army (NDFP/NPA)
in the second half of 2016, grave violations during clashes between them decreased
significantly.
Grave violations
224. The United Nations verified the recruitment and use of 9 boys between
thirteen and seventeen years old. Of the verified cases, 8 were attributed to armed
groups, 5 to the Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF) and 3 to NPA. As well as
being used in support roles, some boys attended training in arms and were used in
combat: 1 child recruited by NPA died during a skirmish with the Armed Forces of
the Philippines. In addition, credible reports suggest that the Bangsamoro Islamic
Freedom Fighters, the Abu Sayyaf Group and the Maute Group recruited children
for combat. In addition, 1 verified incident was attributed to the Armed Forces of
the Philippines, which has used 1 boy in a support role in Negros Occidental since
2013.

32/41

17-14707

A/72/361
S/2017/821

225. The United Nations documented the detention of 8 children without a formal
judicial process for their alleged association with armed groups. For example,
despite continued advocacy by the United Nations, 1 fifteen-year-old boy has been
detained in an adult prison in Basilan for his alleged association with the Abu
Sayyaf Group since November 2015.
226. The United Nations verified the killing and maiming of 38 children (14 killed,
24 injured; 26 boys, 12 girls); the cases were attributed to the Armed Forces of the
Philippines (11), the Armed Forces of the Philippines and the national police in a
joint operation (2) and alleged pro-government armed groups (New Indigenous
People’s Army Reform (6) and Alamara (1)). In addition, 4 cases were attributed to
the Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters and 2 to NPA. Along with incidents of
crossfire, indiscriminate attacks or explosive remnants of war, children were
subjected to targeted killings and alleged torture.
227. A total of 10 attacks affecting 12 schools were verified and were attributed to
the Armed Forces of the Philippines (2) and the Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom
Fighters (1) or were unattributed (7). Reports of threats by alleged pro-government
armed groups against teachers working for schools run by non-governmental
organizations in indigenous communities were also received. In addition, the United
Nations documented the use of 8 schools for military purposes by the Armed Forces
of the Philippines and/or the national police (6) and the Maute Group (2), 4 of
which schools were attacked while they were occupied.
228. Of 4 reports of abduction received in 2016, one incident, which occurred in
December 2015, was verified. In this incident, 1 eight-year-old boy and his parents
were taken hostage by the Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters. The boy and the
mother were released; however the father was reportedly killed.
Developments and concerns
229. In the light of ongoing violations, the United Nations supported the
Government’s efforts to strengthen the protection of children in conflict. In
particular, the Department of National Defence issued a circular setting out
procedures and guidelines for the Armed Forces of the Philippines to prevent grave
violations. To further strengthen the protection of children, I encourage the
Government to promptly adopt the draft law on children in situations of armed
conflict while ensuring its adherence to the highest standards of international law,
and to leverage existing child protection mechanisms to provide assistance to
victims.
230. Regarding MILF, I commend it for the significant progress in implementing its
action plan to end and prevent the recruitment and use of children. In this regard, all
1,869 children identified by MILF as associated with its armed wing underwent
formal disengagement in a series of ceremonies, the last of which was held in March
2017. In addition, MILF promulgated a directive requiring regular self-monitoring
and screening of armed elements as well as age-assessment guidelines to establish
safeguards for the prevention of association and reassociation of children. This
significant progress should be replicated by other armed groups, including
NDFP/NPA, who held discussion with UNICEF during the reporting period.
Thailand
231. A peace dialogue between the Government and an umbrella organization of
armed groups continued in 2016. However, there was ongoing armed violence in
southern Thailand, including sporadic clashes between security forces and armed
groups, as well as attacks by armed groups on civilian targets.

17-14707

33/41

A/72/361
S/2017/821

Grave violations
232. The United Nations received reports of the killing of 5 children and injuries to
27 children resulting from improvised explosive device attacks and shooting, an
increase compared with 2015, when 19 child casualties were recorded (4 killed,
15 injured). For example, in April in Songkhla Province, a 4-year old boy was killed
in a motorcycle bomb attack allegedly targeting the police.
233. Schools and education personnel continued to be targeted by armed groups,
including by the killing of teachers and by arson and improvised explosive device
attacks. On 6 September, for example, a motorcycle-borne improvised explosive
device was detonated in front of an elementary school, killing 1 four-year-old girl
and injuring at least 10 people, including teachers. One attack on a hospital was
reported on 13 March, when an unknown armed group stormed the Joh Airong
Hospital in Narathiwat Province and used it to attack a nearby government security
post. Before leaving, the attackers tied up 1 pregnant nurse and destroyed hospital
equipment.
Developments and concerns
234. I welcome the ongoing peace dialogue between the Government and armed
groups and encourage all parties involved to include the protection of children and
schools in discussions.

IV. Recommendations
235. I am gravely concerned by the scale and severity of the violations
committed against children in 2016, which included alarming levels of killing
and maiming of children, recruitment and use of children and, in certain
situations, denial of humanitarian access to children, and I call upon parties to
conflict, the Security Council and Member States to take immediate action to
prevent these violations against children from occurring.
236. Ensuring full compliance with international humanitarian law, human
rights law and refugee law by all parties must be the cornerstone of our
prevention efforts. In this regard, I welcome the steps taken by a number of
Member States to make international commitments to protect children in the
context of armed conflict, including through the ratification of the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of
children in armed conflict and the endorsement of the Paris Commitments to
protect children from unlawful recruitment or use by armed forces or armed
groups and the Paris Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated with
Armed Forces or Armed Groups. To further the aim of protecting children in
all situations included in the present report, I urge all Member States engaged
in operations against violent extremist groups, whether acting alone or as
members of coalitions, to make commitments to establish specific safeguards to
protect children from violations, including by placing an increased focus on the
principles of distinction and proportionality under international humanitarian
law.
237. I urge Member States, including when countering violent extremism, to
treat children allegedly associated with non-State armed groups primarily as
victims and to swiftly adopt protocols for their handover to civilian child
protection actors in order to prioritize their reintegration. I also encourage the
Security Council to highlight the detrimental impact on children that results
from widespread screening of civilians in situations of armed conflict.
34/41

17-14707

A/72/361
S/2017/821

238. I encourage Member States to establish long-term multi-year mechanisms
for the reintegration of recruited and used children, including by placing a
specific focus on girls and on psychosocial and education programmes and
vocational training. Adequate long-term funding is vital to implement and
sustain such programmes.
239. I welcome national and international efforts to hold perpetrators
accountable for crimes against children in situations of armed conflict.
Impunity must end in order to break the cycles of violence and aid prevention
efforts. Member States should strengthen their support for justice systems by
allocating sufficient resources and capacity to the investigation and prosecution
of those who perpetrate crimes against children.
240. I welcome the leadership and contributions of regional and subregional
organizations regarding the protection of children and I call upon them to
engage with my Special Representative to continue the integration of child
protection considerations into their policies, planning of peace support
operations, training of personnel and conduct of operations.
241. I urge Member States and regional and subregional organizations
involved in negotiating cessation of hostilities or peace agreements to include
specific child protection provisions from the outset in order to prioritize the
prevention of grave violations.
242. I call upon the Security Council to continue to request the deployment of
dedicated child protection capacity to United Nations peace operations, in line
with newly revised United Nations policy on child protection in United Nations
peace operations, in order to mainstream child protection, conduct dialogue on
action plans, release and reintegrate children and for monitoring and
reporting. The need for such child protection capacity, including the budget
required, should be systematically assessed during the preparation of
peacekeeping operations and political missions.

V. Lists contained in the annexes to the present report
243. The modifications in the presentation of the lists contained in the annexes to
the present report resulted from additions to the report of dedicated sections to note
the developments and concerns in the situations covered. In this regard, both
annexes have divided the list into two sections: parties to conflict that have put in
place measures to improve the protection of children during the reporting period and
parties that have not.
244. In Afghanistan, ISIL-Khorasan Province is listed for the recruitment and use
and killing and maiming of children in the light of the number of verified incidents
attributed to that party. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Mai-Mai
Mazembe has been included in the annexes for the recruitment and use and killing
and maiming of children given the number of incidents attributed to that party since
its emergence in mid-2016. In Iraq, the popular mobilization forces were
responsible for 57 verified cases of recruitment and use during 2016 and that party
is listed for that violation. In the Syrian Arab Republic, the Army of Islam also
recruited and used children in significant numbers and has therefore been listed. All
of the above-mentioned parties are included in section A of annex I. In Yemen, the
actions of the coalition to restore legitimacy in Yemen objectively led to that party
being listed for the killing and maiming of children, with 683 child casualties
attributed to it, and as a result of that party being responsible for 38 verified
incidents, for attacks on schools and hospitals during 2016. The coalition is included

17-14707

35/41

A/72/361
S/2017/821

in section B of annex I, as it has put in place measures during the reporting period
aimed at improving the protection of children.
245. Other previously listed parties to conflict have had additional violations added
based on incidents that occurred in 2016. In this regard, given the levels of
abductions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Allied Democratic Forces,
the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda and the Force de résistance
patriotique de l’Ituri have been included for that violation. In Nigeria, Boko Haram
is listed for rape and other forms of sexual violence in the light of the cases verified
as a result of improved access. In the Syrian Arab Republic, government forces and
pro-government militias are listed for the recruitment and use of children. In the
same country, ISIL is also included for the abduction of children.
246. In terms of delisting, the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo took all necessary steps in its action plan pertaining to the recruitment and
use of children and that party has been delisted for that violation; however, it
remains listed for rape and other forms of sexual violence against children. In
addition, in the Philippines, the Moro Islamic Liberation Front has been delisted for
the recruitment and use of children following the completion of its action plan.
247. Other modifications to the list have resulted from changes in the landscape of
armed conflict in the respective situations. In this regard, in Afghanistan the name
of the Taliban has been amended. In the Syrian Arab Republic, the names of the
government forces and the Free Syrian Army have been slightly changed to more
accurately reflect the realities on the ground. Similarly, in Yemen, the name of the
government forces has also been slightly modified.

36/41

17-14707

A/72/361
S/2017/821

Annex I
Pursuant to Security Council resolutions 1379 (2001), 1882
(2009), 1998 (2011) and 2225 (2015), parties that commit
grave violations affecting children in situations of armed
conflict on the agenda of the Security Council*
A.

Listed parties that have not put in place measures during the
reporting period to improve the protection of children
Parties in Afghanistan
Non-State actors
1.

Haqqani Network a,b

2.

Hizb-i Islami of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar a,b

3.

ISIL-Khorasan Province a,b

4.

Taliban forces and affiliated groups, including the Tora Bora Front, Jama’at
al-Da‘wah ila al-Qur’an wal-Sunnah and the Latif Mansur Network a,b,d,e

Parties in Colombia
Non-State actors
1.

Ejército de Liberación Nacional a

Parties in the Central African Republic
Non-State actors
1.

Former Séléka coalition and associated armed groupsa,b,c,d

2.

Local defence militias known as the anti-balakaa,b,c

3.

Lord’s Resistance Armya,b,c,e

Parties in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Non-State actors
1.

Allied Democratic Forces a,b,d,e

2.

Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda a,c,d,e

3.

Force de résistance patriotique de l’Ituria,c,d,e

4.

Lord’s Resistance Armya,b,c,e

5.

Alliance des patriotes pour un Congo libre et souverain a

__________________

* Parties listed in section A have not put in place adequate measures to improve the protection of
children during the reporting period; parties listed in section B have put in place measures to
improve the protection of children during the reporting period.
a
Party that recruits and uses children.
b
Party that kills and maims children.
c
Party that commits rape and other forms of sexual violence against children.
d
Party that engages in attacks on schools and/or hospitals.
e
Party that abducts children.
† Party that has concluded an action plan with the United Nations in line with Security Council
resolutions 1539 (2004) and 1612 (2005).
17-14707

37/41

A/72/361
S/2017/821

6.

Union des patriotes congolais pour la paix (also known as Mai-Mai
Lafontaine)a

7.

Mai-Mai Mazembe a,b

8.

Mai-Mai Simba a,c

9.

Mai-Mai Kata Katanga a

10.

Nduma défense du Congo-Rénové/Mai-Mai Cheka a,b

11.

Nyaturaa

12.

Raia Mutomboki a,c

Parties in Iraq
Non-State actors
1.

Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant a,b,c,d,e

2.

Popular mobilization forces a

Parties in Mali
Non-State actors
1.

Ansar Eddine a,c

2.

Mouvement pour l’unification et le jihad en Afrique de l’Ouest a,c

Parties in Myanmar
State actors
1.

Tatmadaw Army, including integrated border guard forcesa,†

Non-State actors
1.

Democratic Karen Benevolent Army a

2.

Kachin Independence Army a

3.

Karen National Liberation Armya

4.

Karen National Liberation Army Peace Councila

5.

Karenni Army a

6.

Shan State Army-South a

7.

United Wa State Armya

Parties in Somalia
Non-State actors
1.

Al-Shabaab a,b,e

2.

Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a (ASWJ)a

Parties in South Sudan
State actors
1.

38/41

Sudan People’s Liberation Armya,b,c,e,†

17-14707

A/72/361
S/2017/821

Non-State actors
1.

Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition a,b,†

2.

White Army a

Parties in the Sudan
Non-State actors
1.

Justice and Equality Movementa,†

2.

Pro-government militiasa

3.

Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid a

4.

Sudan Liberation Army/Minni Minawi a,†

Parties in the Syrian Arab Republic
State actors
1.

Government forces, including the National Defence Forces and
pro-government militiasa,b,c,d

Non-State actors
1.

Ahrar al-Shama,b

2.

Groups self-affiliated with the Free Syrian Armya

3.

Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant a,b,c,d,e

4.

Army of Islama

5.

Nusrah Front (also known as Jabhat Fath al-Sham) a,b

6.

People’s Protection Unitsa

Parties in Yemen
State actors
1.

Government forces, including the Yemeni Armed Forcesa,†

Non-State actors

B.

1.

Houthis/Ansar Allah a,b,d

2.

Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula/Ansar al-Sharia a

3.

Pro-government militias, including the Salafists and popular committeesa

Listed parties that have put in place measures during the
reporting period aimed at improving the protection of children
Parties in Afghanistan
State actors
1.

17-14707

Afghan National Police, including the Afghan Local Policea,†

39/41

A/72/361
S/2017/821

Parties in Colombia
Non-State actors
1.

Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia — Ejército del Pueblo a

Parties in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
State actors
1.

Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo c,†

Parties in Mali
Non-State actors
1.

Mouvement national de libération de l’Azawad a,c,†

Parties in Somalia
State actors
1.
Somali National Army a,b,†
Parties in the Sudan
State actors
1.

Government security forces, including the Sudanese Armed Forces, popular
defence forces and national police forces a,†

Non-State actors
1.

Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North a,†

Parties in Yemen
State actors
1.

40/41

Coalition to restore legitimacy in Yemen led by Saudi Arabiab,d

17-14707

A/72/361
S/2017/821

Annex II
Pursuant to Security Council resolutions 1379 (2001), 1882
(2009), 1998 (2011) and 2225 (2015), parties that commit
grave violations affecting children in situations of armed
conflict not on the agenda of the Security Council, or in
other situations*
A.

Listed parties that have not put in place measures during the
reporting period to improve the protection of children
Parties in Nigeria
Non-State actors
1.

Jama’atu Ahlis Sunna Lidda’Awati Wal-Jihad, also known as Boko
Haram a,b,c,d,e

Parties in the Philippines
Non-State actors

B.

1.

Abu Sayyaf Group a

2.

Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fightersa

3.

New People’s Army a

Listed parties that have put in place measures during the
reporting period aimed at improving the protection of children
Parties in Nigeria
Non-State actors
1.

Civilian Joint Task Forcea,†

__________________

* Parties listed in section A have not put in place adequate measures to improve the protection of
children during the reporting period; parties listed in section B have put in place measures to
improve the protection of children during the reporting period.
a
Party that recruits and uses children.
b
Party that kills and maims children.
c
Party that commits rape and other forms of sexual violence against children.
d
Party that engages in attacks on schools and/or hospitals.
e
Party that abducts children.
† Party that has concluded an action plan with the United Nations in line with Security Council
resolutions 1539 (2004) and 1612 (2005).
17-14707

41/41
