United Nations

S/PV.6636

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6636th meeting
Monday, 24 October 2011, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Ogwu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Nigeria)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Messone
Mr. Berger
Mr. Ahamed
Mr. Salam
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Gumbi
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-56034 (E)

*1156034*

S/PV.6636

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
rules of procedure, I invite the representatives of
Bangladesh, Cuba, Ecuador, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Egypt, Iceland, Indonesia, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Maldives, Malaysia, Morocco,
Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
Tunisia, Turkey, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Uganda, the United Arab Emirates, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Viet Nam to
participate in this meeting.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 20 October 2011 from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations,
which will be issued as document S/2011/653 and
which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council that will
be held on Monday, 24 October 2011, regarding
the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.”
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Lynn Pascoe, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, to participate in
this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Abdou
Diallo, Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to
participate in this meeting.

2

Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Pascoe.
Mr. Pascoe: On 18 October, Israel and Hamas
implemented the first stage of a prisoner exchange
agreement. Israeli Sergeant Gilad Shalit, held in Gaza
without international access since 25 June 2006, was
released by Hamas. Four hundred and seventy-seven
Palestinian prisoners — many of whom had been
imprisoned for involvement in attacks on Israelis —
were released, mostly to Gaza, but also to the West
Bank, East Jerusalem, the occupied Syrian Golan and
Israel proper. Forty-two prisoners were released to
Turkey, Qatar, Syria and Jordan. In all, 205 prisoners
were transferred, in accordance with the exchange
agreement, to locations other than their residence
before detention.
In their public remarks following the exchange,
Hamas officials unfortunately and unacceptably lauded
violent resistance, and some of the released prisoners
made deplorable statements glorifying acts of violence.
Prime Minister Netanyahu announced that Israel would
continue to fight terrorism.
Approximately 5,000 Palestinians remain in
Israeli prisons. A further 550 of these are to be released
within two months in the second phase of the exchange
agreement. Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails
suspended a hunger strike the day before the prisoner
exchange, following the reported agreement of the
Israeli authorities to end solitary confinement. We
continue to follow closely the security, political and
human rights dimensions of the prisoner issue.
The Secretary-General, who had long called for
an end of the unacceptable captivity of Gilad Shalit and
for the release of Palestinian prisoners, welcomed the
releases as a significant humanitarian breakthrough.
The Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process actively supported
channels of dialogue throughout that period. We
reiterate the Secretary-General’s thanks to Egypt for its
contribution to this outcome, and to Germany for its
efforts.

11-56034

S/PV.6636

We have seen political will brought to bear to
resolve a humanitarian issue, as well as a readiness in
that context to take difficult decisions. We call for the
same determination to be displayed with regard to the
most important issue, namely, the quest for a lasting
peace. The parties must rise to that challenge.
The Quartet statement of 23 September provides
a framework for the parties to find a way forward. We
welcome the separate meetings, expected to be held on
26 October, among negotiators from each side and
Quartet envoys and the Quartet representative to agree
on a method for proceeding in the negotiation. Special
Coordinator Serry will participate in those meetings,
and is in close dialogue with the parties in preparation
for them. We remind the parties that the Quartet
reaffirmed the international legal basis for peace talks
and called for the parties to overcome the obstacles and
resume negotiations without preconditions. The
Quartet further called for proposals within three
months on borders and security, with a view to
achieving substantial progress within six months and
an agreement no later than the end of 2012. The
Quartet stressed the need for the parties to refrain from
provocations and reiterated their Road Map
obligations.
In that regard, we have registered our deep
concern at Israel’s settlement actions. The Israeli
announcement of 1,100 East Jerusalem settlement units
on the day that the Council last met was followed by
the announcement, on 10 October, of 11 new housing
units in the East Jerusalem neighbourhood of Pisgat
Zeev. On 11 October, the Israeli authorities
significantly advanced plans for the construction of
approximately 2,600 housing units in the East
Jerusalem settlement of Givat Hamatos, which would
amount to a new settlement in an area of vital
importance for the viability of a two-State outcome.
The Israeli authorities are also not acting
effectively against the construction of illegal outposts
on private Palestinian land. On 14 October, the
Secretary-General made clear that those developments
were unacceptable and ran counter to the Quartet’s call
and Israel’s commitments under the Road Map. I would
remind the Council that settlement activity is illegal
under international law and should cease. Unilateral
actions on the ground will not be recognized by the
international community.

11-56034

At the same time, restrictions continue on land
allocation and planning for Palestinian construction in
Area C and East Jerusalem. Demolitions by the Israel
Defense Forces (IDF) in Area C during the reporting
period displaced 145 people, including 81 children. We
remain concerned at plans to relocate approximately
2,300 Bedouins in the vicinity of the so-called “E-1
corridor”, connecting East Jerusalem to West Bank
settlements.
The Palestinian application for United Nations
membership is being examined by the Security
Council, and is a matter for Member States. Also, the
Palestinian request for membership in UNESCO is
being reviewed before a vote by the General
Conference. That step could have repercussions for the
organization, as it has legal and political implications
for the funding provided by some Member States. The
Secretary-General is increasingly concerned about
ramifications of such a step for the United Nations as a
whole, and asks all involved to act wisely in
determining a course of action. Regardless of those
developments, a negotiated two-State solution, to
which both leaders are committed, must remain the
highest priority.
In the West Bank, both the application for
statehood and the prisoner release evoked significant
public demonstrations, but few acts of violence.
Demonstrations against the barrier, which deviates
from the Green Line, in contravention of the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice, also
largely remained peaceful. Coordination between the
parties remains essential to maintain a secure
environment.
However, tensions and violent incidents continue.
Settler attacks on Palestinians resulted in one death and
19 injuries, including to five Palestinian children.
Violent settlers especially targeted Palestinians
harvesting their olive groves, and damaged 664 trees.
Settlers also attacked an IDF patrol vehicle on
5 October, resulting in light injuries to an Israeli
soldier. I urge the Israeli authorities to take decisive
actions against acts of violence perpetrated by Israeli
citizens. I also note that, on 3 October in Israel, a
mosque was set on fire in the Upper Galilee village of
Tuba Zangaria. That triggered unrest, vandalism and
the arrest of local residents, as well as the subsequent
desecration of Muslim, Christian and Jewish holy sites
and property in several towns in Israel.

3

S/PV.6636

Palestinian attacks on Israelis in the occupied
West Bank resulted in two injuries, including the
stabbing of an Israeli child on 22 October, as well as
extensive material damage, mostly from stones and
Molotov cocktails thrown at Israeli vehicles. On
6 October, hundreds of Israeli pilgrims accompanied by
the IDF in the Palestinian city of Nablus discovered
swastikas painted on the exterior walls of Joseph’s
Tomb. On the same day, Israeli authorities arrested five
Palestinians in connection with the stoning of a vehicle
travelling in the West Bank on 23 September, which
caused the death of the Israeli driver and his infant son.
Turning to Gaza, in spite of the fragile relative
calm, six indiscriminate rockets and 13 mortar shells
were fired by Palestinian militants into Israel during
this reporting period, while two IDF incursions and
five air strikes resulted in injuries to three Palestinian
militants and two Palestinian civilians. We call for an
end to militant rocket fire into Israel, maximum Israeli
restraint and respect by all parties for international
humanitarian law.
I echo the Secretary-General’s expressed hope
that the prisoner exchange will be followed by more
far-reaching steps to end the closure of Gaza. Those
steps should be taken within the framework of the full
implementation of resolutions 1850 (2008) and 1860
(2009), and in close coordination with the Palestinian
Authority.
In spite of the recent economic growth and the
drop in unemployment in Gaza, the sustainability of
that progress is unclear. Significant parts of the
population remain food insecure and rely on
humanitarian
assistance.
While
agencies
are
implementing approved projects, ongoing restrictions
limit the ability of the United Nations to support
Gaza’s economic recovery and reconstruction. There is
a worrisome humanitarian and development vacuum
that is being filled by other actors, fuelled by an illicit
tunnel trade largely controlled by the de facto
authorities.
That situation presents genuine concerns with
regard to prospects for the emergence of a viable
Palestinian State in the West Bank and Gaza, and
deepens the Palestinian divide. We reiterate our call on
Israel for more far-reaching steps to ease its land
closures and facilitate the entry of construction
materials into Gaza, exports and the free movement of
people in both directions, with due consideration for

4

Israel’s legitimate security concerns. We also reiterate
our call for weapons smuggling to be brought under
control.
Notwithstanding inter-factional contacts, there
has been no concrete progress towards the further
implementation of the May reconciliation agreement.
We reiterate our support for Palestinian reconciliation
within the framework of Quartet principles, Palestinian
Liberation Organization commitments and the Arab
Peace Initiative.
Turning to Lebanon, I am pleased to report that
the situation in the area of operations of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) has
remained generally quiet and stable. UNIFIL recorded
no major incidents or violations, except for continuing
Israeli overflights of Lebanese airspace on an almost
daily basis. I will not go into detail, as the Security
Council will hear more in-depth briefings on Lebanon
in the coming weeks.
Lebanon of course continues to be affected by
developments in neighbouring Syria. In several
instances during the month of October, the Syrian army
opened fire across the border, carried out incursions
into Lebanon and raided houses to capture fleeing
nationals and army deserters. On 6 October, Syrian
troops killed a Syrian national on Lebanese soil. The
United Nations continues to coordinate closely with the
Government of Lebanon on the provision of assistance
to the displaced Syrian nationals who crossed into
Lebanon fleeing violence, as well as on matters of
protection and the determination of their status.
Those developments reflect the continuing
political and human rights crisis in Syria, which has led
to the deaths of more than 3,000 people since March.
Unfortunately, signs are that the face-off between the
regime and the opposition will continue, with all of the
negative consequences for Syria and the region. This is
of great concern to the United Nations. The SecretaryGeneral continues to call on the Syrian leadership to
take urgent action to stop the killing. He also continues
to emphasize the need for the international community
to act in a coherent manner to prevent further
bloodshed. In that regard, we note that the League of
Arab States met on 16 October to discuss the situation
in Syria. The Arab League called for dialogue and
established a follow-up committee. Its ministerial
delegation will travel to Damascus on 26 October.

11-56034

S/PV.6636

Turning back to the Israeli-Palestinian peace, let
me conclude by emphasizing our deep concern at the
impasse between the parties and its potential
implications for the future. Leadership is urgently
needed and the moderate Palestinian leadership must
be supported. The parties must refrain from
provocation and should stand ready to offer serious
proposals on borders and security for negotiation. We
urge them to approach their meetings with the Quartet
envoys later this week in that spirit. Otherwise, the
impasse will only deepen, and with it, the level of
confrontation and the scale of mistrust. The
international community must stand ready to play an
active role in helping to steer the situation towards an
agreement that resolves all final status issues, ends the
occupation that began in 1967, ends the conflict and
creates an independent and viable Palestinian State
living side by side with Israel within secure and
recognized borders.
The President: I thank Mr. Pascoe for his
briefing. I now give the floor to the Permanent
Observer of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Palestine congratulates
Nigeria on its skilled stewardship of the Security
Council this month. We also express appreciation to
Lebanon for its efficient presidency in September,
including its responsible handling of Palestine’s
application for United Nations membership, which was
conveyed to the Council on 23 September by
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon (see S/2011/592).
I also reiterate our appreciation to the UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. B. Lynn
Pascoe, for his briefing and for all the efforts being
carried out by the Department of Political Affairs,
including by the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, Mr. Robert Serry, on behalf of the
Secretary-General.
Palestine would like to convey its condolences to
the people and Government of Turkey on the losses
resulting from the earthquake that recently struck the
country. We would also like to convey our condolences
to the people and Government of Saudi Arabia on the
death of Crown Prince Sultan Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud.
We meet in this debate at a historic moment,
when the Security Council is considering the
application submitted by Palestine for admission as a
Member State of the United Nations (S/2011/592). It is
a moment long overdue in the tragic history of the

11-56034

Palestinian people and this prolonged conflict. And it is
a moment requiring Council members to demonstrate
the utmost responsibility in upholding their Charter
duties and their legal obligations with regard to the
question of Palestine, in line with the relevant United
Nations resolutions.
We believe that it would not be overstating the
case to say that the Palestinian people, the peoples of
the region and virtually the entire international
community have joined in an appeal to the Council at
this moment to do justice by Palestine and fulfil its role
in the attainment of a just, comprehensive and lasting
solution that will finally make peace and security a
reality between Palestine and Israel and throughout the
Middle East.
We reflect today on that which has brought us to
this stage in our long quest to realize the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people and achieve a peaceful
solution to the conflict. To date, 130 countries have
recognized the State of Palestine. Those countries have
taken a principled stand in support of our people’s right
to self-determination and in line with countless United
Nations resolutions, from resolution 181 (II) of 1947 to
the present. We are grateful for their recognition and
support, which constitute an investment in peace
consistent with the two-State solution on the basis of
the pre-1967 borders, a solution that is internationally
supported and endorsed.
At the same time, over the past two years, we
have seen significant progress in the building and
strengthening of Palestinian national institutions with
the implementation of the Palestinian Authority’s twoyear plan to prepare our institutions and infrastructure
for the independence of our State. It is a massive
project, undertaken with the strong support and
funding of countries from around the globe. Despite
the many obstacles and the dysfunction caused by the
Israeli occupation, this project has been a success, as
affirmed by international institutions and as recently
reflected in the 18 September conclusions of the Chair
of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination
of the International Assistance to Palestinians, which
reaffirmed that we are able to govern ourselves with
viable, effective institutions that are above the
threshold for a functioning State.
In addition to those two processes, we have
witnessed the repeated and regrettable failures of the
peace process. For nearly two decades, the negotiations

5

S/PV.6636

undertaken by the Palestinian leadership in a spirit of
historic compromise and good faith have been
undermined, obstructed and stalled as a direct result of
Israel’s intransigence, its egregious violations of
international law and human rights and its refusal to
commit to the most basic principles and parameters
essential for the achievement of a just and lasting
peace.
The consequences of its actions have not,
however, been borne by the occupying Power, which
continues to act with total impunity. Instead, they have
been borne by generations of Palestinians, who
continue to suffer the hardships of ongoing
dispossession and exile and the brutality of the Israeli
occupation in all of its manifestations; by the region,
which continues to suffer from the insecurity and
turmoil generated by this conflict; and by the
international community, which continues to feel the
wide-ranging impact of tensions and instability in the
region and which continues, to no avail, to expend vast
efforts and resources to resolve the conflict and
alleviate its consequences.
All of those dynamics have led us to this
moment — a moment in which we insist that
international law and the relevant resolutions,
including those of the Security Council, be upheld and
that the status quo no longer be maintained, for it is
unacceptable, illogical and unjust. That is what brought
President Mahmoud Abbas to the United Nations on
23 September (see A/66/PV.19) with the application of
the State of Palestine for admission as a Member State
and his historic statement to the General Assembly on
that day. Here, we express our deep appreciation to the
United Nations Secretary-General and the Legal
Counsel for verifying Palestine’s application and
conveying it without question to the Security Council
for its consideration. We believe that this reflects the
strength of Palestine’s application and its fulfilment of
the required criteria for this important step.
The Council has been debating our application
for nearly a month, which we believe is sufficient time
for its thorough consideration. We are aware of the
deliberations taking place in the Committee on the
Admission of New Members and express our gratitude
for the principled positions of support affirmed by
many delegations.
We also express appreciation for the efforts of the
Non-Aligned Movement caucus of the Council in

6

addressing this issue. It is time for the Security Council
to shoulder its responsibilities by approving our
application and making a positive recommendation to
the General Assembly for Palestine’s admission to
membership. That would be the most just and
appropriate outcome of this process. We reiterate our
belief that actions undertaken at the United Nations,
the centre of multilateral activity in our world, can and
must contribute towards the peace we all seek and will
not obstruct the realization of this objective.
Of course, we are aware of the difficulties, but we
cannot accept attempts to extend or postpone this
exercise indefinitely at the expense of the merits of
Palestine’s application and its long overdue and
rightful inclusion in the community of nations. We
believe that this exercise should be brought to closure
with a clear outcome. In this regard, we stress that we
see no contradiction between the possibility of a
resumption of negotiations between the two sides,
which the Quartet is seeking to arrange, and the
Security Council’s responsible consideration of
Palestine’s application. In fact, these processes, which
share the objective of actualizing the two-State solution
of Palestine and Israel living side by side in peace and
security on the basis of the pre-1967 borders, should be
viewed as mutually reinforcing.
Palestine’s recent efforts, including President
Abbas’s speech before the General Assembly and the
submission of our application, have contributed to a
growing momentum that underscores the urgency of
bringing an end to the occupation that began in 1967. It
is time for the Palestinian people to live in freedom and
dignity and for a new era of peace and security to
prevail in our region. That momentum, which led to the
introduction of the French proposal by President
Nicolas Sarkozy (see A/66/PV.11) and to the
23 September statement by the Quartet, has given
added impetus to Governments and civil society
worldwide to bolster their support for the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian people at this critical
time.
The Palestinian leadership’s core understanding
of the Quartet statement is that negotiations are to
commence on the basis of the 4 June 1967 borders and
that Israel is expected to meet its legal obligations,
including those under the Road Map, to halt all
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. Clearly, no credible
peace process can proceed in the absence of such a

11-56034

S/PV.6636

basic understanding. If the Quartet succeeds in
securing a commitment from the Israeli side on this
basis, then the Palestinian side is willing to resume
negotiations in accordance with the agreed terms of
reference reflected in the resolutions of this Council,
the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Road Map.
Here, we reiterate that there is no contradiction
between resuming negotiations in this framework and
the Palestinian efforts to become a State Member of the
United Nations. This is particularly clear, since the
two-State solution enjoys global consensus and the aim
of both processes is the long overdue independence of
the Palestinian State — a right denied for over 63 years
since partition — and the achievement of a just and
lasting peace.
The current reality of the Israeli occupation and
the situation of the Palestinian Authority cannot be
sustained. Israel cannot continue to exploit and benefit
from the occupation without consequences, absolved of
its responsibilities as an occupying Power. Either the
current situation must change, or Israel must assume
full responsibility as the occupying Power. I would like
to repeat that. Either the current situation must change,
or Israel must assume full responsibility as the
occupying Power. The status quo cannot be maintained
as we move forward, for it is absolutely untenable.
Indeed, the situation on the ground continues to
worsen and tensions continue to rise. In the midst of
the serious diplomatic efforts being exerted by all
concerned parties, Israel has instead intensified its
illegal settlement campaign in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, gobbling up more
Palestinian land with its construction and expansion of
settlements and the wall, destroying more Palestinian
homes and properties and displacing more Palestinian
families, as well as permitting the terror rampages of
the Israeli settlers against our civilians, their homes,
their lands and trees, and their mosques. Such actions
by Israel must be seen for what they are: a concrete,
negative reaction to the efforts of the international
community, including the Quartet, in favour of its
occupation and expansionist annexation agenda.
How else can one explain the provocative and
arrogant declarations in just the past three weeks
regarding the construction of nearly 4,000 more
settlement units? How else can one explain the
deliberate planning and expansion of settlements and

11-56034

the attempts to entrench settlement outposts through
legislation, particularly in occupied East Jerusalem and
Bethlehem? All these measures are severing the
northern and southern parts of the West Bank,
encircling occupied East Jerusalem and separating it
from its natural Palestinian environs, and totally
undermining the contiguity and viability of our State.
There is no justification for those illegal Israeli
measures and no explanation for them other than that
this Israeli Government is interested in neither the twoState solution nor in peace and security, and that it has
chosen instead to continue its occupation and
subjugation of an entire nation of people and to
prolong the conflict.
That obstruction of peace has also been
underscored recent days by the occupying Power’s
intensification of the mistreatment and abuse of the
thousands of Palestinian civilians who remain
imprisoned in its jails and detention centres. In a series
of letters, we have drawn the Council’s attention to
their plight, including the hunger strike that began on
27 September, and we call on it to uphold international
law vis-à-vis the situation of our prisoners. The
international
community,
including
the
high
contracting parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention,
must demand that Israel comply with its legal
obligations and cease its abuse of Palestinian
prisoners — who include hundreds of children, some as
young as 12 years old — and that the International
Committee of the Red Cross be given unfettered access
to them. In that regard, the recent prisoner exchange
was a very important development. We welcome the
release of hundreds of Palestinian prisoners and await
the release of the thousands of others who continue to
unjustly languish in Israeli prisons.
Yet another unsustainable situation is the Israeli
blockade of the Gaza Strip, which has inflicted so
much suffering on the Palestinian civilian population.
All pretexts for continuing that illegal blockade must
be rejected. The international community must
unanimously demand that Israel fully lift the blockade
and allow the sustained and unfettered movement of
persons and goods into and out the Gaza Strip in order
to permit the reconstruction of destroyed homes,
properties and infrastructure, as well as the
rehabilitation of our society there, which has been so
damaged by that vicious form of collective punishment
by the occupying Power.

7

S/PV.6636

The Palestinian leadership remains committed to
peace and to negotiating seriously all final-status
issues — the Palestine refugees, Jerusalem, settlements,
borders, security and water — when the appropriate
environment is secured. However, we will not enter
into negotiations for the sake of negotiations. The
situation on the ground and the two-State solution itself
are too fragile to withstand further delays and
sabotage. Israel, the occupying Power, must be
speedily compelled to commit to negotiations along the
clear parameters to which we have already committed.
While committed to the peace process, we must
reiterate clearly that the right of the Palestinian people
to self-determination, freedom and independence is not
up for negotiation, nor will it be the product of
negotiations. It is an inalienable right and the sole
domain of the Palestinian people. It has never been an
issue for negotiations with Israel, nor will it ever be.
Negotiations on the core issues and the expression of
our self-determination should not be confused by
Israel, or others, as one and the same, because they are
not. Israel, as the occupying Power, should not be
allowed to continue obstructing and dictating the terms
of our exercise of that inalienable right.
We are determined to achieve that right and all of
the legitimate national aspirations of our people. We
are determined to bring an end to the injustice endured
by our people, including the grave injustice inflicted on
our refugees. We are determined to peacefully achieve
the independence of the State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, based on the pre-1967 borders.
That achievement will be the core of a just and lasting
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, and the
Arab-Israeli conflict as a whole. We are grateful for the
long-standing support of the international community
in that journey, and urge that no effort be spared at this
critical crossroads to make that a reality. It clearly
requires that the Security Council responsibly uphold
its Charter duties.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): At the outset, I would like to
extend my condolences to the people of Turkey
following yesterday’s tragic earthquake.
Let me begin by reminding the Council that the
name of today’s debate is the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question, and not vice
versa. This morning, I would like to take the unusual

8

step of actually focusing on the situation in the Middle
East. Let me assure the Council that I will give proper
attention to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict later.
However, let us first look at the facts.
The Middle East is in turmoil. Thousands of
innocents have been gunned down in the street. People
are calling for their freedom and demanding their
rights. Yet, month after month, the Council deals
disproportionately with one — and only one — conflict
in the region. I do not claim that the Council is not
dealing with the situation of specific countries in the
Middle East. It does. However, I think that it is time to
start connecting the dots so that we can face the bigger
picture.
For generations, the Arab world has failed
miserably to address the needs of its own people. The
United Nations Development Programme has
sponsored five — five— Arab Human Development
Reports since 2002. Year after year, the Arab
researchers who write the reports often offer a glimpse
into the real world of the Middle East. Young people
struggle without access to jobs and education. Women
are denied basic rights. Free expression is repressed.
Minorities are persecuted. Elections are a sham.
With their world in flames, Arab leaders continue
to blame Israel and the West for all their problems. For
years, it has been the only explanation that they have
been able to offer to their own people. From time to
time, they spice up the story. When a shark attacked a
tourist in the Red Sea resort of Sharm el-Sheikh
recently, the local Egyptian Governor suggested that
Mossad was using sharks to harm Egyptian tourism.
Everything wrong in the Middle East, according to
many Arab leaders, is simply Israel’s fault. If it is not
Mossad, it is the Central Intelligence Agency, MI6 or
some other foreign force.
Today, the people of the Middle East demand real
answers for their plight. We have seen their brave
stands in public squares. We have heard their cries. We
have witnessed the deadly response to such calls for
freedom. In Hama, Dara and Latakia, the Syrian regime
slaughters its citizens in a desperate bid to hold onto
power. Some members of the Council remain blind to
Al-Assad’s brutality. In Libya, the reign of Muammar
Al-Qadhafi is over after more than 40 years of
repression and many months of bloodshed. The Libyan
despot’s violent end illustrated what Churchill once
described as the signal disadvantage of a dictator. What

11-56034

S/PV.6636

he does to others may often be done back to him. That
truth haunts the minds of many leaders in our region.
Al-Qadhafi’s fate rings an alarm bell for them.
In Iran, an Ayatollah regime represses its own
people, as it helps other tyrants to butcher theirs. Last
week, United Nations Special Rapporteur Shaheed
briefed the General Assembly, offering a chilling
picture of what daily life in Iran looks like. His report
highlighted
“a pattern of systemic violations of …
fundamental human rights … includ[ing]
multifarious deficits in relation to the
administration of justice … practices that amount
to torture … the imposition of the death penalty
in the absence of proper judicial safeguards …
the persecution of religious and ethnic minorities,
and the erosion of civil and political rights”. (see
A/66/374, para. 18)
Iran remains the world’s central banker, chief
trainer and primary sponsor of terror. Recent events
have shown that its State-directed terrorist activities
extend from the Persian Gulf to the Washington
Beltway, with targets that range from innocent
protesters to foreign soldiers to official diplomatic
representatives. That is the way the regime behaves
today. One can only imagine what it would do with
nuclear capabilities — with the dangerous combination
of extremist ideology, advanced missile technology and
nuclear weapons.
The reports of the International Atomic Energy
Agency make clear that Iran continues to march
towards the goal of a nuclear bomb in defiance of the
international community. We all cannot allow it to
place the entire world under the spectre of nuclear
terrorism. The world must stop Iran before it is too
late.
The Middle East is trembling. Its future is
uncertain. Two roads stand before us. There is a future
offered by Iranian and Syrian leaders of more
extremism, greater violence and continued hate. Their
vision will not liberate human beings. It will enslave
them. It does not build. It destroys. There is another
road — a path of progress, reform and moderation.
The choice before us is clear. It has never been
more critical to make the right choice for the future of
the Middle East and all its inhabitants. It is time for the
Council to stop ignoring the destructive forces that

11-56034

seek to keep the Middle East in the past, so that we can
seize the promise of a brighter future.
Make no mistake. It is important for Israel and
the Palestinians to resolve our long-standing conflict. It
is important on its own merits, so that Israelis and
Palestinians alike can lead peaceful, secure and
prosperous lives. But it will not produce a sudden
outbreak of stability, harmony and democratization
from the Persian Gulf to the Mediterranean Sea.
Seriously addressing the underlying problems of the
Middle East will be essential to advancing IsraeliPalestinian peace.
The road to peace can only be built on a
foundation of mutual recognition and a dialogue. A
month ago, President Abbas stood in this building and
said,
“I come before the General Assembly today from
the Holy Land, the land of Palestine, the land of
divine messages, ascension of the Prophet
Muhammad and the birthplace of Jesus Christ”.
(A/66/PV.19, p. 29)
He denied 4,000 years of Jewish history. It was
not a small omission. It was not an oversight. The
Palestinian leadership’s attempts to erase the
connection between the Jewish people and the land of
Israel is not new. Others in the Arab world have offered
a different message. In 1995, for example, King
Hussein went to the United States and said,
“For our part, we shall continue to work for the
new dawn when all the children of Abraham and
their descendants are living together in the
birthplace of their three great monotheistic
religions”.
Let me repeat that King Hussein said three
monotheistic religions, not one or two. Those who seek
peace do not negate the narrative of the other side. On
the contrary, they recognize its existence and choose to
sit down and negotiate peace in good faith. That is
what President Sadat did; it is what King Hussein did.
The ancient Jewish bond with the land of Israel is
unbreakable. This is our homeland. The United Nations
recognized Israel as a Jewish State 64 years ago. It is
time for the Palestinians and more than 20 Muslim
countries around the globe to do the same.
Let there be no doubt, and I repeat, Israel wants
peace with a future Palestinian State. In word and in
deed, my Government has demonstrated time and again

9

S/PV.6636

that we seek two States for two peoples living side by
side in peace. I repeat: two States for two peoples. We
do not hear that from the Palestinians or any Arab
leaders. If anyone should hear the phrase “two States
for two peoples”, they should call me, on a 911 number
if necessary, day or night.
It is no coincidence that Prime Minister
Netanyahu stood here last month and issued a clear call
to President Abbas (see A/66/PV.19). Today let me
reiterate that call to the Palestinians. Sit down with
Israel. Leave your preconditions behind. Start
negotiations now. The international community has
called on the Palestinians to go back to negotiations.
Israel has accepted the principles outlined by the
Quartet to restart negotiations immediately without
preconditions. We are waiting for the Palestinians to do
the same thing.
The Palestinians suggest that settlements are the
core cause of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. It is an
interesting assertion, considering the fact that the
conflict raged for nearly half a century before a single
settlement sprang up in the West Bank. From 1948
until 1967, the West Bank was part of Jordan. Gaza
was part of Egypt. The Arab world did not lift a finger
to create a Palestinian State, and it sought Israel’s
alienation when not a single settlement stood anywhere
in the West Bank or Gaza. The issue of settlements will
be worked out over the course of negotiations. But the
primary obstacle to peace is not settlements. That is
just a pretext for the Palestinians to avoid negotiations.
The primary obstacle to peace is the Arab world’s
refusal to acknowledge the Jewish people’s ancient
connection to the land of Israel, and the Palestinians’
insistence on the so-called right of return.
Today the Palestinian leadership is calling for an
independent Palestinian State, but insists that its own
people return to the Jewish State. That is a proposition
that no one who believes in the right of Israel to exist
could accept, because the only equation in political
science with mathematical certainty is that the socalled right of return equals the destruction of the State
of Israel. The idea that Israel will be flooded with
millions of Palestinians is a non-starter. The
international community and the Palestinian leadership
know it, but the Palestinian people do not hear it. This
gap between perception and reality is a major obstacle
to peace. The so-called right of return is the major
hurdle to achieving peace. Since the Palestinian
leadership refuses to tell the Palestinian people the

10

truth, the international community and the people
around this table have a responsibility to tell the
Palestinian people about the basic compromises that
they will have to make.
The many issues that remain outstanding can and
will be resolved only through direct negotiations
between the parties. Israel’s peace with Egypt was
negotiated, not imposed. Peace with Jordan was
negotiated, not imposed. An Israeli-Palestinian peace
must be negotiated; it cannot be imposed. Palestinian
unilateral action at the United Nations is no path to real
statehood; it is a march of folly. Today the Palestinians
are far from meeting the basic criteria for statehood,
including the test of effective control. The President of
the Palestinian Authority has zero authority in the Gaza
Strip. Before flying 9,000 kilometres to New York to
seek United Nations membership, President Abbas
should have driven 50 kilometres to Gaza, which he
has been unable to visit since 2007. In the same breath
that they claim that the State will be peace-loving,
Palestinian leaders speak of unity with Hamas, an
internationally recognized terrorist organization.
Hamas and a love of peace? There is no greater
contradiction in terms.
This month, on a fund-raising excursion of
terrorism with his Iranian patrons, Hamas leader Ismail
Haniyeh stood in front of an audience in Tehran and
said that “the correct strategy to liberate our country
and Jerusalem is violent resistance”. Under Hamas
rule, Gaza remains a launching ground for constant
rocket attacks targeting Israeli civilians that are fuelled
by a continuous flow of weapons from Iran and
elsewhere. Israel has a right to defend itself. As the
Palmer report made clear, the naval blockade is a
legitimate security measure for preventing weapons
from entering the Gaza sea.
When it is not attacking Israelis, Hamas is
oppressing its own people. In Gaza, civil society is
non-existent. Political opponents are tortured, women
are subjugated and children are used as suicide
bombers and human shields. Textbooks and television
glorify martyrdom and demonize the Jews. Incitement
against Israelis also continues in the West Bank, among
the official institutions of the Palestinian Authority,
which names its public squares after suicide bombers.
The unresolved questions about the future of a
Palestinian State cannot be simply swept under the
carpet. They go to the core of resolving our conflict.

11-56034

S/PV.6636

They have to be addressed. Let me be clear: for Israel,
the question is not whether we can accept a Palestinian
State; we can. The question is what the character of the
Palestinian State that emerges alongside us will be —
whether it will live in peace.
Palestinian unilateral action in the United Nations
breaches the Oslo Accords, the Interim Arrangements,
the Paris Protocol and other bilateral agreements that
form the basis of 40 spheres of Israeli-Palestinian
cooperation, all of which could be jeopardized by
unilateral action at the United Nations. This unilateral
initiative will raise expectations that cannot be met. It
is a recipe for instability and, potentially, violence.
Members of the international community should be
clear about the responsibility: you vote for it, you own
it. All those who vote for unilateral action and
recognition will be responsible for its consequences. At
this critical juncture, the Palestinians’ true friends will
encourage them to put aside the false idol of
unilateralism and get back to the hard work of direct
negotiations.
Speaking of friends, the many so-called Arab
champions of the Palestinians’ cause have a
responsibility to play a constructive role. Constructive
support from the Arab world is vital for building the
civic and economic structures necessary for real
Palestinian statehood and peace. Instead of simply
adding to the cause of State-bashing, the Palestinians’
true supporters will help advance State-building. Arab
donors provided just 20 per cent of international funds
for the Palestinian Authority’s regular budget last year.
Let me put this in perspective: last year Arab donations
to the regular Authority budget accounted for a little
more than half of what Saudi Prince Al-Waleed bin
Talal spent on his newest personal luxury jet. People in
Washington, London and Paris are struggling with an
economic downturn, but still providing the bulk of
support for Palestinian institutions, while Arab States,
saturated in petrodollars, do not even give the
Palestinians crumbs from the table.
In the Jewish tradition we are taught that
whosoever saves a single life saves an entire universe.
This sacred principle forms the backbone of Israel’s
democracy. It drives our Government’s policy. We
witnessed a clear reflection of those values last week.
All of Israel welcomed home our kidnapped soldier,
Gilad Shalit, after he had spent more than five years in
Hamas captivity. It was a moment of great joy, but it
came with tremendous costs. I would like to take this

11-56034

opportunity to thank the Secretary-General personally,
and the people around him. Some of the countries
represented here today played an important role in
Gilad Shalit’s release. For us, the supreme value of a
single human life justified releasing more than 1,000
terrorists and criminals covered in the blood of
innocents. The values inherent in such an act shine
bright in our region. Many took note. On Twitter, one
Syrian blogger, Soori Madsoos, wrote:
“Their Government is prepared to pay the
ultimate price for one citizen, while our
Government kills us like we were animals, and
our Arab neighbours say that it is an internal
matter”.
Time and again, Israel has shown that it is ready and
able to make bold and courageous decisions to preserve
life, to uphold human dignity and to pursue peace.
Sustainable peace must be negotiated, must be
nurtured and must be anchored in security. It must take
root in homes, schools and media in order to teach
tolerance and understanding and thus grow within
hearts and minds. It must be built on the foundation of
a younger generation that understands the compromises
necessary for peace. A brighter future for the Middle
East must be forged from within, when we are open
and honest about the challenges before us, and resolute
in our determination to meet them together.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes in
order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the text in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I now invite the Permanent Representative of the
United States of America and Member of President
Obama’s Cabinet, Her Excellency Ms. Susan Rice to
take the floor.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I wish to
thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his briefing.
I will begin with the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The
United States continues to work vigorously with the
parties, the Quartet and our international partners to
resume negotiations on the basis of the 23 September
Quartet statement. That statement provides a clear and
credible path back to the negotiating table, which is the
only path to achieve the two-State solution we all seek.

11

S/PV.6636

The Quartet statement reaffirms President
Obama’s vision for peace, as laid out in his May
remarks. President Abbas and Prime Minister
Netanyahu have each agreed to send negotiators to
Jerusalem for preparatory meetings with the Quartet
envoys on 26 October. Thus, our focus remains on
laying the groundwork for these and subsequent
meetings leading to the two parties’ exchanging
comprehensive proposals on territory and security by
the end of the year, as outlined in the Quartet’s
timeline.
We urge all members of the Council and all
Member States to unite to help to create a positive
climate for resuming negotiations. Ultimately, it is the
Israelis and the Palestinians who must live side by side.
Only they can reach agreement on the painful issues
that divide them: borders and security; refugees and
Jerusalem. We have been very clear that we believe
Palestinian efforts to seek Member State status at the
United Nations will not advance the peace process, but
rather will complicate, delay and perhaps derail
prospects for a negotiated settlement. Therefore, we
have consistently opposed such unilateral initiatives.
We will continue, at the same time, to exert every
effort to bring the parties back to the negotiating table.
Like every American Administration for decades,
the Obama Administration does not accept the
legitimacy of continued Israeli settlement activity. The
fate of existing settlements is one that must be dealt
with by the parties along with other permanent status
issues, including the status of Jerusalem. For that
reason, steps by the Government of Israel to advance
significant new construction in Givat Hamatos are
deeply disappointing.
The illegal trafficking of weapons in Gaza
continues to pose a serious threat to civilians in Gaza,
in Israel and in Egypt. It must be stopped.
With regard to Hamas, we reaffirm the
importance of fulfilling the Quartet’s principle’s
commitment to non-violence, recognition of Israel’s
right to exist and recognition of previous agreements.
We call again on Palestinians and Israelis to take
constructive actions to promote peace and to avoid
actions that complicate this process or undermine trust.
The United States is very pleased that Gilad
Shalit has finally been reunited with his family after
five long years in captivity.

12

I will now turn to the crisis in Syria. For more
than seven months, ordinary Syrians have taken to the
streets to demand respect for their most fundamental
human rights. The Al-Assad regime has met those
peaceful protests with brutal and escalating violence.
According to the United Nations, the death toll has
surpassed 3,000. It is tragic that Al-Assad’s barbaric
acts have recently been met by silence from this
Council.
The United States welcomes the Arab League’s
renewed efforts to stop the violence to allow the Syrian
people to exercise their rights to freedom of expression
and assembly and to bring about a peaceful transition
to democracy.
We are very sceptical, however, that the Al-Assad
regime has any intention of allowing the opposition to
meet in an environment free of intimidation. We again
call for full and unfettered access by credible,
professional observers, including human rights
monitors, the United Nations Human Rights Council’s
commission of inquiry and international observers.
In addition, we strongly deplore the violent
incursions and raids into Lebanon by Syrian security
forces that have resulted in death and injury.
Turning to Yemen: We welcome the Council’s
adoption on Friday of resolution 2014 (2011)
addressing the grave situation there. Each day that
passes without a peaceful and orderly transition of
power is another day that the Yemeni people are forced
to live in danger and instability. We again urge all
parties to cease violence and exercise maximum
restraint. We will continue to work intensively with the
international community to support the Yemeni
people’s aspirations for democracy and protection of
their basic human rights.
We are pleased that the Government of Lebanon
has reaffirmed that it will uphold Lebanon’s
international commitments, including Lebanon’s
agreement with the Special Tribunal for Lebanon. We
believe it is of utmost important that Lebanon fulfil its
funding obligations to the Special Tribunal within the
coming weeks. We remain deeply committed to the full
implementation of resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680
(2006) and 1701 (2006). The United States continues to
support the Lebanese Armed Forces’ ongoing efforts to
assert control and maintain stability in southern
Lebanon.

11-56034

S/PV.6636

Finally, the United Sates congratulates the
Tunisian people on the reported high turnout in
Sunday’s elections for a constituent assembly. This is a
milestone on the Tunisian people’s path from
dictatorship to a democratic Government founded upon
respect for the will of its citizens.
We look forward to working with the people and
Government of Tunisia, including the new Constituent
Assembly, over the next phase of their country’s
historic transition.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. E. Ahamed, Minister of State for External Affairs
of India, to take the floor.
Mr. Ahamed (India): At the outset, I would like
to convey our deep condolences to the Government and
the people of Saudi Arabia on the passing away of His
Royal Highness, the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia,
Sultan Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud. I would also like to
convey our solidarity with the Government and the
people of Turkey in dealing with the aftermath of the
devastating earthquake.
First of all, I would like to thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this open debate on the
Middle East, a region witnessing momentous
transformation. I also would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his comprehensive
briefing on developments in the region.
Clearly, the issue of Palestine has taken a
decisive turn in the history of the Middle East conflict
after President Mahmoud Abbas filed an application
with the Secretary-General on 23 September for
Palestine’s full membership to the United Nations.
Speaking on 24 September 2011 — a day after
President Abbas filed the application — my Prime
Minister, Manmohan Singh, said in the General
Assembly that India has been steadfast in its support
for the Palestinian people’s struggle for a sovereign,
independent, viable and united State of Palestine with
East Jerusalem as its capital, living within secure and
recognized borders side by side and at peace with
Israel, as per the relevant resolutions of this
Organization, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
Road Map. The Prime Minister added that we look
forward to welcoming Palestine as an equal Member of
the United Nations (see A/66/PV.22).
India recognized the Palestine Liberation
Organization as the sole legitimate representative of

11-56034

the Palestinian people in 1975, and its Office in New
Delhi was accorded full diplomatic recognition in
1980. India was the first non-Arab country to recognize
the State of Palestine, in 1988. We have maintained
diplomatic relations with Palestine for over two
decades now. It is also pertinent to note that Palestine
has been recognized by more than two thirds of the
membership of this Organization.
Obviously, the State of Palestine fulfils all
criteria mentioned in Article 4 of the Charter for
membership to this Organization. We therefore support
Palestine’s application and hope that the process will
be concluded expeditiously.
During my long political career, I have had the
honour to work closely with Palestinian leaders. I met
the undisputed leader of the Palestinian people, the late
President Yasser Arafat, on 17 September 2004 at
Ramallah, just a few months before he left his earthly
abode. At that meeting, I had the opportunity to
reiterate India’s solidarity with the Palestinian people
and support for their cause. He warmly recalled his
close relations with Indian leaders, particularly
Mrs. Indira Gandhi and Mr. Rajiv Gandhi, and
appreciated India’s unwavering support for the cause of
the Palestinian people. We have continued our
interactions with the Palestinian leadership under
President Abbas. He paid state visits to India in 2008
and 2010.
As the world’s largest democracy and arguably its
most diverse country, India recognizes the democratic
aspirations of all peoples, including those in the
Middle East. The call of the international community
for democracy and respect for fundamental rights will
sound hollow if the present impasse continues and the
Palestinians are denied their aspirations.
It is also our firm conviction that lasting peace
and security in the region can be achieved only through
peaceful dialogue, not through the use of force. In this
context we take note of the Quartet statement of
23 September, and we hope that the timelines indicated
in that statement will be realized.
The biggest stumbling block to direct
negotiations between the Israelis and the Palestinians
remains continuing settlement activity in the occupied
Palestinian territories. We call upon Israel to stop
settlement activities. That would facilitate the
resumption of negotiations, in which all final status
issues should be addressed.

13

S/PV.6636

We
cannot,
however,
make
Palestine’s
membership in the United Nations conditional upon a
peace agreement, for that would be legally untenable,
even while we support the resumption of direct talks to
resolve the outstanding issues.
We welcome the recent agreement between Israel
and Hamas on the exchange of prisoners. We hope it
will ease tension and build confidence. We also hope it
will pave the way for an early and significant easing of
restrictions on movement of goods and people into the
Gaza Strip, thereby addressing the dire humanitarian
situation there.
India, for its part, has continued its development
support to the Palestinian Authority. From the year
2009-2010, we enhanced our annual contribution to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to $1 million, in
addition to a special contribution of another $1 million
to UNRWA in response to a flash appeal in 2010.
During the past two years, India has also
contributed $10 million annually as untied budgetary
support to the Palestinian Authority. We are offering
100 slots to the Palestinian Authority for capacitybuilding and human resource development under our
technical and economic cooperation programme. With
our IBSA partners Brazil and South Africa, we have
also undertaken joint projects in Palestine, with a
sports complex having just been completed.
While the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is the most
serious one in the region, we need to be mindful that
resolution of that conflict by itself may not result in the
achievement of a comprehensive and durable peace in
the region. Other issues relating to Arab lands that
remain under occupation are equally important.
Progress on the Lebanese and Syrian tracks of the
Middle East peace process is therefore necessary for a
comprehensive and lasting peace in the region.
Developments in the Middle East since February
this year underline the need to reinvigorate the search
for this comprehensive peace, while the countries in
the region undertake inclusive political processes and
implement reforms to meet the legitimate aspirations of
their people. It is important that the grievances of the
people be addressed through dialogue and negotiations
rather than resort to arms.
It is the responsibility of all countries to create
conditions that enable their people to freely determine

14

their pathways to development. That is the essence of
democracy and fundamental human freedoms. No
action should be taken from outside that exacerbates
problems and gives space for the rise of extremism.
The international community should stand ready to
assist countries in their efforts while respecting the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
all countries. As my Prime Minister said in the General
Assembly on 24 September, societies cannot be
reordered from outside through military force.
Observance of the rule of law is as important in
international affairs as it is within countries.
Guided by these principles, India stands ready to
play its role in our collective endeavours to achieve a
just and comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
Mr. Berger (Germany): Germany offers its
condolences to the people of Turkey on the loss of
lives resulting from the massive earthquake on Sunday,
and to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for the passing of
His Royal Highness Crown Prince Sultan Bin
Abdulaziz Al-Saud.
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Lynn Pascoe for his briefing.
Let me mention also that Germany obviously
aligns itself with the statement to be delivered later on
behalf of the European Union.
After a long period of standstill in the Middle
East peace process, there is reason to hope that the
stalemate might be broken by preparatory meetings of
the Quartet with the parties on 26 October. As specified
by the Quartet, a first step would be to agree on an
agenda and method of proceeding in the negotiations.
After that, the parties will have to take the next step, to
come forward with comprehensive proposals on
territory and security.
As the Quartet also said in its statement, meetings
in themselves will establish the trust needed for
successful negotiations. And trust is key in order to
return to negotiations.
In this respect, we are extremely worried about
the recent Israeli steps to expand settlement activity.
The decision to advance the planning process on
thousands of additional housing units in the settlement
of Gilo and Givat Hamatos and plans to legalize illegal
outposts within Israeli law undermine the trust that is
needed for negotiations. They are not compatible with

11-56034

S/PV.6636

Road Map obligations and run counter to current
Quartet efforts.
We have called on the Government of Israel to
dispel any doubts about its interest in serious
negotiations. The imperative of trust should also be
taken into consideration when looking at the
Palestinian application for United Nations membership.
We are mindful of the responsibility entrusted to us in
the Committee on the Admission of New Members.
Let me very clear on this: Germany supports the
establishment of a Palestinian State. As a matter of
course, such a State will become a Member of the
United Nations. But it is also our responsibility in the
Council to give the Quartet’s current efforts and
actions the chance to bear fruit. There is no viable
alternative to the resumption of negotiations. The twoState solution can be achieved only through a peace
agreement between the parties. We want to see the
State of Israel and a sovereign, independent,
democratic, contiguous and viable State of Palestine
living side by side in peace and security.
Germany acknowledges the remarkable progress
made by the Palestinian Authority in building the
institutions of the future State of Palestine. In their
reports, the World Bank, the International Monetary
Fund and the United Nations have clearly stated that
the Palestinian Authority has crossed the threshold
towards being a functioning State in key sectors. We
commend the Palestinian Authority for demonstrating
this capability. Now the political process must catch up
with the progress made in State-building on the
ground.
Germany is relieved at the release of Staff
Sergeant Gilad Shalit. We hope that his release and the
related exchange of prisoners will give new momentum
to the Middle East peace process. In that regard, we
believe that now is the time to fully implement
resolution 1860 (2009), which calls for the
unconditional opening of crossings for goods and
people to and from Gaza, thereby preventing the illicit
trafficking of arms and ammunition.
Let me now turn briefly to the issue of Lebanon.
It is with great sadness that we heard that Judge
Antonio Cassese, the first President of the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon, passed away last Friday. The
loss of that eminent scholar will undoubtedly affect all
those who seek accountability and justice. In that
context, we would like to recall the statement made by

11-56034

His Excellency Najib Mikati, Prime Minister of
Lebanon, before the Council, when he reiterated
Lebanon’s commitment to all its international
obligations, including those relating to the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon.
In early 2011, Tunisians courageously stood up
against an autocratic regime that had repressed them
for decades. Nine months later, free elections are
taking place in Tunisia, for the first time since it gained
independence. Ninety per cent of those who registered
for elections have cast their ballot. That is an
impressive number. Peaceful, free and fair elections
provide an important role model for countries where
the Arab Spring has already made inroads and offer
tremendous encouragement where people take to the
streets seeking to live a better life in freedom and
dignity. Germany will continue to actively support
Tunisia through its transformation partnership.
Let me turn now to the question of Syria. On
4 October, two permanent members of the Council
vetoed a draft resolution on the situation in Syria that
condemned human rights violations, demanded an end
to the violence and called for an inclusive, Syrian-led
political process. The days that have passed since that
vote have shown that the strategy advocated by some
to give the Syrian regime more time has failed. Those
who delayed Council action with reference to their
bilateral efforts have not delivered. On the contrary:
the situation has further deteriorated. In a statement
made on 14 October, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Navi Pillay, voiced
her disappointment at the inaction of the Council. She
reminded the members of the international community
to take protective action in a collective and decisive
manner before the continual ruthless repression and
killings drove the country into a full-blown civil war.
Indifferent spectatorship is not an option. We still
think that the Council should send a strong message in
the form of a resolution. However, we are not going to
accept any equidistant approach that suggests that the
opposition could be as responsible for the violence as
is the Government. Only the Syrian people can decide
on the future of their country, and we therefore
welcome the various efforts undertaken by the Syrian
opposition to peacefully build a political platform. In
that respect, we note the creation of the Syrian
National Council as a positive step forward.

15

S/PV.6636

We also welcome the efforts undertaken by the
League of Arab States to convince Damascus to enter
into a meaningful dialogue with the opposition. The
Arab League has set a clear timeline for such a
dialogue. But it is clear that dialogue has to include all
of the opposition and that there can be no meaningful
dialogue as long as repression and killings of
demonstrators continue.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China is deeply saddened at the major loss of life and
property suffered by Turkey during the earthquake that
struck its eastern region. My Prime Minister, Mr. Wen
Jiabao, has already conveyed our condolences to the
Prime Minister of Turkey, and China is ready to extend
a helping hand.
I should like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, for his briefing.
I also listened very carefully to the statement made by
the representatives of Palestine and Israel.
The Middle East peace process is currently at an
impasse, which is a source of great concern to China.
We hope that all of the parties concerned will
demonstrate political will, and, on the basis of the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations, the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Road Map, settle disputes between Palestine
and Israel by political and diplomatic means, so that
the two countries can coexist in peace.
The issue of Israel’s settlements is the direct
cause of the current impasse in the peace talks and a
major obstacle to their resumption. China deeply
regrets the recent decision of Israel in connection with
new settlements in East Jerusalem, to which we are
opposed. We urge Israel to put an end to that project, to
cooperate actively with international peace efforts so as
to create conditions for building confidence between
the two sides and break the present impasse.
China welcomes the recent agreement between
the two sides on the exchange of prisoners, and we
appreciate the mediation efforts made by countries
such as Egypt and Germany in that respect. China
hopes that both sides will seize this opportunity to
continue to take constructive steps to ease tensions and
minimize differences in order to restart the peace talks.
Efforts to solve the Middle East problem require
the strong support and help of the international
community. China welcomes and supports all efforts

16

aimed at minimizing differences and promoting the
relaunching of dialogue and negotiations.
On 26 October, the Quartet will hold talks with
Palestine and Israel separately on the resumption of
direct talks. We hope that all parties concerned will
work together for the early resumption of talks and the
achievement of substantive results in that context.
China is in favour of the Council’s playing a greater
role in connection with the question of the Middle
East.
China was among the first to recognize the State
of Palestine. We have always been supportive of
Palestine’s just cause to establish an independent State.
We support the vision of two States realized through
political negotiations and the establishment of a fully
sovereign, independent State of Palestine based on the
1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.
China supports Palestine’s membership in the United
Nations.
To achieve a comprehensive, lasting and just
peace in the Middle East, there must be progress on all
tracks of the peace process, including the talks between
Lebanon and Israel and between Israel and Syria. All
parties concerned should create conditions for
diplomatic negotiations with a view to ending the
confrontations and tensions that have plagued this
region for too long.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Let me join previous
speakers in expressing our sympathy and solidarity to
the Turkish people and Government for the tragic loss
of lives caused by the earthquake that struck eastern
Turkey, and to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on the
passing of Prince Sultan Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for
his briefing. I also thank the Permanent Representative
of Israel and the Permanent Observer of Palestine for
their statements.
It is not often that we can, at these regular
briefings, welcome positive developments on the
Israeli-Palestinian issue. So let me begin by welcoming
the exchange of prisoners and the orderly manner in
which the agreement that made it possible was
implemented. We hope this positive development can
be translated into further cooperation, in particular
concerning the situation in Gaza. Fully lifting the
blockade without prejudice to legitimate Israeli

11-56034

S/PV.6636

security concerns is vital to allow for life to go back to
normal and reconstruction to take place.
Brazil believes that the time has come for
Palestine to be fully represented at the United Nations.
We hope the Council can take a decision on the
Palestinian application very soon. The ultimate
demonstration that Palestine is a peace-loving State is
precisely the decision to turn to international law and
to the United Nations to realize its legitimate right to
self-determination. The recognition of the Palestinian
people’s legitimate right to sovereignty and selfdetermination increases the possibilities of peace
between Israel and Palestine.
While supporting the Palestinian aspiration,
Brazil remains convinced that a negotiating process, in
which Israel’s legitimate concerns for security are duly
taken into account, is the way to achieve lasting peace
in the Middle East.
Negotiations, however, must be meaningful and
minimally balanced. International recognition of the
Palestinian State and its admission in the United
Nations as a full Member can help reduce the
asymmetry that at present characterizes relations
between the parties. No sustainable agreement can be
reached if one side is too weak and is constantly
undermined by the actions of the other on the ground.
In this regard, the announcements of new
settlements in occupied East Jerusalem are not only
against international law, but are also detrimental to the
prospects for resuming negotiations. Coming just days
after the Quartet called for the resumption of
negotiations on the basis of Security Council
resolutions and the obligations under the Road Map,
they downgrade our hopes and contradict Israel’s
proclaimed disposition to negotiate a viable peace.
The continuation of settlement activity in the
occupied Palestinian Territories destroys the very
feasibility of a two-State solution. It is not reasonable
to expect the Palestinians to keep negotiating as the
reality on the ground is being deeply and, some fear,
irreversibly altered. This is particularly worrisome in
East Jerusalem and in small and medium settlements
deep into the West Bank. In the current circumstances,
therefore, strong political commitment is needed for
the peace process to advance. This includes putting a
halt to and reversing settlement activity.

11-56034

The Quartet must impress upon the parties the
need to abide by the steps and timeframe set out in the
statement of 23 September. Given the link many
countries see between the deliberations in the Council
on Palestine’s request for membership and the
Quartet’s efforts for the resumption of peace
negotiations, it is important that the Council be briefed
by the Quartet on progress made, or the lack thereof.
As Brazil’s Foreign Minister Antonio Patriota
stated in our debate on preventive diplomacy in
September, “It behoves the Security Council to find
solutions that can both resolve the challenges posed by
specific situations of crisis and, at the same time,
strengthen the multilateral system itself” (see
S/PV.6621, p. 19).
The wave of change that has swept the Middle
East and Northern Africa lends an even greater sense of
urgency to the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian
people for a State of their own. In this pressing
issue — perhaps one of the most important issues
regarding international peace and security today — this
Council must also be on the right side of history.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset we wish to express our
condolences to Turkey with respect to the destructive
earthquake that hit the country, which has claimed
human lives.
We are grateful to Mr. Pascoe for his briefing on
developments in the Middle East. We share his
concerns with respect to the stalemate in the process of
a Middle East settlement.
As of today, resumption of direct IsraeliPalestinian talks continues to be one of the most
pressing tasks. It is distressing that the parties have yet
to progress towards establishing an atmosphere of
mutual trust, which is an important condition for a
serious and productive dialogue.
At the same time, one must be encouraged by the
fact that despite certain pessimistic forecasts, this past
September did not lead to any major upheavals. What
is more, the Quartet of Middle East mediators has
stepped up its work, within which intensive efforts are
under way to narrow the differences of the parties. We
would like to highlight the Quartet’s statement adopted
on 23 September in New York, reaffirming the
importance and inviolability of the entire international
legal basis for the Middle East settlement, including

17

S/PV.6636

the well-known Security Council resolutions, the
Madrid principles — including the key principle of
land for peace — and the Road Map and previous
agreements between the parties.
Nevertheless, the authorities in Israel, in violation
of the norms and principles of international law and
ignoring the view of members of the Quartet, continue
to authorize the construction of more and more housing
units in the occupied territories. We are particularly
concerned that such decisions are adopted at a crucial
time for the future of the peace process. We believe
that settlement activities are a primary impediment to a
two-State solution. They undermine the painstaking
efforts of the international community to relaunch the
dialogue and dash existing hopes.
Now more than ever, the parties need to take
steps towards each other, and not unilateral steps that
change the situation on the ground and prejudice the
final parameters for a settlement. Israel must reassess
its plans for construction in East Jerusalem and cease
its demolition of Palestinian structures.
Despite the troublesome situation in the
Palestinian-Israeli area, Russia, as a member of the
Quartet, together with its partners, is prepared to use
any opportunity to advance towards peace in the
region. We anticipate that the Quartet’s planned
contacts on 26 October with representatives of the
parties will help get the peace process moving again.
With respect to the official application of
Palestine to the United Nations for membership, we
believe that this bid is logical and legitimate. We
recognized the Palestinian State as early as 1988 and
are prepared to support the request of the Palestinians
again. We believe their State meets all criteria in the
United Nations Charter with respect to future Members
of the world Organization.
Our view is that Palestine’s application for
membership in no way contradicts the negotiated peace
process or diminish its prospects. Quite the contrary; it
is complementary. It is important that the leadership of
the Palestine National Authority has unequivocally and
repeatedly emphasized its readiness to continue the
quest for ways to resume negotiations.
Our sense is that despite the dire calls since
September in the relations between the parties there
has been some positive points. This is seen in the
exchange of the Israeli soldier, Gilad Shalit, for more

18

than one thousand Palestinian prisoners. That is an
important humanitarian gesture of goodwill that
contributes to an overall improvement of the situation
in the region and of the atmosphere in terms of the
Palestinian-Israeli relationship. The Russian Federation
has supported the mediation efforts in this area,
including during our contacts with the leadership of
Hamas.
This arrangement gives us every reason to
anticipate that the parties will be able to move towards
addressing other sensitive issues as well, above all in
terms of improving the humanitarian situation in the
Gaza Strip. We share the view of those who call for
lifting all restrictions on the movement of goods in and
out of Gaza, particularly with respect to building
materials.
The inter-Palestinian reconciliation continues to
be an imperative. The leaders of all Palestinian forces,
especially Fatah and Hamas, need to step up their
efforts to consolidate the Palestinian ranks. We would
also like to call for progress on other tracks of a
Middle East settlement, including the Syrian and
Lebanese tracks. Without advancing on them, a lasting,
comprehensive and just settlement in the Middle East
is not possible.
With respect to the situation in Syria, which some
colleagues have touched upon, the Security Council
has been able and will continue to be able to put in its
constructive word, as was just done with respect to
Yemen. The Russian-Chinese draft resolution on the
situation in Syria, which is aimed at a settlement and
not at inciting conflict, continues to be available to
Council members. It is clear that the strategy of certain
members of the international community with respect
to Syria, consistiing of threats and pressure that worsen
the situation in the country through sanctions, does not
work. We are encouraged by recent initiatives and steps
proposed by the League of Arab States with regard to
the Syrian Arab Republic.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): At the
outset, I wish to offer my Government’s condolences
for yesterday’s earthquake in the Turkish city of Van.
Our thoughts are with the victims and their families.
My Government stands ready to support the
Government of Turkey in any way that it can.
I wish also to express my Government’s sincere
condolences to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and its

11-56034

S/PV.6636

people following the passing of His Royal Highness
Prince Sultan Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud.
This is a moment of huge opportunity for the
people of the Middle East to build more open, free and
prosperous societies. Yesterday, Tunisians cast their
votes in the first ever democratic elections to appoint
an Assembly to draft the country’s new constitution. At
the same time, the new Libyan authorities declared
liberation from 42 years of ruthless dictatorship. For
Tunisia, Libya and, indeed, Egypt, the road ahead will
be difficult, but the change under way in those
countries, as well as more broadly in the region, has
shown that demands for political and economic
freedom will spread more widely and by themselves,
not because Western nations advocate them, but
because they are the natural aspirations of people
everywhere. We shall continue to work in partnership
with those forging a new future for their countries.
The courage and determination of the Tunisian,
Libya and Egyptian peoples and the changes taking
place in their nations serve both as an inspiration to the
rest of region and a warning to the dictatorships that
continue to brutally crush the legitimate aspirations of
their peoples. The lesson of the last nine months has
been that regimes that use violence to oppress their
peoples instead of responding to their legitimate
demands will not survive. We are therefore deeply
disappointed that, owing to the use of the veto by two
members, the Security Council was incapable earlier
this month of appropriately censuring the Syrian
regime, which continues to kill, brutalize and torture
its people at the same rate that it has been doing for the
past seven months.
There is no sign of the reforms that Assad has
been promising, nor any remorse for the tactics that
have been used by the regime, which may amount to
crimes against humanity. It is a worrying state of
affairs when Iran’s leadership, a regime that has itself
crushed the rights of the people, is able to voice a
greater sense of condemnation than this Council. It is
time that members of the Security Council assume their
responsibilities and take the strong collective action
that is required if there is to be any hope of deterring
the Syrian regime from its violent course.
In contrast, we are pleased at the unanimous
adoption on 21 October of resolution 2014 (2011) on
Yemen. President Saleh must now heed the calls of the
Council and the wider international community. He

11-56034

must cease the bloodshed and the human rights
violations and immediately sign the Gulf Cooperation
Council initiative that will set into motion a transition
of power.
The changes taking place across the Middle East
are bringing into sharp focus the unfulfilled aspirations
of the Palestinian people. They must realize their goal
of an independent, viable State of Palestine, just as
others in the region are demanding, and in some cases
securing, their legitimate rights. At this critical and
sensitive juncture for the region and the Middle East
peace process, progress in securing a democratic
peaceful State of Palestine living side by side with
Israel in peace and security is urgent and essential.
Speaking on behalf of the United Kingdom, as a
friend of the Israeli and Palestinian peoples, I wish to
make three points. First, the Quartet statement of
23 September set out a time frame for negotiations to
be concluded over the coming 12 months on the basis
of the well-known parameters — two States, based on
the 1967 borders, with mutually agreed land swaps;
security arrangements that protect Palestinian
sovereignty
whilst
also
providing
sufficient
reassurance to Israel; Jerusalem as the capital of both
States; and a just, fair and agreed solution for refugees.
It is time now for both parties to fully commit to direct
negotiations within this framework and to make the
bold compromises required to realize the goal we all
want to see. We fully support the efforts of the Quartet
envoys to restart talks, including through the important
meetings with the parties in Jerusalem on 26 October.
Secondly, settlement activity must stop. We
condemn the recent Israeli decisions to expand
construction in the settlements of Mordot Gilo and
Givat Hamatos. If implemented, those constructions
would further erode the viability of a future Palestinian
State. The proposed constructions in Givat Hamatos
would cut the geographic contiguity between East
Jerusalem and Bethlehem.
Settlement construction, including in East
Jerusalem, is an obstacle to peace and erodes the space
for meaningful negotiations on final status issues,
including the status of Jerusalem. It undermines trust
and is illegal under international law. It should stop.
The Israeli Government should abandon its
construction plans, and the time has come for the
Israeli Government to stop merely talking about its
readiness to resume negotiations and instead take the

19

S/PV.6636

action necessary to inspire the confidence that will
bring about meaningful negotiations.

the initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council (see
resolution 2014 (2011)).

Thirdly, we welcome the release of Israeli soldier
Gilad Shalit. His long captivity and the lack of access
by the Red Cross were unjustifiable. There must now
be a sustainable and complete end to violence
emanating from Gaza. There must also be an easing of
restrictions on the flow of goods and personnel in and
out of Gaza. The status quo only breeds resentment,
radicalism and violence. An improved Gazan economy
is both essential to the people of Gaza and in Israel’s
long-term security interests.

In Syria, leaders who have lost all legitimacy are
hanging on to power and dragging their country into a
bloody spiral of violence. The Syrian people are
already mourning more than 3,000 victims. Tens of
thousands of peaceful demonstrators have been torn
from their families, held in secret and tortured. Those
responsible for this violence will be held accountable
to justice for their actions. Repression must end so that
Syrian can engage in the peaceful transition sought by
the Syrian people. That is the only way to restore
stability to Syria and preserve stability in the region,
which is threatened by Syrian incursions in Lebanon,
the flow of refugees into neighbouring countries and
attempts by the Syrian regime to exploit Palestinian
claims.

There is no time to waste in making progress
towards peace. Without it, history demonstrates that the
most likely outcome is backsliding towards violence.
The leaders of both sides must demonstrate the
leadership required to ensure the outcome that both
their peoples want.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
also like to express my condolences to the Republic of
Turkey for the earthquake that has just struck it. We
also offer condolences to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
on the death of Crown Prince Sultan Bin Abdulaziz
Al-Saud.
I thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his statement and I
would like to make the following points. First of all,
three months ago, France articulated here the desire
that the legitimate aspirations expressed by the peoples
of the region for freedom and democracy should be
translated into reality swiftly and peacefully. Today,
Egypt, Tunisia and Libya are facing the many
challenges involved in building a democracy in civil
harmony and with respect for pluralism, and France
will continue to provide them with all of its support.
We are pleased that Tunisians turned out to the polls in
great numbers yesterday to vote on the political future
of their country.
A new chapter is also opening for Libya. We call
on the National Transitional Council to continue to
work towards a democratic and pluralistic Libya in the
context of respect for the rule of law, the fight against
impunity and respect for fundamental freedoms.
We hope that a peaceful political transition will
soon take place in Yemen. The Council fulfilled its
responsibilities on Friday in calling on President Saleh
to carry out a peaceful transfer of power on the basis of

20

The members of the Council that have opposed or
voted against a draft resolution of the Council will
have to explain to history and to Syrian, international
and domestic public opinion what they are offering
specifically to bring an end to the bloodshed. This is no
longer the time for words, to which the regime is not
listening in any case. We must take action. Opting for
Security Council paralysis is tantamount to supporting
the Al-Assad regime and taking his side. The Syrian
people understand that.
In this volatile context, parties must show the
greatest restraint with respect to Lebanon and continue
to cooperate within the framework of the Tripartite
Commission to prevent any new mishap along the Blue
Line. We reiterate our appeal to the Lebanese
Government to honour all its international obligations,
in particular those concerning the Special Tribunal and
resolution 1701 (2006).
The demands of the Palestinian people are every
bit as legitimate as those expressed throughout the
region. It is legitimate and natural for the Palestinian
people to ask for a Palestinian State to be established,
while the two-State solution and the Palestinian
people’s right to self-determination enjoy the
consensus of the international community. It is in that
context that President Abbas submitted a request for
admission as a full Member of the United Nations on
23 September. I will not dwell on our consideration of
that request, which is under way in the Committee on
the Admission of New Members and will soon be
reported on to the Security Council.

11-56034

S/PV.6636

Everyone knows, however, that the path to
admission to the United Nations is strewn with
obstacles. That is why, on 21 September, the President
of the French Republic proposed an intermediate stage
that could generate concrete progress for the
Palestinians by elevating the status of Palestine in the
United Nations to that of Observer State. That is the
best way currently available to emerge from the
impasse.
A concrete response to Palestinian demands will
require the establishment of political conditions that
would enable the emergence of the Palestinian State.
That is what we must work on as a priority. To that
end, the President of the French Republic called for a
change of methodology, on the basis of his conviction
that circumventing multilateral forums like the
Security Council or eschewing the support of regional
and European partners, inter alia, is not working. We
must also stress the need for a credible framework,
such as the parameters defined by the Europeans here
in February or those announced by President Obama in
May. Such a credible framework must be based on a
clear timeline for negotiations in order to allow the
parties to resume their talks on a sound basis and
remove all preconditions.
On 23 September, the Quartet set such a timeline
for negotiations. We welcome the parties’ positive
response to it. In two days, Palestinian and Israeli
representatives will meet with members of the Quartet
in Jerusalem in a new attempt to relaunch direct
negotiations, which will begin with an initial phase on
borders and security and conclude with an agreement
on all of final status issues within a year. The chances
of success are slim because trust between the parties
has been deeply shaken. That is why the international
community must pool its efforts and unanimously call
on both parties to refrain from all provocation. France
proposes the convening of a donor conference in Paris
to help relaunch the process and strengthen Palestinian
institutions.
In that context, we condemn once again the
recent announcement of the expansion of Israeli
settlements, which undermine peace efforts and hinder
the achievement of the two-State solution. Following
the decision to build in Gilo, taken following the
Quartet declaration, a new project has been announced
for construction in Givat Hamatos. The project
threatens the contiguity of Palestinian territories
between East Jerusalem and the West Bank and directly

11-56034

threatens the possible establishment of a two-State
solution, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States.
The announcement comes across not only as a
provocation aimed at undermining trust, but also as a
deliberate effort to make the creation of a Palestinian
State impossible. How often must we reiterate that the
construction of settlements in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem is a blatant violation of international law and
relevant Security Council resolutions. Israel must cease
all settlement activity and abandon the projects it has
announced. Similarly, we can only condemn a recent
decision to legalize the outposts.
The settlements have become a central symbol of
the conflict and the concrete denial of any discourse on
the quest for a peaceful solution. However, we
welcome the agreement that freed Gilad Shalit and
Palestinian prisoners. We hope that the agreement will
allow the Palestinian reconciliation process to move
forward under the authority of President Abbas and in
the context of commitments made by the Palestine
Liberation Organization and recalled on 21 September
before the General Assembly (see A/66/PV.11).
Gaza cannot be excised from the effort to
establish a concrete basis for a Palestinian State. In that
regard, the full implementation of resolution 1860
(2009) — including the lifting of the blockade imposed
on the people of Gaza and an end to the unacceptable
shelling of Israeli territory — remains necessary.
In conclusion, the peoples of the region are
demanding the right to express themselves and to
participate in shaping their own destinies. The Council
heard the appeals from the people of Libya and Yemen
and responded clearly. The situation in Syria can be
treated no differently, and the Council must break its
own silence, awake from its torpor and complacency,
and exert the necessary pressure on the Syrian regime.
I would echo the words of the President of the
French Republic to the General Assembly that the
“spring of the Arab peoples imposes on us the moral
and political obligation at last to find a solution to the
Middle East conflict” (A/66/PV.11, pp. 22-23). The
Council, mandated by the Charter to maintain
international peace and security, cannot be exempt
from that obligation.
Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Madame, for having convened this important
meeting under your presidency. Gabon wishes to echo
the messages of condolence to the Government of

21

S/PV.6636

Turkey in the aftermath of the earthquake that struck
the eastern part of the country, and to the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia on the demise of its Crown Prince. I also
thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his briefing
on the situation in the Middle East.
With respect to the Palestinian issue, my
delegation wishes again to stress, as it has always done
in previous statements on this matter, that, alongside
many other countries, it shares the fundamental goal of
the existence of two States, Israel and Palestine, living
in peace and security within recognized borders.
Reaching that goal and achieving lasting peace entails
working within the framework established by the
international community, within which the Quartet is
endeavouring to bring together the two parties. From
our perspective, it is against that backdrop that
Palestine’s application to become a Member State
should be considered
My delegation would like to reiterate its
appreciation for the efforts of the international
community, especially the Quartet’s latest proposal
aimed at relauching the peace process between Israel
and Palestine, and in particular the next scheduled
meeting between the Quartet and the parties. Although
it is true that the Quartet’s proposals aim largely at a
timetable for continuing talks in the process, this new
initiative nevertheless has the merit of laying the
foundations for the resumption of direct negotiations
between Israel and Palestine, which have been at an
impasse since the fall of 2010.
My delegation hopes that the next meeting
between the Quartet and the parties sets a course
towards the resumption of negotiations on final status
issues, namely, borders, Jewish settlements, the fate of
Palestinian refugees and the status of Jerusalem. We
therefore call on the parties to refrain from any actions
that undermine trust among them and have a negative
impact on the restart of the negotiations.

Palestinian prisoners. We commend the role played by
Egyptian and German diplomacy in reaching that
agreement.
With regard to other situations in the region, I
should like first to turn to Libya. In that connection,
the developments of recent days should lead us to work
together with the National Transitional Council to
achieve peace, rebuild the country and re-establish
security.
We also commend the way in which Tunisians
have set in motion the process for establishing the
basis for democracy and development in that country.
With regard to Lebanon, my delegation welcomes
the calm in the area of operation of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon. We emphasize the need for
strict respect for resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701
(2006). We also underscore the need for the cessation
of violations of Lebanese airspace, which we believe to
be unacceptable.
Lastly, with regard to Yemen, we join the appeal
launched by the Secretary-General for a genuine
dialogue in order to bring an end to the deterioration of
the security and humanitarian situations in that country.
The efforts made to that end by the Gulf Cooperation
Council should be supported.
Mr. Gumbi (South Africa): My delegation
expresses its appreciation to Under-Secretary-General
Lynn Pascoe for his briefing to the Security Council.
We associate ourselves with the statement to be
delivered later today by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
We also wish to thank the Ambassadors of
Palestine and Israel for their statements.

Establishing trust also entails respect for
international law and the resolutions of the Security
Council. The announcement of new settlements and the
blockade of Gaza are not conducive to an atmosphere
for the resumption of negotiations. We condemn the
most recent announcements in that regard.

The Arab Spring has prompted the Council to
consider decisive actions in a number of cases. Yet, in
the matter of the longest-standing item on our agenda
pertaining to the Middle East, we remain paralyzed by
inaction. We meet every month to discuss the situation
in the Middle East. For the past several years,
statements made around the table have followed
similar lines. Yet, there is no real movement towards a
final settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian question.

I cannot fail to commend the prisoner-exchange
agreement that was recently concluded between Israel
and the Palestinians, which led, on 18 October, to the
release of Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit as well as

Since our latest debate (see S/PV.6623) there
have been significant developments related to the
Palestinian-Israeli question, including the Palestinian
application for full membership of the United Nations,

22

11-56034

S/PV.6636

the Quartet proposal for resuscitating direct
negotiations, and the exchange of prisoners. However,
the significance of those developments continues to be
diminished by Israel’s continued building of illegal
settlements.
On 23 September, President Abbas submitted an
application for Palestine’s full membership of the
United Nations. The near universal excitement and
support that accompanied that historic event is an
indication of how important the issue of Palestinian
statehood is, not just for the Palestinians but, in fact,
for the rest of the world. In that connection, South
Africa wishes to reaffirm its conviction that Palestine
is a peace-loving State and that it is willing and able to
carry out its obligations under the Charter of the
United Nations.
Furthermore, South Africa believes that the issue
of Palestine’s membership of the United Nations
should be resolved expeditiously and in accordance
with the provisions of the Charter, the relevant rules of
procedure of the General Assembly and the provisional
rules of procedure of the Security Council. Above all,
South Africa believes that we cannot make Palestine’s
membership of the United Nations conditional upon a
peace agreement.
Mindful of the political sensitivities inherent in
that process, we believe that it is now more important
than ever that we act in a manner that befits the stature
of the Council and recommend Palestine’s full
membership of the United Nations. In addition, the
Council should further fulfil its obligations under the
Charter and simultaneously resuscitate the negotiations
process, with the aim of achieving a two-State solution.
While the Quartet proposal for negotiations is
welcome, and, in fact, long overdue, we should recall
that we have had concrete time frames for those
negotiations before. However, every time, the parties
have fallen short of an agreement within a given time
frame. We hope that the parties will this time commit
themselves to finding a solution even earlier than the
envisaged end of 2012. We also call on those countries
that have influence on the parties to encourage them to
participate in the negotiations in good faith and without
preconditions or changing the parameters of a final
outcome.
The single obstacle to the negotiations is clearly
the incessant building of illegal settlements by Israel.
Just last month, after the promulgation of the Quartet

11-56034

blueprint, the Government of Israel defied unanimous
calls from the Council and the Quartet, and announced
its intention to construct 1,100 new units in the
settlement of Gilo. Certainly, that regressive act alters
facts on the ground and the parameters of final status
issues. That, not the Palestinian application for
membership of the United Nations, is an obstacle to
peace.
South Africa welcomes the recent agreement on
prisoner swaps. The agreement, which the SecretaryGeneral described as a significant humanitarian
breakthrough, is a positive step towards cooperation
between Israel and Palestine. We hope that those who
have been released will be allowed to live normal lives
without persecution, and that the Israeli Government
will fulfil its obligation to facilitate the release of all
the remaining prisoners as soon as possible. The
Government of Israel must also fulfil its obligations
under international humanitarian law with regard to the
remaining Palestinian political prisoners — by
ensuring their safety, allowing access to them by
family members and respecting the basic human rights
of the prisoners.
We reiterate our active concern about the abuse of
the human rights of Palestinian children and about their
detention. Needless to say, we are all very much aware
of the long-lasting adverse psychological effects that
such abuses will have on this vulnerable group. In that
regard, a 12 June statement by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East cited in the report of the Special Rapporteur
on the situation of human rights in the Palestinian
territories occupied since 1967 states that
“The impact of home demolitions on children can
be particularly devastating. Many children affected
by demolitions show signs of post-traumatic stress
disorder, depression and anxiety.” (see A/66/358,
para. 31 (c))
A few days ago, in a statement to the Third
Committee of the General Assembly, the Special
Rapporteur expressed concern about reports of
violence against Palestinian children, including their
arrest and detention by Israeli military authorities. We
regret that there has been an increase in detentions of
minors in recent years. Again, we call on Israel to fulfil
its obligations under international human rights and
humanitarian law and to protect the rights of children.

23

S/PV.6636

South Africa looks forward to welcoming
Palestine, sooner rather than later, as the 194th
Member of the United Nations. We also hope that the
process will achieve its stated objectives as soon as
possible and ultimately bring about lasting peace
between Israel and Palestine. My delegation looks
forward to meaningful progress that will bring us
closer to a comprehensive and lasting peace in the
Middle East region. In that connection, South Africa
will continue to contribute in any way that can lead to
the resolution of the Middle East problem in all of its
aspects.
Last, but by no means least, I would like to add
the voice of my delegation in pledging solidarity with
the people of Turkey in the aftermath of the natural
calamity that befell their country yesterday. Likewise,
we convey our sympathy to the people of Saudi Arabia
during this period of grief over the passing of their
Crown Prince.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, allow me to join others in expressing our
deepest condolences to the Government and people of
Turkey in the aftermath of the earthquake in the city of
Van yesterday, as well as to the Government and
people of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on the death of
Crown Prince Sultan Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud.
Allow me also to thank Under-Secretary-General
Lynn Pascoe for his comprehensive briefing. We
further thank the Permanent Representative of Israel,
His Excellency Mr. Ron Prosor, and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine, His Excellency Mr. Riyad
Mansour, for their contributions to today’s debate.
Bosnia and Herzegovina understands the request
for membership in the United Nations that was
submitted to the Secretary-General on 23 September as
an aspiration of the Palestinian people for their own
statehood. It is also our understanding that the entire
international community would like to see the
realization of a two-State solution, with a secure State
of Israel and an independent State of Palestine living
side by side in peace and security. The only way to
bring about a just and lasting solution to the conflict is
through direct negotiations between the Israelis and the
Palestinians on the basis of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Road
Map, the agreements previously reached by the parties
and the Arab Peace Initiative.

24

Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches particular
importance to the determination of the Quartet to
actively seek a comprehensive resolution of the Middle
East conflict. In that context, we take note of the
Quartet’s statement issued on 23 September and the
proposed timetable for the resumption of credible
negotiations. We are all aware of the complex situation
in which the negotiations must resume, but as we have
previously stated, it is in the best interest of not only
the Israelis and the Palestinians, but also the peoples of
the region and beyond.
The continuation of settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, continues to pose a serious obstacle on the
road to comprehensive peace. Those activities are
illegal under international law and are contrary to
Israel’s obligations under the Road Map. We therefore
call upon Israel to respond positively to the appeals of
the international community and to end all settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem. We also reiterate our view
that the status of Jerusalem is a final status issue that
must be resolved through negotiations between the
parties.
The humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip
continues to be of great concern. We reiterate our
appeal for the immediate, sustained and unconditional
opening of crossings for the flow of humanitarian aid,
commercial goods and persons to and from Gaza, in
accordance with resolution 1860 (2009). Israel’s
security concerns, including a complete stop to
violence, must also be addressed.
My delegation is aware of the tremendous efforts
required from both sides in order to return to the table
and get the negotiation process moving. A number of
obstacles must be overcome, but we believe that good
political will and a strong sense of political
responsibility can help to overcome those hurdles.
Even small steps in the right direction can contribute to
confidence-building and the creation of the general
environment necessary for successful negotiations. In
that context, we welcome the recent announcement and
conduct of the prisoner exchange. We appreciate the
efforts of all those who have contributed to the
agreement, including the Egyptian and German
negotiators. In that connection, we express our sincere
belief that a just, comprehensive and lasting settlement
in the Middle East is possible. We therefore urge both

11-56034

S/PV.6636

parties to make an extra effort and to seize the
opportunity to overcome obstacles.
Allow me to conclude by turning briefly to the
situations in Yemen and Syria. In Yemen, regrettably,
the deadlock has been costly, the death toll has been
rising, the economy is ruined, violence is flaring and
some provinces have fallen out of Government control.
Bosnia and Herzegovina strongly condemns all human
rights violations and emphasizes that all who commit
them must be held responsible. We express our hope
that the transfer of power will begin as soon as
possible, and we reiterate our support for an inclusive
Yemeni-led process of transition.
The situation in Syria remains a source of deep
concern and carries with it a real risk of greater
violence and civil war. Once again, we strongly
condemn the continued violence and use of force and
urge the Syrian authorities to immediately stop such
actions. We also reiterate our firm position that all
those responsible for committing crimes must be
brought to justice and held accountable. Bosnia and
Herzegovina restates its support for Syria’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity. We still believe that an
inclusive, Syrian-led dialogue and the implementation
of the announced reforms are the keys to resolving the
crisis.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): At the outset, I would like
to thank Mr. Pascoe for his briefing.
Allow me to join my colleagues in extending my
condolences to the Government and people of Turkey
on the victims of yesterday’s earthquake, and to the
Government and people of Saudi Arabia on the passing
away of His Royal Highness Crown Prince Sultan Bin
Abdulaziz Al-Saud.
It is clear that there can be no final and durable
solution to the Palestine question without real and
genuine negotiations on final status issues, such as
Jerusalem, refugees, settlements, water and security.
That was repeatedly emphasized by President
Mahmoud Abbas before and after submitting the
request of the State of Palestine for membership in the
Organization. That request should continue to be dealt
with by the Council solely on the basis of its objective
merits, in accordance with the 1948 advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice on the admission
of new Members.

11-56034

The examination of the request by the Security
Council should therefore in no way be linked to the
Quartet activity, or subordinated to the course of the
negotiation process and its vicissitudes. More
fundamental, the question of the recognition of
Palestinian statehood cannot and should not be
subjected to the outcome of negotiations between
Palestinians and Israelis. Otherwise, Palestinian
statehood would be made dependent on the approval of
Israel. In other words, the occupying Power would be
granted a right of veto over the right to selfdetermination of the Palestinian people, a right that the
General Assembly has recognized as inalienable since
1974.
Despite all its shortcomings, let me now welcome
the Quartet’s statement of 23 September. Since the
Quartet reiterated the obligations of both parties under
the Road Map, it might be warranted to recall that,
with regard to security, the Road Map provides that the
“Government of Israel takes no actions
undermining trust, including deportations, attack
on civilians, confiscation and/or demolition of
Palestinian homes and property, as a punitive
measure or to facilitate Israeli construction”.
As for settlements, the Road Map provides that
“the Government of Israel immediately dismantles
settlement outposts erected since March 2001,” and
provides that “consistent with the Mitchell Report, the
Government of Israel freezes all settlement activity
(including
natural
growth
of
settlements)”.
Furthermore, the Quartet statement of 23 September
calls upon the parties to refrain from provocative
actions if negotiations are to be effective.
On 29 September, less than a week after the
Quartet statement was issued, Israeli authorities
approved a plan to build 1,100 housing units in the
settlement of Gilo, on land originally expropriated
mainly from the Palestinian village of Beit Jala. Is this
not clearly inconsistent with their Road Map
obligations? Is this not clearly provocative?
On 14 October, Israeli authorities approved a plan
for the construction of 2,610 units in the settlement of
Givat Hamatos, on land illegally annexed from Beit
Safafa and Bethlehem, further inserting East Jerusalem
and cutting it off from the rest of the West Bank. Is that
not clearly inconsistent with the Road Map
obligations? Is this not clearly provocative?

25

S/PV.6636

Since 23 September, Israel has unrelentingly
continued to blockade Gaza, severely restricting the
access of goods and limiting the movement of people,
in addition to launching air strikes against its suffering
people. Is this not clearly inconsistent with the Road
Map obligations? Is this not clearly provocative?
Since 23 September, Israel has demolished
Palestinian residences and farms in the regions of
Qalqiliya, Kafr ad-Dik and Tubas. The Israelis have
also uprooted and burned hundreds of olive and
almond trees in Ramallah, Bethlehem and Hebron. In
addition, armed settlers have physically assaulted and
injured Palestinian civilians, including many children,
as documented by reports of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Again, is this
not clearly inconsistent with the Road Map
obligations? Is this not clearly provocative? Should we
also add that the erection of the wall continues
unabated, despite the Advisory Opinion of the
International Court of Justice and the Road Map
obligations?
It would not be enough for the Council to
recommend to the General Assembly the admission of
the State of Palestine to the United Nations; the
Council also has the duty to ensure an end to
Palestine’s occupation. Likewise, it would not be
enough for the Council to agree that Israel is the party
undermining the possibility of a resumption of
effective negotiations, as called for by the Quartet; the
Council also has the duty to hold Israel and its leaders
accountable for not abiding by their international
obligations, for disregarding Security Council
resolutions
and
for
systematically
violating
international law and international humanitarian law.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Allow me to
present our sincere condolences and solidarity to the
people of Turkey after the terrible earthquake that
struck their country, and to Saudi Arabia on the passing
of the Crown Prince.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for
his very useful briefing, as well as the Permanent
Representative of Israel and the Permanent Observer of
Palestine for their contributions to today’s debate.
Momentous events are still taking place in the
wider Arab world, with a direct impact on the Middle
East and on the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian
people. While the Yemeni and Syrian peoples continue
their courageous struggle against despotic regimes,

26

Tunisia held its first free elections in decades and the
Libyan authorities announced the liberation of their
country. Gilad Shalit has been freed and reunited with
his family after many years in unjustifiable detention
and isolation. Palestinian prisoners have also been
released. President Abbas has submitted a request for
Palestine to be admitted as a full Member of the United
Nations. The Quartet has put forward a statement that
clearly and constructively lays the ground for the
resumption of negotiations between Israelis and
Palestinians, and the parties will be meeting with its
representatives in a couple of days in Jerusalem. The
Quartet has also called upon the parties to refrain from
provocative actions in order for those negotiations to
be effective.
Let me address some of those issues, beginning
with Gilad Shalit. Portugal sincerely hopes that his
release and the related liberation of Palestinian
prisoners will not only lead to positive developments in
the security, humanitarian and economic situations in
Gaza and the cessation of all attacks on Israeli civilians
from the Strip, but that it will also contribute to easing
tensions between neighbours and translate into
concrete progress in the stalled Middle East peace
process.
Shalit’s
liberation
took
leadership,
determination and a sense of compromise; these are the
same values that will be necessary for Israelis and
Palestinians during the important weeks ahead in order
to ensure the successful resumption of credible
negotiations between them.
Let us be clear. Only such negotiations on all core
issues between Israelis and Palestinians, pursued in
good faith, will allow for a peaceful and
comprehensive resolution of their conflict, based on
the two-State solution, mutual security and respect for
each country’s needs. That comprehensive solution has
been made even more urgent by the historical events
taking place across the Arab world. Those events
continue to underscore that the status quo is
unsustainable and that there is no time to squander if
we wish to ensure that the changes in the region will
indeed bring about peace and prosperity for all.
As will be said later on by the observer of the
European Union in his statement, which we naturally
endorse, it is necessary to heed and support the
legitimate aspirations of the peoples of the region,
including those of the Palestinians for statehood. That
is, for Portugal, a matter of coherence and consistency.

11-56034

S/PV.6636

Statehood is an inalienable and legitimate right of
the Palestinian people. There is a strong international
consensus that the Palestinian Authority is capable of
running a State. Portugal commends the Palestinian
leadership and people on this achievement, but
recognizes that the Palestinian people will be able to
fully explore their potential only in the framework of
an independent and sovereign State. That can be
achieved only with direct and meaningful negotiations
with their Israeli neighbours.
Portugal will continue to examine the Palestinian
application for full membership in the United Nations
in a responsible way, as is our duty as a member of the
Security Council. At the same time, we continue to
strongly urge both parties to give diplomacy a chance
and to work diligently towards a final and
comprehensive settlement of their conflict under the
terms and timelines outlined in the Quartet declaration
of 24 September and on the basis of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles, the
Road Map, the agreements previously reached between
the parties and the Arab Peace Initiative.
We also recall the Quartet’s appeal to the parties
to refrain from any provocative actions and to fully
respect their respective obligations under the Road
Map. The disturbing announcement of thousands of
new housing units and settlements in Gilo, Pisgat
Ze’ev and Givat Hamatos and the decision to entrench
West Bank outposts are not only illegal but run counter
to Israel’s declared commitment to a negotiated
solution to a final status issues, including borders and
Jerusalem, as the Under-Secretary-General emphasized
in his briefing.
We are equally troubled by the upsurge in
violence by Israeli settlers against Palestinian civilians.
We also condemn the recent attacks against Israel
Defense Forces personnel. We remain particularly
concerned with the increase in demolitions of
Palestinian homes and infrastructure. We call on the
Government to fulfil its obligations under international
law to protect Palestinian civilians and property in the
occupied Palestinian territory.
Israelis and Palestinians have a unique
opportunity to resume direct and meaningful
negotiations and to finally settle all outstanding issues,
paving the way for two independent States living in
peace and security and fully integrated in their region.
Let them not forfeit that opportunity.

11-56034

The situation in Syria has continued to deteriorate
since the last discussion in the Council on 4 October
(see S/PV.6627). The risk of the ongoing violence and
political crisis escalating into a fully-fledged civil war
with severe implications for the region increases by the
day. Thus, we believe that it is extremely urgent that
the Security Council send a strong, clear and united
message to Syria. The authorities’ violent repression
against its population must cease immediately and
those responsible for human rights violations must be
held accountable. We welcome the active engagement
by the Arab League and urge President Al-Assad to
respond in a positive and timely manner to that appeal.
Portugal remains fully committed to the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
national unity of Syria. Therefore, we once again call
for an inclusive, credible and Syrian-led political
process aimed at effectively addressing the legitimate
aspirations of Syria’s population.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of my Government, I wish first of all to convey
our grief to the Government and people of Turkey on
the recent tragedy that cost so many lives. We also
convey our condolences to Saudi Arabia on the death
of Sultan Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud. I am very grateful to
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for the interesting report on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, in which he describes to us a disturbing scene
of confrontation that is very worrying.
In recent months, we have seen the renewed and
ongoing expression of the rightful demand of peoples
in defence of their freedoms and fundamental rights,
which for so long have been ignored and violated. That
clamour that has been spreading in the entire region
must lead to the strengthening of democratic
institutions.
We welcome the progress and the reforms that
have already started to bear fruit, as in the case of
Tunisia with the elections for the Constituent Assembly
that took place this weekend. Likewise, we value the
efforts made by the Egyptian people and Government
towards an ordered democratic transition.
We can say the same about the new Libya that is
now starting to take shape. Its people, masters of their
destiny, have decisively marked out the path of
freedom amid pain and suffering. The time has come
for Libya’s democracy, the rebuilding of its social

27

S/PV.6636

fabric, and the opportunity to lay the foundations for a
stable and developing future. We wish its people every
success in that task and offer our cooperation and
support where they deem it appropriate.
We hope that in the case of Yemen, resolution
2013 (2011) adopted last week by the Council, along
with the initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council,
will contribute to a national dialogue that is not only
necessary but urgent for a harmonious coexistence that
would lead to the strengthening of institutions and
meet the rightful demand of its people.
A cause of concern continues to be the very
serious situation in Syria and the ongoing use of
violence. We call an end to the violent repression and
confrontation and for reason and dialogue to prevail.
Reforms must take place immediately and produce
tangible results so that its people can benefit from them
as soon as possible.
On the Palestinian question, for many years we
have expressed our view clearly in favour of a
comprehensive, structured and lasting solution on the
basis of the principles of the United Nations Charter
and the noble goals of international peace and security.
We understand and support the aspiration of the
Palestinian people to have a State. We therefore
reiterate that we support the goal of establishing a
viable Palestinian State living in peace alongside
Israel, with defined, secure and internationally
recognized borders. However, it must be the result of
an agreement that guarantees coexistence between
those two peoples.
Fully convinced of that, we once again
underscore that negotiation is the only possible and
robust path to achieve that objective. Ending the
settlement activities that we have always condemned,
as well as less threatening language as a result, we
hope, of the recent release of prisoners, will contribute
to that.
We support the Quartet statement on the Middle
East of 23 September because we believe it to be a
concrete proposal that may bear fruit in so far as the
parties accept the set timeline. We hope that the parties
manage to agree a viable agenda and clear negotiating
terms at the meeting to take place on 26 October.
In the context of that initiative, the Colombian
Government contributed to the invitation to dialogue as
a result of the Quartet’s proposal through direct and

28

discreet actions of President of Colombia Juan Manuel
Santos Calderón and the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
who have had individual exchanges with the senior
officials of Israel and Palestine. It entailed discreet
good offices promoting dialogue and understanding
since we believe the time has come to firm up a peace
process.
Palestinian children and young people have the
right to grow up in hope. The new generations of
Israelis deserve to enjoy peaceful relations with their
Arab neighbours. We must all do our best to ensure that
that noble becomes a reality and that we find peace.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Nigeria.
My first thoughts must be to express our
profound condolences to the Government and people of
Turkey for the grave loss of lives following an
earthquake, and to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on the
passing of Crown Prince Sultan Bin Abdulaziz
Al-Saud.
My delegation utterly condemns the senseless
grenade attack in downtown Nairobi yesterday that
caused numerous civilian injuries.
I wish very much to thank Mr. Pascoe for his very
useful and comprehensive briefing on the current
situation in the Middle East.
It is clearly evident from the various opinions
expressed during this debate that the situation in the
Middle East remains not only sensitive but also
complex and daunting. Indeed, the mixed reaction to
the application for membership of the United Nations
by the Palestinian Authority illustrates the complex
challenges in the path of closure on that issue.
Yet, it is undeniable that progress is imperative.
The most tangible means of achieving progress is for
all of us to take genuine and concerted action to bring
the parties to the negotiating table, seizing the
momentum offered by recent developments, including
the statements of Prime Minister Netanyahu and
President Abbas at the General Assembly committing
to peace (see A/66/PV.19), the statement of the Middle
East Quartet, and the prisoner swap that saw the
release of Gilad Shalit and brought freedom to over
1,000 Palestinians.
Nigeria views the Quartet statement proposing a
new timetable for reaching a peace agreement before

11-56034

S/PV.6636

the end of 2012 as a credible attempt to reopen the
stalled talks. The parties should embrace the proposal
as a basis for substantive engagement to bridge their
differences over common and status issues. Indeed, the
26 October meeting in Jerusalem between the Quartet
envoys and Israeli and Palestinian officials offers an
opportunity for the parties to develop an agenda for the
negotiations. We reiterate that direct talks remain vital
to fostering good and normal relations between the two
neighbours and for sustaining peace in the Middle East
long after the two-State solution has been realized.
Let me affirm unequivocally that Nigeria believes
in a two-State solution as the best option for resolving
the protracted conflict in the Middle East, consistent
with the numerous resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Council. In recognizing the State of Palestine
27 years ago, we were certain then that the Palestinian
Authority had achieved a high degree of institutional
performance that is sufficient for independent
statehood, and we are even more certain now. Indeed,
the people of Palestine deserve the right to live in
freedom and dignity and to enjoy the full benefits and
privileges of statehood.
In the two-State solution matrix, we must
acknowledge that the independent State of Israel
deserves the recognition of its neighbours. Israel has
the right to existence as a peaceful and secure country
without the threat of annihilation.
Achieving two viable States will require the
parties to take a number of specific actions. They must
now find and strengthen their common bonds and
renew their commitment to engage in negotiations
based on mutual trust, and without preconditions.
Israel must take concrete steps to freeze all
settlement-related activities in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem. It must avoid military incursions into Gaza
and ease the blockade of the territory. In the same vein,
Palestinian leaders must deal with militancy and
actions that endanger Israel’s security, including firing
rockets into southern Israel. They must also utilize only
lawful channels to transport people, goods and
materials out of Gaza.
Nigeria will continue to maintain close relations
with both Israel and Palestine. We will also continue to
support all efforts that can lead to a peaceful resolution
of the conflict. We believe that the Security Council
should be consistent and remain an impartial peace

11-56034

broker whose efforts must encourage Israel and
Palestine to return to direct negotiations.
With respect to Lebanon, we support its
sovereignty and territorial integrity. We welcome the
progress being made by Prime Minister Najib Mikati’s
Administration and its commitment to the
implementation of Council resolutions 1701 (2006) and
1559 (2004), as well as other international obligations.
We urge Israel to halt further incursions into Lebanese
territory. The parties must maintain calm along the
Blue Line.
On Syria, we remain concerned about the
deteriorating security, human rights and humanitarian
conditions in the country. We encourage the Syrian
authorities to implement the promised reforms, address
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people and
engage in genuine, credible dialogue with the
opposition. Nigeria will continue to work with other
Council members to achieve peace and stability in
Syria.
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Egypt.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): On behalf of the States
members of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), I
would like to begin by expressing our condolences and
deep sympathy to the Government and people of
Turkey on the tragic loss of life due to the earthquake
that hit eastern Turkey yesterday. I would also like to
offer the Movement’s condolences and sympathy to the
Government and people of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia for their great loss in the passing away of His
Royal Highness Prince Sultan Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud
after a long life of achievement for his country, his
region and the world at large.
I have the pleasure of addressing the Security
Council today on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
at this critical juncture in the Security Council’s
dealings with the situation in the Middle East. I would
like to start by expressing the Movement’s appreciation
for today’s briefing by Mr. Lynn Pascoe, UnderSecretary-General
for
Political
Affairs.
The
Non-Aligned Movement believes that the international
community must renew its resolve to uphold its
longstanding commitment to realizing a two-State
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, on the basis

29

S/PV.6636

of international law and the well-known terms of
reference of the peace process.
There is an international consensus that we must
reach the endgame, the independence of the State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital — the core
of a peaceful settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict as a
whole. It is regrettable that all serious efforts to date by
international and regional parties, including the last
Quartet statement of 23 September, to resume and
advance direct negotiations on the Palestinian track
towards that objective have failed. This is mainly due
to the lack of clear parameters for the negotiations and
the insistence of Israel, the occupying Power, on
continuing to illegally, unilaterally and aggressively
change the situation on the ground. Such actions belie
Israel’s claims that it accepts the Quartet statements
and that it is indeed acting in good faith to end this
conflict.
It is worth mentioning that around the same time
last year, many of us had high hopes for the new round
of final status negotiations, which began in early
September 2010 under the direct auspices of United
States President Barack Obama, with the participation
of the Quartet, Egypt and Jordan, with the goal of
reaching an agreement within one year. Yet the
negotiations collapsed just a few weeks later, due to
Israel’s refusal to renew the moratorium on settlement
activities, cease its illegal settlement campaign and
abide by clear parameters for negotiations to achieve a
just and final solution.
The persistence of such behaviour on the part of
Israel and its refusal to commit to the internationally
endorsed parameters for a two-State solution cast a
dark shadow of doubt over its professed intentions.
Instead, they reinforce the belief that Israel’s insistence
on the negotiation path is merely for the sake of
negotiations and not to actually reach any
comprehensive peace settlement.
It is highly condemnable that Israel, the
occupying Power, continues to pursue its illegal
settlement activities, and many other illegal policies
and practices, in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. Such illegal actions
undermine peace efforts and are the main obstacle to
efforts to resume negotiations, making it nearly
impossible to realize a two-State solution on the basis
of the 4 June 1967 borders. Recent announcements
regarding the establishment of thousands more

30

settlement units, particularly in and around occupied
East Jerusalem, the continued Israeli demolition of
Palestinian homes and properties, and devious attempts
by the Israeli Government to legitimize its illegitimate
settlement scheme are the true measure of Israel’s
alleged commitment to the peace process and a twoState solution.
All indications at present — from provocative
declarations to accelerated construction on the ground
to the continued revocation of Palestinian residency
rights — are that Israel continues to choose settlement
over peace and to choose occupation and conflict at the
expense of the future of both peoples and the region as
a whole.
The Non-Aligned Movement remains firm in its
condemnation of Israel’s illegal settlement policies and
practices, stressing that all such unlawful attempts to
alter the demographic composition, character and
status of the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, remain rejected and unrecognized by
the international community.
The fact that a majority of NAM member States
co-sponsored the draft resolution presented to the
Security Council earlier this year (S/2011/24) that
called for the immediate cessation of all settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory — as
outlined in relevant letters addressed by the Chair of
the Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Movement to the President of the Council — reflects
the international position on this most critical issue.
The Non-Aligned Movement regrets that the Security
Council did not adopt the draft resolution, as we had
hoped and expected.
The Movement therefore reiterates its call for the
Council to be resolute in demanding that Israel abide
by its legal obligations. Moreover, the Movement
believes that calls for compliance must be backed by
credible action, which is incumbent upon this Council
in light of its duties under the Charter and given the
fact that the occupying Power is continuing to
deliberately obstruct the attainment of peace and
security in our region.
Israeli impunity must no longer be tolerated.
Israel must be called upon to abide forthwith by all of
its obligations under the Fourth Geneva Convention,
relevant United Nations resolutions and the Road Map.
That includes an immediate cessation of all settlement
activities and full respect for the international

11-56034

S/PV.6636

consensus on the issue, including the calls from the
United Nations, NAM, the European Union, the
Quartet and all other concerned international and
regional bodies and actors.
The Non-Aligned Movement emphasizes the need
to compel Israel, the occupying Power, to lift fully its
illegal blockade, in accordance with its obligations
under international law, Council resolution 1860
(2009) and all other relevant United Nations
resolutions. The Movement reiterates that this
unacceptable and unsustainable situation must end. The
unresolved crisis continues to pose serious
repercussions on international efforts to promote peace
and continues to inflict deep suffering on the
Palestinian people.
In that connection, the Movement reemphasizes
the need for the reconstruction of Gaza, and calls on
Israel to open all of its crossing points with Gaza and
allow for the sustained and regular movement of
persons and goods, including the import of essential
reconstruction materials, which includes those
necessary for the long overdue reconstruction of
United Nations facilities and the schools of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), and normal
commercial flows. NAM also reiterates the need to
empower UNRWA with all financial and human
support necessary to undertake its mission effectively.
NAM welcomes the prisoner swap deal under
Egyptian auspices that led to the release of Israeli
soldier Gilad Shalit in exchange for more than 1,000
Palestinian prisoners and detainees. NAM strongly
condemns the continued detention and imprisonment of
thousands of Palestinians in Israeli jails, where illtreatment and torture are widely used.
It is the conviction of the members of the
Movement, as stated in the special declaration adopted
by the NAM ministerial conference in Bali in May, that
those prisoners, who include children and women,
should be immediately released and proper
international inspection of their current condition
should be a priority for the international community,
particularly the Security Council and the Human
Rights Council.
There were three main developments during the
last few months. The first one was the historic speech
given by President Abbas on 23 September in the
General Assembly Hall. The second development was

11-56034

the agreement on Palestinian national reconciliation
carried out under the auspices of Egypt, the core pillar
of which was the return of power to the people through
legislative and presidential elections within a year. The
third development is the fact that to date, more than
130 countries have recognized the State of Palestine
based on the 1967 borders, including more than 100
members of the Movement, and they comprise more
than the two-thirds majority of the General Assembly.
Those three major developments, coupled with the
recognition of all major international organizations and
institutions including the United Nations, the World
Bank and the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the
Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians, that Palestinian institutions are more than
ready for statehood, clearly indicate that the dream of a
Palestinian State is closer than ever to becoming a
reality.
Indeed, there is unanimous conviction that
Israel’s respect for its obligations is imperative for the
resumption of direct negotiations towards achieving
the two-State solution on the basis of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515
(2003) and 1850 (2008), the Madrid terms of reference,
including the principle of land for peace, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Road Map. The international
community must exert all efforts to compel Israel to
abide by its obligations and commitments forthwith
and to resume final status negotiations based on clear
parameters that would include: cessation of all
settlement activities, an agreed timeframe that
recognizes the urgency of the matter and the 4 June
1967 borders as the foundation and starting point for
negotiations, as set out by President Obama in his
19 May speech and as supported by the entire
international community.
In so saying, the Movement stresses the utmost
importance of the efforts of the international
community and the United Nations and of a credible
negotiation process for bringing an end to the Israeli
occupation that began in 1967, as well as the
achievement of an independent State of Palestine with
East Jerusalem as its capital.
Turning now to Lebanon, the NAM condemns
Israel’s ongoing violations of Lebanese sovereignty
and the recurrence of serious breaches to Security
Council resolution 1701 (2006). The Movement calls
on all concerned parties to implement fully Security

31

S/PV.6636

Council resolution 1701 (2006) in order to end the
current fragility and avoid the recurrence of hostilities.
Concerning the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that all measures
and actions taken, or to be taken, by Israel, the
occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan, as
well as the Israeli measures to impose jurisdiction and
administration there, are null, void and have no legal
effect. The Non-Aligned Movement demands that
Israel abide by Security Council resolution 497 (1981)
and withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to
the borders of 4 June 1967, in implementation of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973).
The President: I
representative of Jordan.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Tarawneh (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Today
we are experiencing an Arab renewal that seeks
realization of its hopes and aspirations, rejects the
current situation and calls for a better future with
dignity. After the current stage, the most pressing issue
on the way forward will require attention to the Arab
peoples’ pride and sources of indignation that will need
to be resolved. I refer, in particular, to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, which has lasted far too long. In
fact, the calls of the Arab Spring are for justice and
non-discrimination will not accept that Israel or any
other party remain above the law or international
legitimacy.
It is absolutely unacceptable that Israel would
continue to build settlements, thus undermining the
efforts to settle the conflict based on the two-State
solution and the 1967 borders. As long as short-term
political gains retain priority over long-term strategic
interests, Israel will remain incapable of building a
better future for its people. Political decision makers in
Israel need therefore to promote broader strategic
interests rather than short-term interests. Today, more
than ever, it is necessary for Israeli decision makers to
consider the future and free their foreign policy from a
siege-based mindset in order to establish goodneighbourly relationships based on equality.
Jordan confirms its support for Palestine’s
application to full membership as an independent State
on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
That request was made to the United Nations after
Israel had impeded all international and regional efforts

32

towards a resumption of negotiations and had denied
the negotiations any substance due to its settlement
activities and its refusal to negotiate on the basis of the
1967 borders.
Jordan also reaffirms its support for a final
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that
addresses all final status issues, including the issues of
settlements, Jerusalem, refugees, borders and water,
within specific timeframes.
Jordan believes that recognition of the Palestinian
State within the United Nations is neither a substitute
for direct negotiations nor is it aimed at delegitimizing
Israel, for such recognition of the Palestinian State
would leave five points of the final status negotiations
pending, which means that the conflict would continue
without being fully addressed.
Jordan therefore believes that the latest statement
of the Quartet is clear and creates a good opportunity
for returning to the negotiating table, as long as there is
full respect without conditions for its substantive
contents or without any reservations that could deny
any meaning to the negotiations. The United Nations
and the international community, as well as the
influential parties, must take action to bring pressure to
bear on Israel to ensure that it complies with the
dozens of resolutions that reaffirm the right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination on its own
national territory, including East Jerusalem, based on
the 1967 borders. There must also be a comprehensive,
just settlement of the issue of Palestinian refugees,
without which there can be no peaceful settlement.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia): Thank you,
Madame President, for the opportunity to speak at this
meeting.
Allow me, first, to thank all the delegations that
have expressed their sympathies and condolences to
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on the passing of His
Royal Highness the Crown Prince. We appreciate their
support and solidarity. I would also like to extend our
condolences to the people and Government of Turkey
for their losses caused by the earthquake that struck
their country.
I further want to point out that we align ourselves
fully with the statement made by the Egyptian
Ambassador on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

11-56034

S/PV.6636

(spoke in Arabic)
At the outset, I am honoured to express my
gratitude to you for convening this open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question.
This meeting is being held at a time when the
Palestinian people are paying for the reluctance of the
international community and the Security Council to
deter Israel from its actions against the Palestinian
people, such as killing, displacement, imprisonment,
blockades, annexation of land, confiscation of property
and plundering the wealth of Palestine. All those
actions subject the Palestinian people to further intense
oppression and torture, with the goal of forcing them to
surrender and despair.
The Israeli Government persists in its
intransigence, refusing to give the Palestinians their
basic rights. It proceeds with its illegal settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, riding roughshod over
international will, countries’ condemnations and United
Nations resolutions issued in this regard. Israeli
settlements surround most cities of the West Bank and
seize nearly half of their water resources, making it
difficult for any Palestinian Government to work
effectively.
Furthermore, it is unethical that the occupation
forces impose a blockade on an entire people and
continue their settlement activities, secure from any
accountability. Most of the countries gathered here,
including the permanent members of the Security
Council, have issued individual statements against the
continuation of Israeli settlement activities. What they
need to do now is to take an international, collective
stand that clearly reflects that existing unanimity. It is
high time for Israel to realize that it cannot continue to
exempt itself from full compliance with the rules of
international law-based behaviour.
The “Apartheid Wall” embodies irrefutable
evidence of the extent of the Israeli occupying Power’s
persistence in violating United Nations resolutions,
particularly General Assembly resolution 181 (II), on
the pretext of legitimate self-defence. In fact, the true
purpose of building the wall is to change the facts on
ground and to evict the Palestinian people, prevent East
Jerusalem from escaping Israeli sovereignty and secure
control over water resources, in addition to establishing
as many settlements as possible for the settlers. The

11-56034

Kingdom of Saudi Arabia reiterates that security can be
achieved neither by building symbols of oppression
and occupation nor through the unjustified use of
military force. Rather, security can be achieved by
respecting human rights and the rule of law.
The situation in the besieged Gaza Strip
constitutes another factor that exacerbates the problems
that the Palestinian people face. In fact, the Gaza Strip
has become one big prison, as a result of the unjust
blockade imposed by Israel against the Palestinians,
preventing them from exercising their natural rights
and accessing their necessary services and needs.
Meanwhile, a generation of Palestinian children in the
Gaza Strip are born and raised with nothing in their
minds but devastation, destruction and the world’s
failure to support them in exercising their natural
rights — which are the same as those of any other
children in the world. Therefore, in this Chamber, we
urge the Security Council to shoulder its
responsibilities by lifting the siege on Gaza and
opening the crossings that lead to it.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia calls upon the
international community to compel Israel to take the
necessary procedures to protect the holy sites and
places of worship in Palestine, particularly in
Jerusalem. In addition, the Kingdom urges the
international community to force Israel to release the
remaining Palestinian prisoners, some of whom have
not seen their families for decades.
The Kingdom would not make such demands
without extending a hand of peace and proving its
commitment to a just and comprehensive peace. In this
vein, the Kingdom introduced a peace initiative that
was adopted by all Arab States in 2002, known as the
Arab Peace Initiative. That Initiative reiterates the
Arabs’ commitment to achieving a just and
comprehensive peace based on the rules of
international law. Nevertheless, we have not seen any
similar commitment from Israel. Rather, Israel has
evaded its duties and responsibilities and continued its
many violations against the Palestinian people and
their rights.
We therefore, now more than ever before, call
upon the Security Council to support the Palestinian
people and recognize their State, within the borders of
4 June 1967, and with Jerusalem as its capital. Israel
and the children and people of Palestine must be made
to see clearly that the international community has

33

S/PV.6636

agreed, albeit belatedly, to support the Palestinian
cause by granting Palestine full membership in the
United Nations. We call upon Israel to withdraw fully
from all the Arab territories occupied in 1967.
In conclusion, peace in the Middle East requires
the commitment of all States of the region to be
guaranteed security. We cannot talk about peace in the
Middle East without referring to the recently
discovered plot to assassinate the Ambassador of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to the United States of
America. According to the evidence provided by the
competent authorities of the United States, it is clear
that the perpetrators who planned and supported the
implementation of this heinous crime either work for
the Iranian Government or are affiliated with it.

34

The Kingdom reiterates its denunciation and
condemnation of any attempt to tamper with its
security or assault any of its citizens or officials. The
Kingdom will not stand idle in response to those who
play foul with its security. Furthermore, the Kingdom
reaffirms its full cooperation with the international
community and the Security Council, which is
entrusted with maintaining international peace and
security, to ensure that anyone involved in that plot,
whether State or individual, be held accountable.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. I
intend, with the concurrence of the members of the
Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.20.

11-56034
