United Nations

S/PV.6720

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6720th meeting
Wednesday, 22 February 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ohin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Togo)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Yang Tao
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Bonne
Mr. Berger
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Parham
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Timor-Leste
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (S/2012/43)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-23800 (E)

*1223800*

S/PV.6720

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Timor-Leste
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (S/2012/43)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Angola,
Australia, Brazil, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand and
Timor-Leste to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His
Excellency Mr. José Ramos-Horta, President of the
Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, and request the
Protocol Officer to escort him to his seat at the Council
table.
José Ramos-Horta, President of the Democratic
Republic of Timor-Leste, was escorted to a seat at
the Council table.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Ms. Ameerah Haq, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste,
to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Deputy Head
of the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/43, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste.
I now give the floor to Ms. Haq.
Ms. Haq: Let me begin by acknowledging the
presence of Nobel Peace Laureate His Excellency
Mr. José Ramos-Horta, President of Timor-Leste.
President Ramos-Horta tells me often about the request
he made in 2006, in this very Chamber, to establish the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste

2

(UNMIT). It is remarkable that he is in this Chamber
today to discuss the end of that same Mission. Under
his leadership, as well as that of Prime Minister
Xanana Gusmão, Frente Revolucionária do TimorLeste Independente (Fretilin) Secretary-General Mari
Alkatiri and others, Timor-Leste has made significant
strides in advancing peace and stability. In the light of
the overall stable situation, we are continuing to plan
for the expected close of UNMIT by December 2012.
Indeed, as part of our joint transition planning with the
Government and other stakeholders, we are already
discussing the post-2012 engagement of the United
Nations with Timor-Leste, so as to facilitate decisions
of the next Government and the Council. In the
meantime, UNMIT continues to support Timor-Leste’s
efforts to ensure that the prevailing stability and
security continue through 2012 and beyond.
Timor-Leste is about to hold presidential and
parliamentary elections, and we have every reason to
believe that they will be successful. On 13 January, the
President signed a decree establishing 17 March as the
date of the presidential election. Thirteen candidates,
including two women, whose candidacies were
approved by the Court of Appeal will contest the
election. The legally established campaign period starts
on 29 February and ends on 14 March. A run-off, if
necessary, will be held in the third week of April. The
voter registration period closed on 11 January.
According to the Technical Secretariat for Electoral
Administration, 628,454 people were registered. That
is an increase of 89,015 voters from the registration
results in 2007, reflecting improved civic education
and outreach efforts on the part of the Technical
Secretariat, improved statistics through the census, and
the country’s high rate of population growth. The
parliamentary election, the date of which is yet to be
established, is likely to take place in late June.
The electoral management bodies are striving to
deliver transparent and fair elections. As mentioned in
successive reports of the Secretary-General, their
capacities have increased since 2007, and there has
been an accompanying decrease in the level of United
Nations support. Still, the United Nations continues to
provide integrated technical assistance through the
joint United Nations Development Programme and
UNMIT electoral support team. The final group of 130
United Nations Volunteers, who arrived in January,
have deployed throughout the country to support the
Technical Secretariat for Electoral Administration and

12-23800

S/PV.6720

the National Electoral Commission with activities that
include operational planning, logistics, and voter and
civic education. That work is complemented by
operational support by UNMIT police to the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) during the elections,
and our good-offices efforts to help sustain a
constructive political environment.
During the electoral process, the SecretaryGeneral is planning to issue messages commending
Timor-Leste on its achievements and calling on all
Timorese to ensure that the presidential and
parliamentary elections are credible, transparent and
peaceful. Presidential candidates and political party
leaders are acting in that spirit; their constructive
messages about the need for peaceful elections are
central to maintaining public confidence in the
elections and political stability. My senior staff and I
have been travelling to many of the districts to get a
first-hand sense of the situation on the ground and the
readiness of the local authorities to carry out the
elections. For example, in Baucau on 20 January, I met
with the district administration and village chiefs and
was reassured to hear their expressions of confidence
in election preparations and public security.
National institutions are also taking increased
ownership of dialogue processes around elections. The
National Electoral Commission is developing a
national unity pact likely to be signed at the end of this
month by all presidential candidates and political
parties. As the Council may recall, UNMIT facilitated a
similar pact in 2007. It is encouraging that this
important work is now being done by national
institutions.
Maintaining a favourable security environment is
the most important task for the Policia Nacional de
Timor-Leste (PNTL). Some incidents involving martial
arts groups occurred in Dili in December, with the
alleged involvement of some members of the PNTL. In
an effort to prevent such incidents from becoming a
trend, the Council of Ministers recently adopted a
resolution prohibiting martial arts group activities for
one year. The PNTL has also identified seven officers
who took part in the December incidents. Three officers
have been recommended for dismissal and the remaining
four were recommended for written reprimand.
Following through on these recommendations through
decisive actions is important to maintaining public
confidence in the police service.

12-23800

The PNTL, with UNMIT police support, is
getting ready to ensure security during the electoral
period. A live exercise involving all security forces in
the country, including the Falintil-Forças de Defesa de
Timor-Leste (F-FDTL) and the international security
forces, took place on 8 February. The President and I
were present to see this. The exercise tested the ability
of the respective forces to respond to possible security
incidents during elections, in accordance with their
respective roles and responsibilities.
In this context, I was heartened by the public
statements of the head of the armed forces, MajorGeneral Lere Anan Timur, regarding F-FDTL’s role
during the elections as a support to the PNTL, if and
when requested by the appropriate civilian authorities.
Other joint PNTL-United Nations police electionrelated activities include threat assessments conducted
in all districts, security assessments of all polling
centres, and election-specific training. I am confident
that these initiatives will help to ensure our joint
preparedness to respond to any eventuality during the
electoral period.
Preparations for the elections come in addition to
other capacity-building activities supported by UNMIT
police. Overall, progress of the Joint Development Plan
is encouraging, with 37 per cent of the 588 planned
activities completed as of 7 February. However,
UNMIT is facing difficulties in extending police
officers in key advisory positions. As the PNTL will
focus heavily on elections security in the coming
months, maintaining continuity and momentum in our
capacity-building work is becoming even more
important. Once again, I encourage police-contributing
countries to grant extension of officers in these
positions.
My assessment is that the PNTL will fulfil its role
in maintaining stability through 2012, with support
from UNMIT police, as required and requested. Of
course, building a professional and effective police
force is a major task that will continue long after
UNMIT’s departure. I very much hope that bilateral
and multilateral support will be forthcoming to help the
PNTL’s further development. Already, the institution is
on the right path, and it will continue along that path as
long as it demonstrates its commitment to integrity,
professionalism and capacity-building.
The Government and UNMIT have made good
progress in advancing UNMIT’s transition. On

3

S/PV.6720

22 December, the Prime Minister signed a decree
establishing an inter-ministerial committee to manage
the transfer of certain UNMIT assets to national
authorities — a strong sign of the Government’s
commitment to an orderly transition. On 2 February,
the High-level Committee on Transition reviewed the
encouraging progress in the implementation of the
Joint Transition Plan. The main challenge now is to
ensure that institutions taking on new responsibilities
have sufficient capacity and funding to carry them out
effectively.
In close collaboration with the Government, we
are also working to ensure that many of the Mission’s
activities can transition seamlessly to the United
Nations country team in order to safeguard the
country’s gains. We have developed a portfolio of 34
projects requiring $75 million in funding from 2012 to
2014, which leverage the country team’s expertise in
four areas linked to UNMIT’s work. The portfolio has
been approved by all relevant line ministries. This
morning, President Ramos-Horta, the Government,
UNMIT and the United Nations Development Group
presented the portfolio to Member States. I was
delighted with the positive reception, and hope that
bilateral support to United Nations agencies working in
Timor-Leste will be forthcoming.
More broadly, I hope that the Council will
recognize both the progress made in key areas of
UNMIT’s mandate and the requirement for further
consolidation in the areas of justice, governance,
human rights, and capacity-building for the PNTL.
Such consolidation will very much tie in with the work
of the Group of Seven Plus on the new deal and the
peace and statebuilding goals — policy initiatives that
have been spearheaded by the Government of TimorLeste, in particular Finance Minister Emilia Pires.
Transition planning also entails improving the
capacity of national staff so that they can continue to
make a positive contribution to Timor-Leste’s
development after UNNMIT leaves. UNMIT has an
extensive capacity-building programme to help its
national staff gain certification in various technical and
administrative areas. On 26 January, we held the latest
graduation ceremony for national staff participating in
this programme.
At the end of January, a joint team from the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Political Affairs, the United Nations

4

Development Group and UNMIT conducted a detailed
assessment of possible options for the United Nations
post-UNMT engagement in Timor-Leste based on those
identified in the Joint Transition Plan. The team sought
the views of a wide range of interlocutors, including
the President, the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime
Minister — who is the overall focal point in the
Government for transition — and other Government
officials. The team also met with representatives of
political parties, civil society, media and the
international community. I would like to thank the
Government of Timor-Leste, especially its focal point
for post-UNMIT arrangements, Foreign Minister
Zacarias da Costa, for the warm welcome extended to
the team and the high level of attention accorded to the
transition by the Government.
In its meetings, the team encountered a
remarkable degree of coherence in the views of
different stakeholders. Interlocutors consistently
expressed the view that, on the understanding that
things go well this year, there should be no uniformed
United Nations personnel in Timor-Leste beyond 2012,
but that there is a need for a small political presence
with a link to the Secretariat, and through it to the
Security Council. Such a presence, it was suggested,
should focus on consolidating a culture of democratic
governance, nurturing a generation of future leaders,
consolidating gains in the areas of justice, governance,
human rights, and providing civilian advice to the
PNTL. Consultations on the post-UNMIT UN presence
will continue in the coming months on the
understanding that any final decision on this matter
will be taken only following consultation with the
Government formed after the parliamentary elections.
The early planning currently under way will enable
well-informed discussions with the newly elected
Government and lay the groundwork for a seamless
transition to a new form of partnership.
The year 2012 is a critical one for Timor-Leste,
marked by several key anniversaries, including the
tenth anniversary of the restoration of independence. I
count that this year will give us the opportunity to
celebrate peaceful elections, an orderly transition to a
new Government, continued stability and security and
further development of the PNTL’s technical
capacities.
This year will also be a critical year for the
United Nations’ long engagement with Timor-Leste. In
view of the developments that have been outlined in

12-23800

S/PV.6720

his report to the Security Council, the SecretaryGeneral has asked that the Council extend UNMIT’s
current mandate until 31 December 2012. Following
consultations with the new Government, and within 60
days of its formation, the Secretary-General would
submit a report containing his suggestions on UNMIT’s
anticipated withdrawal and the post-UNMIT United
Nations presence in Timor-Leste. That report could
form the basis of a Council meeting in September or
October to enable a seamless transition to the postUNMIT presence. As the security situation permits, we
envisage that UNMIT police will begin a well-paced
drawdown following the parliamentary elections and
the formation of the new Government.
In conclusion, let me thank all of the United
Nations personnel in Timor-Leste. I would also like to
thank the leadership of Timor-Leste, and again
President Ramos-Horta, with whom we are here today.
Finally, allow me to thank the people of Timor-Leste
for their determination to establish a stable and
enduring peace for their country.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Haq
for the briefing.
I now give the floor to President Ramos-Horta.
President Ramos-Horta: May I first introduce
my delegation. I am accompanied by the Minister of
Finance, Mrs. Emilia Pires; Deputy Minister of Foreign
Affairs Alberto Carlos; my deputy Chief of Civilian
Staff, Mr. Hernani Coelho; and, of course, our
Permanent Representative, Mrs. Sofia Borges, whom
all members of the Security Council know.
Deputy Minister Alberto Carlos has 11 years’
experience
with
the
United
Nations
High
Commissioner for Refugees, including two and a half
years in emergency operations in the Sudan and eight
years in Timor-Leste, with two years as head of the
office.
Mr. Hernani Coelho served four and half years as
a policy adviser with the United Nations Development
Programme in Timor-Leste, and three years as our
Ambassador in Canberra. Mrs. Emilia Pires worked for
years in the donors coordinating unit of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) in the donors coordinating unit. After
studying at the London School of Economics, she
served at the World Bank in Gaza, Palestine. With no
party affiliation, Mrs. Pires was invited and accepted

12-23800

the challenge of heading the Ministry of Finance for
Timor-Leste, and has served in that position for nearly
five years.
As members can see, like others in my country,
those compatriots have had long and rich experience in
both the national and international arenas and have
served in challenging field missions.
At this juncture, I would like to thank the
Permanent Representative and Ambassador of South
Africa for agreeing to serve as coordinator of the Core
Group for Timor-Leste. I would also like to thank
Brazil for its previous leadership of the Group.
The year 2012 will mark another milestone in our
history with the United Nations. I have lost count of
the number of times I have walked the halls of the
United Nations since 1975. As a point of curiosity,
when I first came to the United Nations, Yakov Malik
of the former Soviet Union was here. Members can
therefore imagine how long I have known the United
Nations. I also knew many others who have since
passed from the scene or passed away.
Between 1975 and 1999, many of my trips to
New York were discouraging, but we continued our
struggle. Finally, after many years, the vast majority of
the population chose independence in the popular
consultation administered by the United Nations
Mission in East Timor. That was followed by
UNTAET, led by our dear and terribly missed friend
Sergio Vieira de Mello, and subsequent United Nations
missions.
In 2006 it was with much regret that I had to
return to the Council to ask once again for assistance
after civil disturbances affected Timor-Leste. That was
a difficult time for me and for our people. However,
the events of 2006 have to be put into context. Barely
four years had passed since the restoration of
independence in May of 2002. Nearly all States
undergo those types of traumatic experiences at some
point in their histories. The mark of a successful State
is that it learns from such experiences and emerges
stronger and is determined to ensure that they do not
reoccur.
In that regard, the people of Timor-Leste are
committed to ensuring that the prevailing peace and
stability continue through 2012 and beyond. I can
confirm from my many travels across the country,
including to the most remote areas, that the Timorese

5

S/PV.6720

people are united in our commitment to peace and our
desire for a better future.
I am very pleased to once again address this
body, this time in much happier circumstances than
those that prevailed in Timor-Leste in the first half of
2006, when Timor-Leste appeared to be racing towards
the edge of an abyss. In May of that year, weeks into
the crisis, I hastily travelled to New York to address the
Council and to plead with it to urgently assist us in
restoring law and order. I said then, in describing the
atmosphere in the city, “Dili is a city on the edge; fear
is palpable”. In retrospect, I can only say today that the
2006 crisis could have been averted. It had its origin in
minor but unresolved problems in the defence force
that were allowed to fester and then spilled over into
the police and ultimately into the streets. Today I speak
before the Council in very different circumstances. Dili
is a bustling city, full of life. Today it is peace that is
palpable. Peace has returned to our cities, our
communities, our streets, our schools and our homes.
My Office took a number of initiatives to address
the root causes of the 2006 crisis, and to foster a
culture of peace and non-violence, bearing in mind that
peace has to grow from within ourselves as individuals,
within families and communities. It cannot be achieved
by formal agreements and declarations or by
Government decrees alone or by police action. Peace is
a process, sometimes a long one — too long. It can be
achieved through a formal political process; but, to be
sustained, we have to deal with human beings as
individuals, communities and real people with traumas,
emotions and anger, but also with hopes, with hearts
and feelings.
In 2009 we launched the Dili-City of Peace
vision, an initiative built on a series of monthly
dialogues with communities in all regions of the
country. Under the slogan “The Road to Peace and
National Unity”, it included major sports and cultural
initiatives — the Mount Ramelau Cultural and Music
Festival; the Tour de Timor, which is now in its fourth
year; and the Dili International Marathon in early May,
which is in its third year — among other initiatives
aimed at restoring hope, pride and faith in our people.
The peace campaign is enhanced by fast-tracked
anti-poverty initiatives, which include building simple
homes for extremely poor households, building or
refurbishing schools, and supporting incomegenerating schemes for very poor families.

6

With humility we acknowledge and are conscious
that no single person or institution can single-handedly
deliver peace, security and stability. It is the work of
all of us in Timor-Leste — the Government, political
leaders, civil society, churches, and all who are
committed to lasting peace. Healing the wounds in
communities requires patient effort, with special
attention given to the wounds of the soul. Peace must
be built block by block, community by community, and
it requires unlimited patience and care every day, every
week, through working together, connecting with
common people, being accessible to them, listening
and communicating, making them feel that leaders do
care about their suffering, needs and dreams.
Almost five years into my mandate as President
and that of the Fourth Constitutional Government led
by Prime Minister Xanana Gusmão, I am both pleased
that much has been achieved but sad that too much
remains to be realized. I must also state here that we
would not have come this far without the generous
assistance of the international community, the United
Nations through the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), specialized agencies and
programmes, our many bilateral partners — large and
not so large — and our closest neighbours. Hence, I
wish to thank all for their generous and steady
engagement with us from 1999 to 2002 and again since
2006.
I wish in particular to reiterate our people’s
gratitude to the Governments and peoples of Malaysia,
Australia, New Zealand and Portugal, who in 2006, in
response to our request for urgent assistance, promptly
dispatched to our shores a robust force that, working
closely with Timorese leaders, succeeded in preventing
the worst from happening. Malaysia, a fellow SouthEast Asian neighbour, displayed true regional and
South-South solidarity, impressive professionalism and
preparedness in deploying in record time air and seaborne forces thousands of miles away from its shores.
At its peak in 2006-2007, the combined Australia-New
Zealand forces present on our soil totalled 3,500
servicemen and women.
Today that number is approximately 450. They
have not been engaged in operational policing duty
since 2009, but have been extremely effective in
assisting with humanitarian and engineering training
for our defence force. Within a week of our appeal for
assistance in 2006, from 20,000 miles away Portugal
deployed by air a company of its elite force, the

12-23800

S/PV.6720

prestigious Guarda Nacional Republicana, with all the
required equipment, including armoured personnel
carriers, medical units and more. The Republic of
Indonesia has been a good neighbour and a good
friend, ensuring that our common borders are kept safe
even during the turmoil in Dili. To all, I reiterate our
sincere admiration and the eternal gratitude of our
people.
This is an eventful year for our people. We will
celebrate the tenth anniversary of the restoration of
independence and will be holding two major elections:
the presidential election on 17 March and the
legislative election in the last week of June. Ten years
on, we can draw some satisfaction from the fact that
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
Human Development Report of October 2010 accorded
Timor-Leste a human development index value of
0.502, placing our country in the medium human
development category. This was an increase from 0.428
in 2005 and 0.375 at independence.
Since 2005, life expectancy at birth in TimorLeste has increased by more than two years and now
averages 62.1 years. The gross national product per
capita increased 228 per cent during the same period to
over $5,000. Average annual growth has been doubledigit for the past four years, and real non-oil gross
domestic product growth remains strong.
School enrolment in Timor-Leste has jumped
from a modest 63 per cent in 2006 to over 90 per cent
for basic education, according to the 2010 national
census. In the past three years, close to 200,000 adults
have graduated from illiteracy to functioning literacy,
and Timor-Leste will proclaim full adult literacy by
2015.
In the health sector, as in the adult education
sector, significant progress has been made, with much
of the credit going to Cuba. Infant mortality and the
mortality of children under five years old have all been
dramatically reduced. Incidences of malaria and
dengue and the prevalence of poverty have decreased.
There cannot be a nobler mission than that of
rescuing our fellow human beings from the centuriesold illness of leprosy. With the support of the Nippon
Foundation and the World Health Organization (WHO)
and the commitment and dedication of its patron,
Mr. Yohei Sasakawa, WHO Goodwill Ambassador for
the Elimination of Leprosy, the incidence of the disease
in Timor-Leste is now less than one case per 10,000

12-23800

people. Leprosy is considered by the WHO to have
been medically eliminated in Timor-Leste, for the first
time in centuries.
Here, I wish to duly acknowledge the generous
contribution of the European Commission, our secondlargest development partner. Other bilateral donors,
public and private, non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) and United Nations agencies have all
contributed generously, and we are forever grateful to
all.
However, as proud as we are of our achievements
thus far, we are also very aware of the daunting
challenges still to be overcome. Poverty has seen a
significant reduction as its prevalence declined from
49 per cent in 2007 to 41 per cent two years later,
according to estimates of the World Bank. But this
means that poverty is still high and remains a major
challenge. Child malnutrition is extremely high and is
an indictment of us all, we the Timorese leaders and
our partners. Tuberculosis remains rampant and is our
number one health problem.
While we acknowledge shortcomings and
failures, it is time that our bilateral and multilateral
partners, including international NGOs, accept their
share of responsibility for the failures in this very
critical field. Our public administration is still lagging
on procedures and lacking qualified human resources.
We are committed to improving efficiency in budget
expenditures and State investment in basic
infrastructure. Access to clean water, sanitation, public
health and education are key priorities that demand
more robust investment now and in the years to come.
As the UNDP Human Development Report and
other indicators show, we have rebounded strongly
from the brief periods of instability. The political
situation in Timor-Leste in recent years has been
remarkably free of tension. Ours is an open society.
Transparency in our public life is a process that we
have committed ourselves to promoting and to
deepening, with the assistance of the international
community.
As many here know, Timor-Leste is fortunate in
that it is relatively rich in mineral resources. We have a
petroleum fund that is carefully managed to ensure that
it shall benefit Timor-Leste for years to come. The
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative rates
Timor-Leste as the best performer in Asia and third in

7

S/PV.6720

the world in terms of accountability and transparency
in the management of our petroleum resources.
In the pursuit of good governance and
transparency, our National Parliament has enacted an
anti-corruption law. We have since created an
anti-corruption body. The offices of the Ombudsman
and the investigative powers of the Prosecutor-General
have been strengthened. Both have seen robust
investment in organization and training.
We have a dynamic multiparty democracy, with
nine parties represented in the National Parliament.
Almost 30 per cent of elected members of Parliament
are women. Several women hold key ministerial
portfolios. Thirteen candidates have now been
confirmed for the presidential election on 17 March. I
must have been doing a very poor job as President over
the past four years, since so many people now want to
take the job away from me. I am also a candidate
among the 13. Twenty-four political parties have
registered for the legislative elections — 24 political
parties in a country of 1 million. I always tell our
people that the United States, a country of 300 million
and a super-Power, has two parties. Indonesia, a
country of 250 million, has five parties represented in
Parliament. With 1 million people, we now have 24
parties registered.
I can only hope that the electorate is wiser than
the aspiring politicians and cast its votes on a handful
of the better known political parties in order to ensure
stable, functioning majorities. Because I have spoken
ad nauseam in my country about this issue, I have not
earned the sympathy of the aspiring politicians with
my frequent blunt appeal to voters not to waste their
votes on the new, smaller political parties.
We have ratified all major international human
rights treaties and complied with reporting obligations.
According to Reporters Without Borders, Timor-Leste
has some of the freest media in the region. We are
proud that we have a very liberal, humanist
Constitution that prohibits the death penalty and life in
prison. The maximum prison sentence in Timor-Leste
is 25 years.
Together, we have developed our vision for
national development, and last July we launched our
Strategic Development Plan, which will help us
translate our vision into reality. Timor-Leste’s success
is also the United Nations success. UNMIT, led by
Special Representative of the Secretary-General

8

Ms. Ameerah Haq, has made real contributions since it
was established in 2006, most obviously in the areas of
good offices and public security and policing. UNMIT
has also provided important assistance in the areas of
the rule of law, governance, justice and human rights.
By the end of this year, we would like to see
peacekeeping come to a close and to form a new
partnership with the United Nations. I wish to be clear.
We need and want international partnership,
underpinned by a modest United Nations mission in
line with our country’s real needs and adjusted to the
evolving reality on the ground. To achieve that, we
have established a High-level Committee on
Transition, which I chair with the support of the Prime
Minister and the Special Representative. We meet
every other month and have developed a plan for the
transition, which the three of us signed on
19 September 2011. The level of engagement on the
part of both the Government and the United Nations is
steadfast, and I am confident that the plan will be
implemented.
In January, discussions began between the
Government and the United Nations on potential
options for the post-UNMIT United Nations role. The
emerging consensus is that the United Nations role
could include support to further enhance democratic
institutions, capacity-building of the security sector
institutions, in particular the Policia Nacional de
Timor-Leste, our national police force, and continued
support in areas such as governance, justice and human
rights. The Government and all stakeholders will
continue to be actively engaged in these discussions to
ensure that the best option that emerges is one that is
tailored to the specific needs and priorities of TimorLeste — bearing in mind that, by August 2012, there
will be a new Timorese Government that will make the
final decision on that matter.
In closing, I would like to invite everyone here to
Timor-Leste in 2012 to see for themselves how far our
country has come, to partake in the anniversary
celebrations we have planned throughout the year, and
to visit our mountains and swim in our pristine waters.
I pray every day to our God, the Almighty and the
Merciful, to bestow on the members of the Council the
unique qualities of leadership: vision, compassion and
courage.
This collective security body, set up after the
tragedy of the Second World War to spare humankind

12-23800

S/PV.6720

the scourge of wars, is often called upon to prevent or
to end wars. Expectations are as high as the suffering
and desperation of those seeking help. Often those
expectations are not met in a timely fashion, and
people’s faith in and illusions about the idealistic
United Nations they have imagined in their desperation
are shattered. But the sad fact is that too often, there is
not much that outside forces can do to influence the
course of events in a particular country. But the
Security Council can always offer words of support
and hope. The Council might not be able to mitigate
the suffering of all but it can help some. It might not be
able to offer shelter and safe haven to all, but it can
accommodate some. It might not be able to save 1,000
lives, but it can try to save at least one life.
Too often, regimes fail to seize the opportunities
offered them to walk away in safety and with some
semblance of honour, save themselves and spare the
further suffering of others. And too often, the parties to
a conflict miscalculate, underestimate each other and
overestimate their respective strength, believing that
they can outsmart and defeat their adversary if they
just persist, and all they achieve is further suffering of
the people.
At times, the Council is criticized for failing to
act. Sometimes the critics are right; sometimes they are
wrong and unfair in their sweeping judgments. But I
know that the Council does what it can and as much as
it can, because that is the reality of our world.
Before coming here — this is not part of my
prepared speech — I almost cancelled my trip because
a brother-in-law of mine passed away the day before.
But I decided to come to New York anyway to share
with the Council the good news of what is happening
in at least one corner of the world. As I watched the
nightly news on Al-Jazeera, the BBC or CNN, and saw
the Council try to manage many challenging conflict
situations around the world, I thought to myself that
maybe I should go, not only to ask for help but to bring
those people dealing with these challenges around the
world some good news. I do bring good news from
Timor-Leste, hoping that before the Council turns
shortly to manage other situations, such as that in the
Middle East, my news about what the Council and we
have achieved will be of comfort.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
President Ramos-Horta for his statement.

12-23800

I shall now give the floor to members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): It is a pleasure for us
to see you presiding over this meeting, Sir. My
delegation wishes once more to welcome His
Excellency Mr. José Ramos-Horta, President of the
Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, to the Security
Council. We welcome his report on the progress
attained by his country. We also wish to offer our
condolences on the passing his brother-in-law. We also
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Ameerah Haq, for her comprehensive
briefing on the latest developments in Timor-Leste.
South Africa is pleased to extend its
congratulations to Timor-Leste on the ten-year
anniversary of its independence. That is a milestone,
not only for the Government and peoples of TimorLeste, but also for all peace-loving people of the world
who continue to champion the right to selfdetermination. As an indication of remarkable
progress, Timor-Leste has moved from being the host
of a United Nations peacekeeping mission to a country
that has deployed personnel in United Nations
peacekeeping missions such as the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon and United Nations Mission
in the Sudan. That is testament to the strengthened
capacity of the Falintil-Forças de Defesa de TimorLeste and to the will of the Timorese authorities to
positively contribute to international peace and
security. We are also encouraged by the interest
expressed by Timor-Leste in joining in and playing an
important neighbourly role in the regional community
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
This year is also one in which we will see a
drawdown of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) and the accession of complete
authority by the Timorese Government to the full
functioning of its security institutions. During the
reporting period, we have seen general stability in
Timor-Leste through further improvements in the
political and security situations. We welcome the
strong commitment of the leadership and other
stakeholders in Timor-Leste to fostering national
dialogue and peaceful and inclusive participation in
democratic processes, and its ongoing efforts to
promote continued peace, stability and unity.
In the area of governance and institutionbuilding, the Timorese authorities have adopted

9

S/PV.6720

additional legislation to further strengthen the capacity
and effectiveness of State institutions. We are pleased
to note the progress made by the Timorese authorities
in preparing for the upcoming presidential and
legislative elections later this year. The electoral
process will further consolidate the entrenchment of
democracy and stability in the country. We are
particularly encouraged by the ongoing efforts of the
electoral management bodies to increase the
participation of women and youth in the electoral
process. We commend the political leadership for the
commitment it has expressed in holding elections in a
climate of peace and stability. Continued dialogue
among the political leaders in the run-up to the election
will be important to ensuring a peaceful outcome.
Accordingly, the dialogue among national leaders cohosted by President Ramos-Horta and the Bishop of
Baucau, which is scheduled to be held prior to the
elections, will bring them closer to achieving that goal.
While recognizing the progress made in many
areas, much more still needs to be done, as indicated in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/43). A strong
and effective Timorese-led security apparatus to
effectively deal with security threats is key. In that
regard, we have witnessed the resumption of full
policing responsibilities by the Policia Nacional de
Timor-Leste (PNTL) in pursuit of the implementation
of the PNTL-UNMIT police Joint Development Plan.
There has also been a continued focus by the PNTL on
operational capacity, with technical advice from
UNMIT police, in preparation for the coming electoral
processes. There remains a continuing need for support
to the PNTL, further institutional development and
capacity-building. We therefore request UNMIT, in the
remainder of this year, to continue to support the
PNTL.
Truth and reconciliation are important to the
further consolidation of Timor’s long-term stability.
Further progress towards the implementation of the
recommendations of the Commission for Reception,
Truth and Reconciliation and the Commission of Truth
and Friendship would have a positive impact on the
long-term peace and stability of Timor-Leste.
South Africa is pleased with the progress in the
implementation of the Joint Transition Plan as UNMIT
prepares to terminate its mandate. We support the
Secretary-General’s contention that the Joint Transition
Plan should be accompanied by regular review to
ensure its responsiveness to developments on the

10

ground. South Africa maintains that the nature and role
of the United Nations presence in Timor-Leste once
UNMIT’s mandate has ended is a matter that should be
left for the Timorese authorities to decide and on which
they should take the lead.
It is a singular honour for South Africa to be
called upon to play a lead role in the situation in
Timor-Leste in the Security Council. We wish to thank
Council members which have worked constructively on
the draft resolution, which, inter alia, extends
UNMIT’s mandate until 31 December 2012 and
endorses the plan for its phase-down, in accordance
with the wishes of the Government of Timor-Leste and
conditions on the ground following the successful
completion of the 2012 electoral process. We look
forward to the unanimous adoption of the draft
resolution on Timor-Leste.
I am very sure that all of us have taken note of
President Ramos-Horta’s invitation to the Security
Council to visit his great country in 2012.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): I thank you,
Sir, for convening today’s debate on the situation in
Timor-Leste. I would like to extend a warm welcome
to His Excellency Mr. José Ramos-Horta, President of
Timor-Leste, to the Security Council and thank him for
his statement. I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for TimorLeste, Ms. Ameerah Haq, for her comprehensive
briefing.
The Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2012/43)
has provided us with an opportunity to reflect on the
latest developments as the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) prepares to draw
down by the end of this year. It is a matter of great
satisfaction that the overall situation in Timor-Leste
remains calm and stable and that the country is firmly
on the path to long-term peace, stability and
development. We are indeed encouraged by President
Horta’s assessment of the progress achieved so far.
This year could be an important milestone for the
consolidation of democratic transition in Timor-Leste.
As the country marks the tenth anniversary of the
restoration of its independence, presidential and
parliamentary elections are scheduled later this year.
The continued and active engagement of all political
parties in the democratic processes and the
forthcoming elections are an encouraging indicator of
Timor-Leste’s abiding commitment to democracy. We

12-23800

S/PV.6720

are happy to note that there has been steady progress
towards organizing those elections and that an enabling
legislative framework has already been put in place.
We are appreciative of the technical and logistical
support extended by the United Nations and the
international community towards holding the elections.
We compliment the Policia Nacional de TimorLeste (PNTL) on its efforts towards institutional
development and capacity-building. The PNTL has
successfully assumed the responsibility for the
conduct, command and control of all police operations
in the country. The forthcoming elections will be the
final litmus test of its preparedness to maintain law and
order in the country. As the transition progresses, it is
important that UNMIT remain steadfast in its support
to the PNTL in accordance with the wishes of the
Government.
Moving ahead, it is critical that there be
necessary legislative and operational frameworks in
place for a clear delineation of authority between the
military and the police so that they can effectively
discharge their responsibilities under the overall
command and control of civilian Government. We
support the efforts of the Government to seek enhanced
regional engagement and to address the development
challenges confronting the country. We have noted with
satisfaction that overall economic growth, including
proceeds from the oil and gas sector, remains robust.
The Government’s continued focus on infrastructure
and capital development would certainly be helpful in
ushering rapid socio-economic transition in the
country.
As UNMIT moves towards a drawdown by the
end of 2012 and the Government assumes full
responsibility for various processes, the United Nations
system and agencies present in the field must work in a
coherent manner. All critical aspects related to the
transition, including the downsizing of UNMIT’s
police component following the elections, the
implementation of the Joint Transition Plan and the
contours of the future United Nations engagement,
must be decided in close consultation with the
Government. It is important that the transition be
guided and owned by the Timorese Government. We
look forward to the Secretary-General’s report after the
elections.
India attaches great importance to its relations
with Timor-Leste, and we have sought to contribute to

12-23800

the country’s development by providing expertise and
training in areas of our competence and where we see
complementarities in their application. India has
extended its support to the Government of TimorLeste, including through assistance for the purchase of
equipment and materials related to socio-economic
development and in the human resource development
sector. We are also partnering with the Government of
Timor-Leste under the India-Brazil-South Africa
framework.
The progress achieved so far gives us confidence
that we are moving in the right direction and that
UNMIT is well on path to becoming a success story.
We appreciate the efforts of UNMIT, the international
community and bilateral partners towards peace,
stability and development in the country. We support
the Secretary-General’s recommendation for the
extension of UNMIT’s mandate until the end
December 2012 at the current authorized levels.
Before I conclude, I would like to express our
deep appreciation for the leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Ameerah
Haq, and the dedication and hard work of her team in
supporting the Government and people of Timor-Leste.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): It is an honour
to have you chairing this meeting, Sir. It is also a great
honour for us to have heard the inspiring words of
President Ramos-Horta — not only his uplifting
account of Timor-Leste’s extraordinary journey, but
also his reminder of the Council’s heavy and noble
responsibility. We are sorry for his family bereavement
but blessed by his decision nevertheless to keep his
engagement with us.
Many thanks also go to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Ameerah
Haq, for her briefing today, and to all the personnel of
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) for their continued contribution to the
stabilization of Timor-Leste. Allow me to express our
gratitude for all that they have achieved.
I would like to focus on three topics: first,
developments in Timor-Leste; secondly, the standard
that UNMIT’s drawdown sets; and thirdly, the nature
of the United Nations presence once the mission has
left.
First, this will be a pivotal year for the future of
Timor-Leste and its people, who will be asked to elect

11

S/PV.6720

a President and a new Parliament. As Timor-Leste
works towards these important milestones, we are
pleased to note the consolidation of peace and stability
in the country, along with its encouraging economic
growth and development. The holding of free, fair and
accountable elections in March and June is important
for the future of Timor-Leste and its democratic
credentials. We commend the conduct of political
parties that have continued the calls for calm during
the elections and for refraining from potentially
inflammatory rhetoric.
The
resumption
of
primary
policing
responsibilities by the Timorese police force last year
has been a success. Again we note that there has been
no subsequent increase in violence in Timor-Leste as
we approach the one-year anniversary of that handover.
The national police can be proud of their achievements.
Turning to my second point, 2012 is also an
important year in Timor-Leste for United Nations
peacekeeping — a year which, we hope, will set a
standard for future peacekeeping-peacebuilding
transitions. Last year’s handover of full policing
responsibility was a successful example of that in
action. Peace and security have prevailed and TimorLeste has remained stable.
We commend the development of the Joint
Transition Plan by the Government of Timor-Leste and
UNMIT, and hope that it can set a standard for future
peacekeeping-peacebuilding transitions, and an
example for others to follow, where the United Nations
and a host State produce a comprehensive, detailed
plan for safeguarding the future stability of a country,
supported by the Security Council.
It is important that this process succeed for its
own sake, and also to illustrate that the United Nations
and Member States can manage a process of transition
without
jeopardizing
stability.
However,
the
development of the Plan should not lead to
complacency, and we encourage UNMIT to pursue
rigorous scenario analysis and contingency planning,
including in advance of elections, in case conditions
for drawdown are not met or there is a change in the
security situation on the ground.
UNMIT’s withdrawal will be a key test for the
United Nations in ensuring that its drawdown takes
place safely and effectively, while safeguarding
stability in Timor-Leste. While we hope and expect that
peace and security will prevail in the coming years, we

12

should also take this opportunity to reassure the
Government of Timor-Leste that the withdrawal of
UNMIT does not mean that the Security Council will
turn its back on the country.
This brings me to my third and final point on the
post-UNMIT United Nations presence. We sincerely
hope that the United Nations and the Government of
Timor-Leste will continue the cooperation that they
enjoyed in the development of the Joint Transition Plan
in order to present a clear proposal for the shape,
concept and objectives of the post-UNMIT United
Nations presence.
We need a timely decision among the options
contained in the Joint Transition Plan, drawing on the
input of the relevant United Nations agencies and the
international community. We need to ensure that tasks
and resources are allocated and configured to achieve
maximum efficiency and effectiveness. Objectives,
priorities and benchmarks to measure progress must be
clear, as must the criteria for success and withdrawal.
Our goal should be transition to a regular United
Nations country team presence as soon as is
realistically possible.
In the meantime, the transition from UNMIT to a
new form of United Nations presence will represent an
important milestone on the path of continued stability
and growth in Timor-Leste. We are also grateful to
President Ramos-Horta for his very tempting
invitation.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal) (spoke in
Portuguese; interpretation provided by the delegation):
I welcome the President of the Democratic Republic of
Timor-Leste, His Excellency Mr. José Ramos-Horta,
Head of State of one of our brother countries, and the
members of the Government of Timor-Leste. I also
thank him for his inspiring words and the heartfelt
references he made to my country. I also must present
my sincere condolences upon his bereavement. I
appreciate his presence in these difficult circumstances.
I would also like to especially welcome the
delegations of Angola, which will take the floor in its
capacity the current Chair of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries, and Brazil. I want to
thank the United Nations Integrated Mission in TimorLeste (UNMIT), represented by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and to
reiterate Portugal’s full support for the Mission’s work.

12-23800

S/PV.6720

Through Ms. Ameerah Haq, I would also like to praise
the personnel of the Mission for their important work.
The year 2012 will undoubtedly be a decisive
year for Timor-Leste. The presidential and
parliamentary elections will set the pace for the
country’s political life for the coming term. At the
same time, Timor-Leste is preparing to complete the
transition from UNMIT’s mandate to a future United
Nations presence, which must be reassessed and
adapted to the new realities in Timor-Leste. Finally, it
will be the year in which we will commemorate 10
years of an independent, free and democratic TimorLeste.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/43)
rightly highlights the progress that Timor-Leste has
achieved during the reporting period. We believe it is
clear, from the available data and from the will shown
by the Timorese people and institutions, that TimorLeste is a success story in defending and promoting
democracy, human rights and social and economic
development. Timor-Leste is truly a successful case in
the history of transition from conflict to stability and
development. That success is based on the leadership
and ownership of the authorities; on the depth of
strategic planning for the economy and for the
transition beyond peacekeeping; and on the
implementation of key national policies and on
effective coordination with the United Nations and
bilateral partners.
I would now like to underline several elements
that will shape success in the coming months. The
elections will serve as the defining moment for
consolidation of Timorese institutions. We are certain
that the elections will take place in a climate of peace
and transparency and in accordance with international
norms. We are also confident that they will be
characterized by statesmanship on the part of the
political parties and a sense of duty on the part of the
population.
The role to be played by the National Police
Force of Timor-Leste (PNTL) during the elections will
be one of its greatest challenges since it assumed
responsibility for security throughout the country in
March 2011. It is therefore a positive sign that the
PNTL has been preparing for months in order to ensure
public order during the elections and to address any
other challenges that may arise during the electoral
period. In that context, the support of UNMIT police

12-23800

will be important. I would like to emphasize the
admirable work undertaken by UNMIT in the justice
and security sectors.
With respect to the transition process, Portugal
supports the renewal of UNMIT’s mandate until
31 December 2012, as proposed by the SecretaryGeneral in his report. The draft resolution to be
adopted tomorrow will form a good basis for the
remaining work of UNMIT and the transition itself.
I would like to highlight the excellent
cooperation between the Timorese authorities and the
United Nations that resulted in the signing of the Joint
Transition Plan in September 2011 as the road map for
the transfer of responsibilities and capacities from
UNMIT to the Timorese authorities. It is a remarkable
document within the sphere of United Nations
peacekeeping.
The Timorese Government has already expressed
interest in the United Nations remaining in the country
after UNMIT withdraws. That matter is currently
subject to active assessment in Timor-Leste and will
certainly undergo deeper analysis in the second half of
the year, based on the request of the Timorese
Government, assessments by the authorities and the
contributions of civil society and United Nations
entities.
The relevant political developments throughout
2012, preparations for transition to a new format of
United Nations presence in the country, and
recognition of the achievements in transitioning to
peace and democracy and in building and strengthening
institutional capacities fully justify, from Portugal’s
perspective, a Security Council mission to TimorLeste. I hereby thank the President for his invitation
for such a visit.
Timor-Leste has worked actively to achieve
significant social and economic progress. Economic
planning in Timor-Leste has been noteworthy, as
shown by the adoption of the Timor-Leste Strategic
Development Plan for 2011-2030 and the investment in
developing a non-oil economy, which will be essential
to ensuring sustainable development. Improvements
have also been made in governance and administration.
Portugal remains committed to bilateral
cooperation with Timor-Leste, with a particular focus
on strategic areas including justice, security and
education. I am extremely pleased to note the recent

13

S/PV.6720

signing of a cooperation protocol between the
Ministries of Education of Portugal and Timor-Leste
for the training of 7,000 Timorese teachers at all levels
of schooling for a total population of 300,000 students.
The participation of Timorese troops in the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, within the
Portuguese contingent of that Mission, is a particular
example of Timor-Leste’s commitment to international
peace and security. We salute President Ramos-Horta
for his role in the realization of that project.
Timor-Leste still has work ahead in meeting its
people’s aspirations for economic development and the
strengthening of national institutions. The consistent
support of the international community remains a
crucial element in strengthening capacities and in
social and economic development. Portugal is
optimistic about this year’s decisive developments in
Timor-Leste. President Ramos-Horta can count on our
bilateral and multilateral support for Timor-Leste in the
present and in future.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
would like to welcome President José Ramos-Horta to
the Council. The United States deeply appreciates his
passionate advocacy of human rights and democracy
around the world and thanks him for his presence and
assessments on the progress Timor-Leste has made.
We also wish to congratulate Timor-Leste on its
tenth anniversary of independence. Timor-Leste has
taken its rightful place on the global stage, becoming a
contributor to United Nations peacekeeping missions
and founding and chairing the Group of Seven Plus of
post-conflict countries.
I thank Special Representative Haq for today’s
briefing. Her dedicated leadership and continued
commitment to solidifying peace in Timor-Leste are
much appreciated. The United Nations and the
international community as a whole have worked
together since the independence of Timor-Leste and
will continue to partner with that young democracy to
help it develop and prosper.
Today we have the opportunity to reflect on the
advances made in sustaining the stability of TimorLeste and the country’s remaining needs. We must also
focus on the progress of the planned withdrawal of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) and begin to consider post-UNMIT and
United Nations engagement in Timor-Leste.

14

I would like to address five issues. First, the
United States welcomes the transfer of primary
policing responsibilities from UNMIT to the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL). The contribution of
all parties to maintaining stability throughout the
upcoming election period in Timor-Leste will be
critical, and that transfer is a key step in that process.
We welcome the progress to professionalize and
strengthen the PNTL so that it can carry out its full
security responsibilities and command the role UNMIT
has played. We note that challenges remain and we
encourage the Government of Timor-Leste to define
more clearly the respective responsibilities of the
PNTL and the Timorese defence forces, especially as
we near elections.
As Timor-Leste continues to develop its own
national security institutions, clearly defined
authorities, accountability and impartiality will be
crucial to increasing stability. The United States is
committed to supporting the continuing development
of the military and police forces, and we have recently
increased our bilateral support in that area. Our efforts
to advance community policing and sharpen the
investigative skills of police and prosecutors are two
examples of that commitment.
Secondly, we commend the preparations of the
Government of Timor-Leste for the upcoming
elections, and praise the efforts of the United Nations
and other international partners in supporting the
electoral process. The conduct of peaceful, free and
fair elections will be a critical milestone in TimorLeste’s history. The success of the electoral process
will indicate a further solidification of peace and
security throughout the country and signal continued
progress towards a peaceful and prosperous future.
We continue to urge all political parties to respect
the outcome of the democratic process and to conduct
political activities peacefully. We welcome the
commitments the political leaders have made so far to
respecting a peaceful democratic process.
Thirdly, the development of competent and strong
rule of law and governance institutions is critical to the
country’s long-term success. We are encouraged by the
Government’s progress in promoting anti-corruption
and transparency initiatives, and underscore the
importance of strengthening those institutions. We also
encourage the resolution of outstanding truth and
reconciliation issues from the period 1975-1999,

12-23800

S/PV.6720

including the establishment of a memory institute or
other institutional mechanism. We also hope that the
Serious Crimes Investigation Team will be able to
complete its important work within its mandate. We
urge the Timor-Leste authorities to pursue full and
credible accountability for all crimes and abuses,
including, among others, those arising from the 2006
crisis, in order to deliver justice and build trust in the
institutions of justice.
Fourthly, I want to recognize the truly impressive
level of collaboration that has taken place between
UNMIT and the Government of Timor-Leste in
developing a transition plan for UNMIT’s withdrawal
by the end of 2012. We encourage both parties to
continue to focus their work on transition planning,
even as the electoral cycle begins. We encourage
UNMIT and the Government of Timor-Leste to
continue to engage international partners to ensure that
any capability gaps are quickly identified and filled.
Finally, with UNMIT’s expected withdrawal
approaching, we must think about the future
engagement of the United Nations and the Security
Council in Timor-Leste. Discussions on the role of the
United Nations following UNMIT’s departure will
need to include the Government of Timor-Leste and the
international community. We strongly believe that the
elections themselves should not be an exit strategy, but
rather that UNMIT’s transition should be determined
by the progress of events on the ground. We believe
that continued United Nations engagement could play a
constructive role in addressing issues related to
security, human rights, justice, economic development,
governance and accountability.
In closing, the United States would like to once
again commend the leadership and dedication of
Special Representative Haq, the peacekeepers of
UNMIT for their work and contributions, the
international community for its multilateral and
bilateral support to Timor-Leste, and the Timorese
themselves for their continued dedication to peace and
security in Timor-Leste.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to welcome the participation
of Mr. José Ramos-Horta, President of Timor-Leste, in
this meeting. We would also like to express our
condolences on his recent loss and his determination to
attend this Security Council meeting in person despite
the sad circumstances. We are also grateful to Special

12-23800

Representative of the Secretary-General Ms. Ameerah
Haq for her briefing on the work of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT). I will be
brief.
We are pleased at how the situation is developing
in that country. The internal political trends are
positive. That is particularly important in the light of
this year’s upcoming presidential and parliamentary
elections. We hope that they will take place in a
peaceful environment and will affirm the achievements
of the people of Timor-Leste in national reconciliation.
The security situation is also stable. We commend
the Mission’s efforts to support Timor-Leste by
enhancing the security sector, in particular the national
police. We hope that, during the electoral period, the
Mission will serve only as a support to the national
authorities, which will take full control of the situation.
We are pleased to note that the Government of TimorLeste has assumed full responsibility for the capacitybuilding of the national police and that it has taken a
number of specific steps ahead of the elections,
including improved logistical and technical support of
the law enforcement forces.
The coming spring and summer will be a kind of
graduation test for the Mission. Following that, a final
decision on the modalities for the drawdown of the
Mission will be taken. We hope that everything will be
in line with the ongoing Joint Transition Plan of the
Government of Timor-Leste and the Mission and the
timeline set out by the Secretary-General in his
previous report to the Security Council (S/2011/641).
No less important in the second half of this year will be
the issue of the continuing United Nations presence in
Timor-Leste, the nature and extent of which should be
decided in consultation with the Government of TimorLeste, the Mission and other United Nations bodies.
In the period following the Mission’s withdrawal,
in the light of the recent conflict, ongoing
peacebuilding support will be needed. We believe that
the United Nations should continue to provide
appropriate support to the people of Timor-Leste
through its specialized programmes and funds,
including in the social and economic areas. Following
the Mission’s withdrawal, it should not be felt that the
international presence is fleeing the country. In that
regard, we welcome the efforts of those donor
countries that have provided bilateral support to TimorLeste during this period.

15

S/PV.6720

We are pleased to see that the international
community’s efforts to ensure conflict settlement and
post-conflict peacebuilding are having positive results.
The situation in Timor-Leste is a very good example of
that. We hope that by this autumn we will be talking
about the situation in Timor-Leste only positively,
without any reservations whatsoever.
Finally, we support the adoption of the draft
resolution extending the mandate of the Mission until
the end of 2012. We wish the Government of TimorLeste and the Mission success in meeting the various
challenges still facing them.
Mr. Bonne (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for her briefing. Allow me also,
above all, to welcome the presence among us of
President
Ramos-Horta
in
difficult
family
circumstances.
I associate myself with the statement to be made
by the observer of the European Union.
Timor-Leste is entering a delicate electoral phase.
We understand that, and it will be up to the Timorese
themselves to manage this period. However, we have
grounds for optimism. The situation is stable and
everything leads us to believe that the progress noted
in the economic, institutional and social fields will
continue. The transfer of responsibility for security to
the Polícia Nacional de Timor-Leste is taking place
under good conditions with no increase in crime.
However, history should make us cautious. The
United Nations and other international actors will
therefore help the Timor-Leste authorities in the
preparation of the presidential and legislative elections,
and, of course, stand ready if needed. Timor-Leste is a
United Nations success story that shows the ability of
our Organization to accompany a country towards
peace and stability. Once again, we wish to commend
the remarkable work of the Special Representative and
all staff of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT). We also salute the political
maturity shown by the Timorese political class
throughout that process. We also congratulate President
Ramos-Horta on his country’s participation in a United
Nations peacekeeping operation, which promotes
Timor-Leste from the rank of beneficiary of United
Nations peacekeeping assistance to that of contributor
to peacekeeping.

16

We supported the new deal for engagement in
fragile States, adopted in Busan last December. That
initiative is ambitious in seeking to change the deal
between fragile countries and development partners in
a spirit of mutual responsibility. On that occasion we
were able to assess the dynamic role played by
President Ramos-Horta and the diplomacy of his
country within the Group of Seven Plus, and we
appreciated it.
The departure of UNMIT does not mean that the
United Nations is losing interest in Timor-Leste. On
the contrary, the international community is committed
for the long term. The European Union will therefore
continue its work for the country’s development and
stability. French bilateral assistance will also continue
in line with existing bilateral aid and the priorities set
out in the Strategic Development Plan adopted by the
Timorese authorities.
We hope that the weeks following the elections
will be an opportunity for the new Government, in
cooperation with the United Nations and partner
countries, to define the kind of presence that our
Organization will keep in place after UNMIT’s
departure. We also hope that the coming months will
make it possible to affirm the recent experience of
Timor-Leste as a good example of peacebuilding
operations.
Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to welcome the presence of His
Excellency Mr. José Ramos-Horta, President of the
Republic of Timor-Leste, and to thank him for his
presentation. I would also like to offer him our most
sincere condolences following the passing of a dear
close relative. I would also like to thank Ms. Ameerah
Haq, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Timor-Leste and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), for her
detailed briefing on the most recent developments in
Timor-Leste since the previous meeting last November
(see S/PV. 6664).
My country welcomes the fact that the situation
in Timor-Leste remained calm in the period covered by
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/43). At this
crucial moment in its history, Timor-Leste must pursue
the stabilization and pacification process in the
country. This stability was made possible by the
determination of the national authorities to preserve its
achievements and by the efforts of the international

12-23800

S/PV.6720

community through UNMIT and the presence on the
ground of the multinational security force.

General’s report (S/2010/43) on the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).

In this context, we welcome the considerable
efforts made by the Timor-Leste authorities, the Polícia
National de Timor-Leste (PNTL) and the army, to
ensure security. Indeed, the implementation of the
PNTL-UNMIT police Joint Development Plan and the
institutional capacity-building of the Timor-Leste army
have significantly contributed to stabilizing the
country. Moreover, the unprecedented participation of
Timorese soldiers in the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan attests to the professionalism of the
Timor-Leste army and to the commitment of the
Government to contributing to achieving the objectives
of the Charter of the United Nations.

Azerbaijan welcomes further improvements in
many aspects of the political and security situation in
Timor-Leste. We note the progress made in achieving
stability, economic growth and socio-economic
development in the country, and commend the
Government of Timor-Leste for its efforts to this end.

In terms of the rule of law, actions taken to
protect children, investigations into crimes against
humanity and combating discrimination against women
are all of considerable significance. The reforms
undertaken by the Timorese authorities in the judicial
sector have also facilitated access to justice, reduced
the backlog of criminal cases, and improved prison
infrastructure. These reforms also have facilitated the
adoption, in the framework of enhancing democratic
governance, of legal texts concerning the fight against
corruption, money-laundering and the financing of
terrorism.
Timor-Leste is on the eve of important
presidential and legislative elections that will represent
a turning point by leading to the establishment of a
new Government. In this regard, all stakeholders — be
they political parties or members of civil society, and
particularly women and young people — must be
committed to a satisfactory electoral process, which is
so important for the future of Timor-Leste. At the same
time, as noted by the President of the Republic, the
necessary support of the international community must
continue in order to support the Timorese reforms, the
reintegration of ex-combatants and the economic and
social development of Timor-Leste.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to welcome the presence at this meeting of
His Excellency Mr. José Ramos-Horta, President of the
Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, and to thank him
for his statement. We are also grateful to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Ameerah
Haq, for her briefing and presentation of the Secretary-

12-23800

As the Secretary-General points out in his report,
steady progress has been made in the preparations for
the presidential and parliamentary elections this year.
Important steps have been taken to complete the legal
framework for the upcoming elections. At the same
time, it is obvious that the security situation and
stability on the ground will remain key issues in the
period leading up to the elections. It is essential that
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
continue to play her good offices role vis-à-vis all
parties to ensure a peaceful and credible political
process.
We note that the Polícia Nacional de Timor-Leste
(PNTL) has made operational planning for the
elections a key priority, and that UNMIT police will
continue to stand ready to provide support to the
PNTL, if required and requested, during the electoral
period and beyond. It is encouraging to note that, since
the PNTL assumed full responsibility for law
enforcement in March 2011, the security situation in
the country has continued to be stable and calm, and
the reported crime rate has remained low. It is critical
to further strengthen the institutional development of
the PNTL and support the effective implementation of
the Joint Development Plan.
Azerbaijan welcomes the progress achieved in the
areas of rule of law, justice and human rights in TimorLeste and, in this regard, encourages all stakeholders to
continue their cooperation aimed at strengthening the
capacity of national institutions. We commend the
Government for its positive and constructive response
following the review of its national report through the
Human Rights Council’s Periodic Review Mechanism.
We also are of the view that further efforts towards
establishing accountability for serious criminal
offences of the past would have a positive impact on
long-term peace and stability in Timor-Leste.
Against the background of many challenges, the
country still needs the continued assistance of bilateral
and multilateral partners in order to fully realize its

17

S/PV.6720

potential for equitable and inclusive sustainable
growth. We welcome the Dili Development Pact,
agreed between the Government of Timor-Leste and
the donor community in July 2011, and consider it
essential that UNMIT continue to cooperate and
coordinate with the United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes, as well as all relevant partners, to support
the Government of Timor-Leste.
Azerbaijan commends UNMIT and the United
Nations country team, under the leadership of Special
Representative Ameerah Haq, for their continued
efforts in helping the people of Timor-Leste to advance
peace, stability and development. We support the
extension of the UNMIT mandate until the end of this
year, and believe that it will contribute to facilitating
the transition process. The implementation of the Joint
Transition Plan will be an important task for all
stakeholders in the period ahead and, together with the
needs and preferences of the Government, will
definitely influence the final decision on the United
Nations presence and role in Timor-Leste after UNMIT
completes its mandate at the end of 2012.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by welcoming the President of
Timor-Leste, His Excellency Mr. José Ramos-Horta.
His serene but firm defence of human rights — which,
among other things, earned him the Nobel Peace
Prize — have been a source of inspiration to many of
us.
Similarly, we appreciate the information provided
by Ms. Ameerah Haq, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste and Head of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT). We commend her leadership and efforts in
support of that country.
The year 2012 is very important, as it marks the
tenth anniversary of the restoration of Timor-Leste’s
independence. The achievements made in that brief
time deserve recognition, and we are glad to share this
historic moment with that country. We congratulate
President Ramos-Horta on his leadership and for the
progress made in his country. We also thank bilateral
donors and the international security forces for their
continuing commitment to peace and stability in
Timor-Leste.
We are aware that the consolidation of democracy
and the building of a system of governance are a longterm process. Although there are many challenges to

18

overcome, the political, economic and security
situation in Timor-Leste bears witness to the goodwill
and resilience of the Timorese. The Security Council is
following closely the electoral process, and it is
encouraging that so far steady progress has been made,
which will ensure a peaceful and credible political
process.
We know that the support of the international
community will still be needed after UNMIT’s
withdrawal, particularly to consolidate Timor-Leste
institutions that are still in the process of formation,
such as the police, a sector in which the United Nations
has heavily invested. In that regard, we welcome the
Joint Transition Plan signed by the Government of
Timor-Leste and UNMIT. Its effective implementation
will ensure a smooth transition.
We are encouraged by Timor-Leste’s increasing
incorporation into the international community. An
example is its efforts to join the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, which we hope will be
successful. This will undoubtedly be a platform that
will benefit not only the Timorese but also the
international community as a whole.
Guatemala believes that the continued presence
of the United Nations after the withdrawal of UNMIT
must be consistent with the situation on the ground and
respect the priorities of the Government to be elected
in the coming months.
Timor-Leste is endowed with sufficient natural
resources. The proper management of those resources
will be essential to its sustainable development.
Greater investment will be required in areas including
education, youth employment, health and agriculture.
We echo the call made by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Haq, who urged national institutions
to resolutely combat corruption and to send a clear
message that such practices will not be tolerated.
We would like to acknowledge the important role
that the United Nations has played in Timor-Leste
since 1999. The United Nations has become a better
institution, as a result not only of the work done there,
but also of the lessons learned from that country. Its
evolution has thus been a shared success.
In that same vein, I wish also to recall the
memory of the late Sergio Vieira de Mello, one of the
pioneers of the United Nations presence in TimorLeste.

12-23800

S/PV.6720

Allow me to conclude by thanking President José
Ramos-Horta for his encouraging presentation. It is
true that Timor-Leste is a Security Council success
story, but, more important, it is a success story for the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me at the outset to welcome His Excellency
Mr. José Ramos-Horta, President of the Democratic
Republic of Timor-Leste, and to congratulate him on
the major progress that has been made under his
leadership towards the consolidation of democracy in
his country. I should also like to thank Ms. Ameerah
Haq, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT), for her detailed and clear
briefing on recent developments in that country. We
underscore her dedication and commitment, as well as
that demonstrated by all the staff of UNMIT. I should
like to reiterate our support for her efforts to promote
peace, stability and development in Timor-Leste.
My delegation would like to highlight the
important progress that has been made towards
political consolidation, improved security and stability
in Timor-Leste. We also commend the commitment
shown by the authorities, civil society, the security
forces and the United Nations to foster national
dialogue and promote broad participation in democratic
processes.
We wish to highlight the significant progress
made in preparing for the 2012 elections, particularly
the approval by the National Electoral Commission of
subsidiary electoral legislation, the outcome of the
voter registration process and the initiatives aimed at
encouraging greater participation by women and young
people in the electoral process. The holding of free,
transparent and peaceful elections would be a
milestone for Timor-Leste and would also represent a
major test for the Polícia Nacional de Timor-Leste
(PNTL) and its capacity to respond to security
problems.

parliamentary debate held on the 2012 State budget.
Nevertheless, we believe that in order to ensure a
sufficiency of funds, the necessary resources must be
made be available in a timely manner, so as to ensure
that the national police has a necessary and adequate
logistical capacity before UNMIT’s withdrawal.
We believe that the full implementation of the
recommendations of the Commission for Reception,
Truth and Reconciliation and the Commission of Truth
and Friendship will contribute to the consolidation of
peace and stability in Timor-Leste. We recommend that
there should be a prompt resumption of the
parliamentary debate on draft laws on indemnification
and the establishment of the institutions that will take
over from the two Commissions.
My delegation is pleased to see the progress
achieved by the Government in terms of economic
growth, in particular with respect to poverty reduction
and improved human development indicators. But
efforts still need to be made to promote inclusive, fair
and sustainable growth. It is essential that the
necessary resources be allocated to sectors such as
rural development, health, nutrition, education and job
creation.
We would also highlight the activities carried out
by the Government of Timor-Leste to enhance the
effectiveness and institutional capacities of the
Anti-Corruption Commission and the Civil Service
Commission. We welcome the adoption of a law on
preventing and combating money-laundering and the
financing of terrorism. We believe that Timor-Leste
should have the legislation, institutions, machinery and
standards necessary to ensure the stability,
transparency and effectiveness of the public
administration in the longer term.

We believe that UNMIT police should continue to
provide the necessary operational support during and
after the electoral period. We agree with you,
Mr. President, that with more than 20 political parties,
this is not an easy process to manage.

The effective implementation of the Joint
Transition Plan must be a major priority for the
Government and all stakeholders. Periodic reviews
must be undertaken that ensure the operational capacity
and response of UNMIT on the ground. As the
Secretary-General states in his report (S/2012/43),
achieving the Plan’s objectives will influence the size,
composition and nature of the United Nations
participation in Timor-Leste following the withdrawal
of UNMIT.

With regard to the logistical capacity-building of
the Timor-Leste police, we would highlight the
commitment made by the Prime Minister in the

Given that in the coming months UNMIT’s
support will continue to be necessary for institutional
development and the building of the operational

12-23800

19

S/PV.6720

capacities of the national police, and with respect to
assistance with the elections, Colombia recommends
that the mandate of UNMIT be extended until
31 December 2012.
Mr. Yang Tao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome the presence here today of President José
Ramos-Horta. His briefing was very encouraging. I
also thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Haq for her briefing and her work.
Since the Council’s review of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) late last
year, the situation in Timor-Leste has achieved further
positive progress. At present, the overall situation in
the country remains stable. State institutions are
working normally and police capacity-building has
been especially successful. Economic and social
development is advancing steadily, with good
prospects for development. All of this is the result of
the unremitting efforts of the Government and people
of Timor-Leste, as well as of the critical, vigorous
support of the international community and the United
Nations over the past many years.
Timor-Leste
will
hold
presidential
and
parliamentary elections this year, and UNMIT’s
peacekeeping activities will come to an end. This will
be a crucial year for Timor-Leste’s development. As to
the next phase of priority work for the international
community, I should like to make the following
proposals.
First, we must work tirelessly to support the
Government of Timor-Leste in its capacity-building.
The Government and people of Timor-Leste, under the
leadership
of
President
Ramos-Horta,
have
energetically pursued capacity-building for many years
and striven to take control of the fate and future of
their country, for which China expresses its
appreciation. The development and long-term security
of Timor-Leste will ultimately depend on the efforts of
its Government and people. China hopes that the
international community will further enhance its
support to the capacity-building efforts of the
Government of Timor-Leste, especially in the crucial
areas of institution-building, security, justice, the
economy, education, health and women’s issues. In this
process, the opinions of the Government and people of
Timor-Leste should be taken into account and their
leadership respected.

20

Secondly, priority efforts must be made to ensure
the successful holding of the presidential and
parliamentary elections in Timor-Leste. The upcoming
elections are a major event in the country’s political
life and are of particular significance. China hopes that
the international community and the Government of
Timor-Leste will join forces to ensure orderly and calm
presidential and parliamentary elections. We support
UNMIT in its ongoing close coordination with the
Government of Timor-Leste as it provides necessary
support and plays a constructive role.
Thirdly, it is essential to ensure a stable and
smooth transition process. Ever since its establishment,
UNMIT has made a positive contribution to the
stability and development of Timor-Leste. China
supports the extension of the Mission’s mandate and
the Joint Transition Plan prepared by UNMIT and the
Government of Timor-Leste. We also support the
Secretary-General’s proposal for a phased drawdown
of UNMIT. We hope that the parties concerned will
prepare further arrangements to improve the transition
process and help conclude UNMIT’s mandate in a
stable and orderly manner with a view to ensuring
Timor-Leste’s stability and full capacity to achieve
sustainable development. UNMIT will thereby become
a success story in the peacekeeping activities of the
United Nations.
As to the future United Nations presence in
Timor-Leste, China hopes that the Secretariat will
enjoy close cooperation with the Government and fully
heed and respect its opinion. We expect the Secretariat
and the Secretary-General to offer further proposals to
the Council in that respect. As a developing country,
China has always actively sought out friendly and
mutually beneficial cooperation with Timor-Leste.
Going forward, we will continue to provide our
assistance and support to Timor-Leste within our
capacities.
Mr. Berger (Germany): My delegation would
like to convey a particularly warm welcome to
President Ramos-Horta. We also wish to congratulate
him on the upcoming anniversary of Timor-Leste’s
independence. His statement shows the commitment
with which both the Timorese people and the
Government are working towards shaping a peaceful
and prosperous future for their country.
I would like to join previous speakers in thanking
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Haq

12-23800

S/PV.6720

for her briefing and her leadership. As I have stated in
the Council before, Germany commends the successful
work of the United Nations team, both in Timor-Leste
and in New York, in support of the Timorese people.
Let me also thank the delegation of South Africa
for taking the lead in this dossier. Germany is fully
supportive of the draft resolution to extend the mandate
of the United Nations Integrated Mission in TimorLeste (UNMIT) one final time until the end of this
year. It is our intention to co-sponsor the draft
resolution.
My country aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union later in this
debate.
Germany continues to be fully confident that the
people of Timor-Leste, with the support of the United
Nations and many international partners, remain on the
right track. Today’s briefings clearly underpin our
optimism. We welcome the continued overall progress
in the country, among other things with regard to the
consolidation
of
the
substantial
institutional
achievements made, the generally calm security
environment, and the preparations for the upcoming
electoral cycle. In the latter context, Germany
welcomes the invitation by the Government of TimorLeste to the European Union to send an election
observation mission. In light of this progress, my
delegation feels assured that the successful completion
of another electoral cycle this year will mark the right
moment for initiating the withdrawal of UNMIT.
At this stage, Germany encourages maximum
attention to a smooth and sustainable transition from
UNMIT to the Timorese Government, the new United
Nations presence or other bilateral partners, and lauds
the respective efforts made so far. It is crucial that we
develop an understanding of what we are transitioning
into. Here, my delegation considers it very helpful that
a national consensus is taking shape on the nature of
the future, post-UNMIT United Nations support in the
country. We encourage the next Government to make a
timely decision on the international support requested.
With regard to the remaining volatilities,
Germany is of the view that the right lessons have to be
drawn from the past. Yet, we underline the mediumterm requirements for further consolidation in the areas
of justice, governance, human rights and civilian
capacity-building, as was also mentioned by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. We

12-23800

also support our Timorese partners in their expectation
to maintain a close link to the Council for as long as
volatilities remain. As became apparent in this
morning’s membership consultations, many of those
requirements coincide with the United Nations
strategic focus and comparative advantages.
At this stage, I would like to express once again
the appreciation of my Government for the valuable
contributions made by UNMIT and commend the
dedication and service of its staff. Let me conclude by
wishing President Ramos-Horta and his compatriots all
the best for this very important year. Germany highly
values its close friendship with Timor-Leste and will
continue to stand by Timor-Leste during transition and
thereafter.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for holding this debate on Timor-Leste. We join other
Council members in welcoming His Excellency
Mr. José Ramos-Horta, President of Timor-Leste, to the
Security Council. I would also like to offer heartfelt
condolences upon the demise of his brother-in-law. We
also thank him for inviting the Council to visit TimorLeste.
We would also like to thank Ms. Ameerah Haq,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Timor-Leste, for her comprehensive briefing.
The year 2012 marks the tenth anniversary of the
restoration of independence of Timor-Leste. During
this period, the country has made remarkable progress
overall and will soon transition to being a fully
independent and sovereign nation. Pakistan has made
significant contribution to this transition. As a
contributor to the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor, the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor and the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT)
over the past 10 years, Pakistan considers itself a
stakeholder in the peace and stability of that country.
Currently, there are 127 Pakistani police personnel
serving in UNMIT. One of them, Ms. Shahzadi
Gulfam, was awarded the 2011 International Female
Police Peacekeeper Award in recognition of her
outstanding performance as the team leader of the
Vulnerable Persons Unit in Dili. Pakistan is fully
committed to contributing to the completion of the
mandated
tasks
during
UNMIT’s
remaining
deployment period, in what should be the Mission’s
last extension. I would like to touch upon four issues.

21

S/PV.6720

First, the successful holding of presidential and
legislative elections will be a major milestone in the
transition in Timor-Leste and a key test of the viability
of its State institutions. We are pleased to note from the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/43) that steady
progress has been made in the preparations for the
elections. We commend the efforts of President José
Ramos-Horta to hold a dialogue among national
leaders to create a positive atmosphere for the
elections. It would be important to hold peaceful
elections in accordance with the Constitution of the
country. UNMIT and the bilateral partners of TimorLeste should extend maximum support for the
attainment of that objective. The maintenance of law
and order before and during the elections will be
critical. The operational and logistical gaps faced by
the Polícia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL), as
identified in the Secretary-General’s report, must
therefore be filled in a timely manner.
Secondly, the implementation of the Joint
Transition Plan, signed between the Government of
Timor-Leste and UNMIT on 19 September, will be
critical to the smooth transition of the Mission and the
continued development of the country. In accordance
with the Plan, the transfer of UNMIT functions and
assets to the Timorese Government must take place in a
systematic and coordinated manner, while ensuring that
national authorities have the required capabilities to
take over functions that are being transferred to them.
There is a need to maintain momentum in that exercise,
even as the country prepares to hold the elections. We
look forward to the determination of the United
Nations post-UNMIT engagement in Timor-Leste, from
among one of the four options identified in the Plan
and based on close consultations with the Timorese
authorities. The international community must continue
to assist the country for the duration of the Transition
Plan.
Thirdly, the presence of effective security forces
is critical for maintaining the stability of the country.
We note with satisfaction that the security situation in
the country has remained stable following the transfer
of policing responsibilities to the PNTL. UNMIT must
continue to support the PNTL in its capacity-building
in accordance with the PNTL-UNMIT Police Joint
Development Plan. The PNTL continues to face a
shortage of equipment and resources. In that regard, we
commend the steps taken by the Government to
increase the budgetary allocation for bridging the

22

capacity gaps faced by the PNTL. The bilateral
partners of Timor-Leste must also assist the country in
addressing those gaps through the provision of
resources and expertise. Simultaneously, the authorities
must take steps to build and consolidate judicial
authorities and institutions in order to ensure
accountability and prevent impunity.
Fourthly, we are encouraged by the economic
performance of Timor-Leste. As underscored in the
Secretary-General’s report, the Government must make
further efforts to promote inclusive, equitable and
sustainable growth in the country. The international
community has played its part in helping the people of
Timor-Leste. It is now up to the Timorese leadership to
seize the opportunity and build a better future for the
country.
Finally, we would like to commend the efforts of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ameerah Haq and her team in helping make UNMIT a
success story for the United Nations. Let me once
again assure the Council of Pakistan’s support to that
endeavour.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Togo.
I would like to thank Ms. Ameerah Haq for her
clear introduction of the report (S/2012/43) of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT). I also welcome the
presence in the Security Council of His Excellency
Mr. José Ramos-Horta, President of the Democratic
Republic of Timor-Leste, who has honoured our debate
today with his presence in spite of the loss of a member
of his family.
In accordance with its mandate, UNMIT is to
support the Government and the country’s institutions
with a view to consolidate stability, promote a culture
of democratic governance and facilitate political
dialogue among Timorese stakeholders in their efforts
to begin a process of national reconciliation and to
promote social cohesion.
To that end, on 1 December 2006, UNMIT
concluded an agreement with the Government on the
restoration and maintenance of security in Timor-Lest
and on assistance for the reform, restructuring and
strengthening of the Polícia Nacional de Timor-Leste
(PNTL) and the Ministry of the Interior. Similarly, in

12-23800

S/PV.6720

resolution 1969 (2011), of 24 February 2011, the
Security Council tasked UNMIT with supporting,
within the scope of its mandate, the organization of
legislative and presidential elections scheduled for this
year. Togo welcomes the fact that the United Nations is
effectively helping the Government of Timor-Leste in
both the electoral process and in bolstering the
participation of women and young people in political
life. It is our hope that, with the assistance of UNMIT,
the parliamentary democracy that is developing in the
country will be strengthened following the upcoming
elections. In that regard, the dialogue among national
leaders co-hosted by President Ramos-Horta and the
Bishop of Baucau should be pursued.
With regard to democratic governance, we duly
appreciate the campaign that has been launched to
combat corruption and clean up public finances in
Timor-Leste. In that regard, my country commends
Parliament’s adoption of the law aimed at combating
and preventing money laundering and the financing of
terrorism.
On the security front, the UNMIT police
contingent has continued to provide the PNTL with
operational support in various areas, as well as support
for security agencies, institutional capacity-building
and mentoring for border guard units, including
carrying out joint patrols.
At the same time, UNMIT is working to promote
human rights and the administration of justice, in
particular through a national awareness-raising
campaign with regard to protecting children. UNMIT
also supports the national priorities programme,
socio-economic
development
and
humanitarian
assistance.
Lastly, UNMIT, the Government and other
stakeholders have been working to implement the
transition process, in line with the Transition Plan
signed on 19 December 2011 by the President, the
Prime Minister and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.
We welcome all those efforts, which are perfectly
in line with the goals of promoting peace and security
in Timor-Leste. Nevertheless, while the overall current
situation in Timor-Leste may be calm, we must not lose
sight of local tensions, especially between individuals
and martial arts groups. We hope that the decision of
the Timorese Government to suspend the activities of
those groups for a year will contribute to the

12-23800

organization of legislative and presidential elections
without violence in the country.
On the legal front, we saw that despite the
development of a legal framework and a national plan
of action against gender-based violence, there has been
no progress in the situation with regard to the legal
prosecution of the perpetrators of serious crimes and
grave violations of human rights committed during the
2006 crisis.
We are also of the view that additional efforts
should be devoted to promoting fair and lasting
socio-economic improvement. Togo calls on TimorLeste’s development partners to continue to support the
country in that regard.
The efforts of the United Nations system as a
whole are significant. However, major challenges
remain. For that reason, it is important for UNMIT to
pursue its efforts in the priority areas of its mandate,
such as institutional development, capacity-building
for the national police and electoral assistance. It is
also essential to ensure the efficient implementation of
the Joint Development Plan of the national police and
the United Nations police. The extension of UNMIT’s
mandate is therefore appropriate and I call on the
Security Council to consider the essential stakes in
making a decision on this issue.
In closing, I would like to congratulate the troopand police-contributing countries to UNMIT on their
efforts to ensure peace and stability in Timor-Leste.
The Security Council and the United Nations as a
whole are always ready to do what is necessary to
achieve this objective, which my country is very
pleased to note.
I resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Angola.
Mr. Da Cruz (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese;
English text provided by the delegation): I take the
floor on behalf of the Community of Portuguesespeaking Countries (CPLP): Brazil, Cape Verde,
Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, Portugal, Sao Tome and
Principe, Timor-Leste and my own country, Angola,
which is the current Chair of the Community.
At the outset, I would like to welcome the
participation in this meeting of His Excellency
Mr. José Ramos-Horta, President of Timor-Leste. I also

23

S/PV.6720

take this opportunity to welcome the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2012/43) on the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).
It is with great pleasure that we note the progress
made by Timor-Leste in recent times and how the
report of the Secretary-General does justice to it.
Timor-Leste is one scenario where cooperation within
the CPLP has proven very important for all Member
States, and we sincerely hope that the result of our
joint efforts will benefit the Timorese nation.
The installation of the permanent representation
of the CPLP in Dili is progressing thanks to the
invaluable support of the Timorese authorities.
Moreover, the CPLP strategic plan for Timor-Leste
should soon be in place, especially in the area of the
promotion and dissemination of the Portuguese
language. Thus, the reformulation of the mandate of
the permanent representation that was agreed at the
summit in Luanda, with a strong cultural component
and support for the use of the Portuguese language in
Timor-Leste, in addition to the political component, is
of added importance.
Timor-Leste’s commitment to forging a strong
relationship with the CPLP has also been demonstrated
by its performance as the current President of the CPLP
Parliamentary Assembly and the good results achieved
at its third session, held in Dili in September 2011. The
CPLP has confidence in the country’s political stability,
which has been reflected in the preparation of political
parties for an electoral contest and in the holding of
each party’s congress in a peaceful environment. The
CPLP also supports the initiatives of the Government
concerning stabilization and reconciliation through
institutional dialogue.
The States members of the CPLP will remain
committed to continuing the excellent cooperation
developed with Timor-Leste to date in order to
strengthen its stability, consolidate its institutions and
grow its economy. This process also contributes to the
growing assertion of the country in its region, which is
beneficial to the involvement of the CPLP in SouthEast Asia and the Pacific.
Timor-Leste’s
successful
application
for
membership in the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations and the appointment of a working group to
consider the process of accession attest to the country’s
progress in recent years. We are further pleased to see
Timor-Leste taking its first steps as a country that

24

contributes to peace and security in the world with the
integration of soldiers of the Falintil-Forças Armadas
de Defesa de Timor-Leste (F-FDTL) in the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon in Lebanon and in
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau, as well as a military observer in South
Sudan.
In other areas, Timor-Leste will certainly be an
example to follow in ensuring a more peaceful and
more secure world. I note the lessons learned and
shared by Timor-Leste with regard to the peaceful
demobilization of the veterans of the liberation
struggle, the new military recruits, the legislation
concerning F-FDTL, and the professionalization of the
defence forces of Timor-Leste, which should pride
themselves for serving the people and democracy of
their country.
The year 2012 is of great importance to the
consolidation of the Timorese democracy, and the
Community I represent here reaffirms its confidence in
the maturity of the Timorese people and leaders as they
embark on the political steps that lie ahead. We are
certain that the next presidential and legislative
elections will take place in an environment of
tranquillity and security, reflecting the positive
developments of recent years in the country.
The
Community
of
Portuguese-speaking
Countries maintains its solidarity with Timor-Leste and
has confidence in the capacity of the Timorese leaders
and people to maintain peace and stability, which are
essential to the economic and social development that
can make Timor-Leste a factor for increased stability
and security in the region.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil) (spoke in Portuguese;
English text provided by the delegation): I welcome
His Excellency President José Ramos-Horta and
express Brazil’s pleasure at seeing him participate in
this meeting of the Security Council. I would also like
to thank Special Representative Ameerah Haq for her
briefing and congratulate her on her efforts in support
of Timor-Leste. Brazil is also grateful for the work of
South Africa as the new Coordinator of the Core Group
for Timor-Leste.
The upcoming elections in Timor-Leste will be a
particularly significant moment in the history of the

12-23800

S/PV.6720

country. They will mark the third democratic elections
carried out by the Timorese people, and will occur
during the symbolically important celebration of the
tenth anniversary of Timorese independence. More
importantly, the elections and the newly elected
Government’s assumption of authority will be
cornerstones for the definition of the future United
Nations presence in Timor-Leste.

UNMIT, have significantly contributed to stability in
the security sector, the strengthening of institutions and
socio-economic development. We are fully confident
that Timor-Leste will continue along that positive path.
Brazil will continue to support the Government of
Timor-Leste through bilateral and trilateral cooperation
projects in areas such as agriculture, education, justice
and security.

Brazil trusts that the elections will take place
successfully. The fluid and democratic dialogue
between the Government and the opposition has been a
sign of the political maturity of the Timorese people
and institutions. We also congratulate the Timorese
authorities on the measures taken to prepare for the
elections. Brazil shares the Secretary-General’s
satisfaction with the emphasis placed by the Polícia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) on operational
planning for the electoral months with the assistance of
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT).

Timor-Leste has had an exemplary trajectory. As
we pointed out during the Council’s debate in
November of last year (see S/PV.6664), it is telling that
the challenges that the country faces now are not those
of violent conflict but rather of socio-economic
development and institutional consolidation — in other
words, of fulfilling the country’s great potential.

We are convinced that the stability Timor-Leste
has achieved will be carefully maintained. We
acknowledge
that,
since
reassuming
primary
responsibilities for policing almost a year ago, the
PNTL has demonstrated its capacity to fully carry out
the task. The work of UNMIT with the PNTL,
including through the implementation of the Joint
Development Plan, has been of great importance. We
expect the Mission to continue assisting the National
Police until the final withdrawal of UNMIT’s police
component.
The groundbreaking initiative of the Joint
Transition Plan sets a useful example of the importance
of the dialogue between the host country and the
United Nations to allow for the efficient transfer of
responsibilities to the Government after the departure
of a United Nations mission. As a member of the Core
Group for Timor-Leste, Brazil joins the consensual
support for the extension of UNMIT’s mandate until
the end of the year and looks forward to the SecretaryGeneral’s assessment on the political and security
situation in Timor-Leste. It is crucial that the gradual
drawdown of UNMIT take into account the wishes of
the Government of Timor-Leste, the conditions on the
ground and the successful completion of the electoral
process.
As outlined in the Joint Transition Plan, the
projects set forth by the Timorese, with the help of

12-23800

Timor-Leste’s bid for accession to the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations and its
contribution to the United Nations missions in Lebanon
and South Sudan are a sign of the country’s intention to
play its part in contributing to the cause of a more
peaceful and prosperous world. UNMIT’s role has been
fundamental and will continue to be so until its
departure. We congratulate the Government of TimorLeste and UNMIT for their momentous achievements.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the deputy head of the delegation of the
European Union.
Mr. Vrailas: Thank you, Mr. President, for giving
the floor to the European Union (EU).
The acceding country Croatia, the candidate
countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro and Iceland, the countries of
the Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Serbia, and the European Free
Trade Association country Norway, member of the
European Economic Area, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align
themselves with this declaration.
First and foremost, I would like to congratulate
President Ramos-Horta and the Government of TimorLeste on the continued progress as manifestly spelled
out in the Secretary-General’s report before us
(S/2012/43). The Government’s leadership in fostering
peace, unity and development continues to bear fruit.
I would also like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Ameerah Haq for her briefing.
Her team’s efforts towards stabilization and recovery

25

S/PV.6720

deserve much praise. We also commend the thorough
way in which the team is preparing for the departure of
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) and the necessary transition of the work of
the international community.
Over the years, Timor-Leste has accomplished
impressive progress in terms of stability, democracy,
the rule of law, human rights and economic growth. It
has demonstrated to the international community its
resolve to stay the course, with this year’s elections as
yet another important milestone. The gradual
downsizing and proposed ultimate withdrawal of
UNMIT by the end of this election year are logical
steps on that path.

Turning to the post-UNMIT landscape, we
believe that the necessary decisions need to be taken in
coordination between the Timorese Government and
the United Nations. Whichever setup is decided upon,
from a European perspective it should be designed to
ensure a smooth transition, without any significant
gaps, and to preserve the considerable achievements of
UNMIT’s activities to date. We also believe that
appropriate follow-up needs to be ensured of UNMIT’s
important work on, among other things, justice, the
rule of law and human rights, including through a
continuation of support to the Provedor for Human
Rights and Justice. In that context, the creation of a
local office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights could also be an option worth exploring.

We share the Secretary-General’s positive
appraisal of the steady progress in preparing the
presidential and parliamentary elections. Particularly
encouraging is the constructive and responsible manner
in which political leaders, security forces and civil
society have been interacting, at the national and local
levels, to ensure a safe and responsible electoral
process, consistent with previous occasions. In view of
the coming electoral period and the challenges created
thereby, continued close cooperation between the
Polícia Nacional de Timor-Leste and the United
Nations police, as mutually agreed, remains important.

We have stood by Timor-Leste’s side through its
challenging times and remain committed to doing so in
the future. As the focus is shifting from security and
stability to development issues, the international
community should remain strongly engaged. With the
adoption of the Timor-Leste Strategic Development
Plan, the implementation of the new deal for
engagement in fragile States and the continuous efforts
of development partners, we are confident that TimorLeste will continue to be a successful example in terms
of State-building and socio-economic development.

Next week an EU election exploratory mission
will visit Timor-Leste to assess the merit and feasibility
of an EU election observation mission for the
upcoming parliamentary elections. A decision on the
deployment of such a mission will be taken in the
immediate weeks thereafter.

In conclusion, we fully support the extension of
the Mission’s mandate until 31 December 2012 and we
look forward to the next Secretary-General’s report
assessing the elections and providing recommendations
on the way forward to the successful completion of
UNMIT’s mandate and the eventual establishment of a
post-UNMIT United Nations presence in Timor-Leste.

In addition to consolidating democracy,
reconciliation remains an important precondition for
Timor-Leste’s long-term stability. We call on the
National Parliament to resume discussions on the two
draft laws on the memorial institute and reparations,
and on the implementation of the recommendations of
the
Commission
for
Reception,
Truth
and
Reconciliation.
Another element that in our view requires
continued attention is security sector reform. Although
considerable progress has been achieved as regards
higher standards of professionalism and discipline,
accountability mechanisms and the integrity of the
security forces, we encourage Timor-Leste to continue
and to consolidate its efforts.

26

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this significant meeting and for inviting
Australia to participate. I especially want to welcome
President Ramos-Horta’s presence today, despite his
difficult family circumstances, and to say how much his
personal contribution to the emergence of an independent
and — as we have heard and know — increasingly
vibrant Timor-Leste is admired in Australia. I can assure
him and all the citizens of Timor-Leste that for my own
country Timor-Leste will never be just a corner of the
world. I also thank Special Representative Ameerah Haq
for her report and for all her work and that of her team.

12-23800

S/PV.6720

As we know, 2012 will be an historic and pivotal
year for Timor-Leste, with elections and its tenth
anniversary on 20 May. Timor-Leste has made
remarkable progress in recent years, including an
impressive growth rate of 10 per cent in its gross
domestic product expected this year, a strong
petroleum fund underpinning the prospects of longterm and sustainable economic development, and
important efforts to build the country’s infrastructure.
We recognize, of course, that the challenge of
improving standards of health and education in
particular is ongoing, as is building the institutions that
underpin democracy. Nonetheless, we share an
optimistic view of Timor-Leste’s future as the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT)
prepares to wind down at the end of the year.
My own country supports the renewal of
UNMIT’s mandate until the end of 2012. That will
ensure UNMIT support at the political level, as well as
support from the United Nations police throughout the
full election cycle, including after the formation of a
new Government. It will be important for decisions on
the pace of the withdrawal of UNMIT staff following
the mid-year parliamentary elections to take full
account of the conditions on the ground, as well as of
the wishes of the Government of Timor-Leste.
The elections, as we know, will be a test for the
institutions and people of Timor-Leste, but Australia
has confidence in the electoral authorities’ capacity to
conduct effective elections. We know that a great deal
of preparatory work with the support of the United
Nations police and the International Stabilisation Force
(ISF) provided by New Zealand and Australia are
under way to secure election security. That preparation
is obviously critical. The ISF, of course, stands ready
to provide support to Timorese security services and
United Nations police in the very unexpected event
that such a need should arise.
We all know that elections are often
unpredictable and tightly fought. We have been
encouraged by commitments made across the political
spectrum in Timor-Leste to participating peacefully
and in a democratic spirit. We would also like to
commend Timor-Leste for increasing the number of
female candidates for Parliament from one in four to
one in three on all political party lists — a better record
than my own country, I should say. That will help to

12-23800

give the women of Timor-Leste an even greater say in
how their country is governed.
Looking ahead, Australia welcomes the
Secretary-General’s intention to report to the Council
60 days after the formation of the new Government.
His assessment will be a critical element in finalizing
decisions on the final pace of UNMIT’s drawdown, as
well as on the possible roles and functions for the
United Nations in Timor-Leste after the departure of
the peacekeeping mission. We are pleased that work
has started on this planning, and underscore the
importance of the incoming Government of TimorLeste reaching a timely decision on the future shape of
a United Nations presence in Timor-Leste. I note
President Ramos-Horta’s comments today about the
emerging consensus on that.
An important factor in those decisions is the
success of the very innovative and welcome Joint
Transition Plan, for which we commend both the
Government and UNMIT. Ongoing dialogue between
the Government, UNMIT and bilateral and multilateral
partners will be needed to ensure that smooth
transition, in which strengthening key institutions, such
as the Polícia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) in
particular, will be a decisive part.
This morning’s Member State consultations were
very important in that regard. We look forward to
continuing those consultations with our fellow
partners. In that context, the long-term Strategic
Development Plan of the Government itself must
remain the cornerstone of international assistance. Last
November in Busan, my own Government signed a
partnership agreement with Timor-Leste in the margins
of the High-level Meeting on Aid Effectiveness that
aligns our development assistance with the Strategic
Development Plan. Under the agreement, Australian
aid focus on strengthening services such as health and
education; on improved governance and security,
including through continuing institutional support to
the PNTL; and on promoting economic growth through
agricultural and infrastructure development. Particular
attention must continue to be paid by all of us to youth
unemployment.
In concluding, Busan was also the venue where
Timor-Leste, as leader of the Group of Seven Plus of
fragile and post-conflict States (g7+) launched a new
deal for engagement in these States, demonstrating the
importance of joint partnership rather than just money

27

S/PV.6720

in assisting such countries. Timor-Leste’s leadership of
the g7+ is a very strong statement of how far it has
come in its first 10 years as an independent country
and Member of the United Nations.
The Timorese have much to celebrate in this
historic tenth anniversary year, and we congratulate
them on their achievements. We all have much to learn
from that success. Finally, I would like to thank South
Africa as the new Chair of the Core Group on TimorLeste for its very hard work in drafting and
coordinating the draft resolution to renew UNMIT’s
mandate. I also thank Brazil for its effective leadership
of the Group last year. My own country looks forward
to continuing to work with the Group under its new
chair.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): I would like to begin by
extending a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. José
Ramos-Horta, President of Timor-Leste, and to thank
him for his very encouraging statement. I would also
like to express my appreciation to Ms. Ameerah Haq
for her comprehensive briefing to the Council in her
capacity as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral.
Allow me to recall today in the Council Chamber
the efforts and achievements of the people of TimorLeste witnessed by the international community since
the country achieved independence more than a decade
ago. The journey has been far from easy, but the
Timorese people are successfully taking steps forward,
with the assistance of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) and its contributing
countries.
Now, the signs of steady progress can be seen
everywhere. The Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste
(PNTL) has now fully assumed primary security
responsibility and has been maintaining a situation of
calm in the country. The Timorese army, the FalintilForças de Defesa de Timor-Leste, has greatly improved
its capabilities, assisted by regional friends such as
Australia and New Zealand, and has now begun
dispatching its personnel to United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
To consolidate such achievements and to open the
door to further progress on the part of this young,
promising country, the two elections to be held this

28

year will be of the utmost importance. If the people of
Timor-Leste are to express their political will through
the democratic process, it will be critical to maintain
the security situation before, during and after the
election. In that regard, Japan calls for the further
enhancement of the PNTL’s capabilities with the
assistance of UNMIT, as well as the sustained
cooperation of the UNMIT police and the international
security forces.
Above all, Japan expects the elections and the
subsequent political process to underpin Timor-Leste’s
first steps as a genuinely self-sustaining sovereign
country. For the friends of Timor-Leste in the
international community, the successful withdrawal of
UNMIT will represent a great success story and the
fruit of the peacebuilding endeavours undertaken by
the Timorese people.
We have seen a number of such examples in
various areas. Timor-Leste showed active engagement,
and was highly commended by the participants, in the
promotion and protection of human rights through the
Universal Periodic Review process of the Human
Rights Council last year. The implementation of the
National Strategic Development Plan covering the
period 2011 to 2030 is already under way. In the
context of diplomacy, Timor-Leste is playing a leading
role in the Group of Seven Plus, and the country’s
entry into the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
is anticipated in due course.
It should be noted at the same time that sound
development always comes with significant challenges.
This year’s elections will include approximately
100,000 more citizens than the polling five years ago,
most of whom are members of the younger generation.
Those young people have great potential as a source of
human resources. If we ensure that they acquire the
necessary skills through education and training, they
will be in a better position to exert a positive influence
towards the successful future of the country,
particularly in light of the current high rate of youth
unemployment.
With respect to the economy, Timor-Leste’s
continuing disproportionate dependence on oil requires
gradual reduction so as to make its economy more
resilient to any adverse impact from unforeseen
fluctuations of the global economy.
In that regard, the Member States consultation on
Timor-Leste just held this morning was quite timely.

12-23800

S/PV.6720

Japan would like to reiterate in that context that it has
already begun the implementation of assistance in the
amount of $1.66 million for both elections through the
United Nations Development Programme.
Following the elections, Japan also looks forward
to seeing the new Government of Timor-Leste conduct
a discussion on post-UNMIT plans and make efforts to
ensure that support from the international community
is consolidated and strengthened.
Japan’s commitment as an old friend in the region
remains steadfast as Japan attempts to keep its
assistance flexible in order to extend a hand in support
to our neighbours. It is our great honour and pleasure
to continue to walk side by side with the people of
Timor-Leste as self-sustaining international partners.
It is also reassuring to know that a draft
resolution on Timor-Leste has been prepared by the
delegation of South Africa. Japan strongly supports the
elements of the draft, and particularly looks forward to
the report by the Secretary-General after the elections
have been successfully completed. Japan believes that
the report will provide a strong basis for constructive
discussion in the Core Group and in the Council with
regard to UNMIT’s smooth transition and the future of
Timor-Leste.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Japan’s
continuing commitment to strengthening the friendship
between our countries and cooperating with the TimorLeste people to support their nation-building efforts.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I would like to begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month, and
to thank you for organizing this debate. I wish to thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2012/43) on the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT). By the same token, I wish to welcome the
presence of His Excellency José Ramos-Horta,
President of the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste. I
thank him for his statement and for his kind words
about my country. I also wish to thank Ms. Ameerah
Haq, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Timor-Leste, for her comprehensive briefing.
Malaysia is very much encouraged by the
progress achieved in Timor-Leste. We wish to
congratulate the leaders and people of Timor-Leste,

12-23800

who, with the assistance of UNMIT and other
international partners, have been successful in
maintaining peace and stability in the country. The
encouraging security situation is testimony to the
capability of the judicial and security institutions of
Timor-Leste, especially the Polícia Nacional de TimorLeste (PNTL) in carrying out its policing
responsibilities. In that regard, we call for continuing
efforts in strengthening security and judicial
institutions and in implementing the Joint Transition
Plan and the recently announced Strategic
Development Plan.
Malaysia is pleased to see the progress made by
the
Government
of
Timor-Leste
towards
democratization and good governance. The upcoming
elections are important, and we call on all parties to
respect the outcome so as to ensure that stability
continues to prevail. We are prepared to consider
sending election observers to monitor the elections, if
there is a formal invitation from the Government of
Timor-Leste.
Malaysia supports the Secretary-General’s
recommendations for the extension of UNMIT’s
mandate until 31 December. As the withdrawal of
UNMIT is nearing, Malaysia calls for an early
discussion on the long-term United Nations
engagement in Timor-Leste. We believe that a postUNMIT United Nations presence in Timor-Leste is
necessary. We are always prepared to assist in
promoting law and order in Timor-Leste. Malaysia
stands ready to support a post-UNMIT presence in
Timor-Leste, as part of our contribution towards the
development and rebuilding of the country. We believe
that economic and social development is crucial for
ensuring long-term peace and stability in Timor-Leste.
Malaysia fully supports Timor-Leste’s application
to become a full member of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). In the recent
ASEAN Coordinating Council meeting held on
17 November 2011, in Bali, Malaysia reiterated its
position that Timor-Leste’s application should be
favourably considered, in line with article 6.2 of the
ASEAN Charter and the fact that Timor-Leste meets
the geographical criteria stipulated in therein. We look
forward to welcoming Timor-Leste as a full member of
ASEAN soon.
Malaysia has been actively participating in
Timor-Leste since 1999. To date, Malaysia has a total

29

S/PV.6720

of 230 police personnel and two military observers
serving in the country. At the request of the United
Nations, Malaysia has approved the deployment of an
additional 20 police personnel to UNMIT, bringing the
total to 250. Currently, Malaysia is the top policecontributing country in Timor-Leste. In November
2011, UNMIT requested Malaysia to consider
extending the tour of duty of 20 Malaysian United
Nations police officers until December 2012, which we
have agreed to do. Those officers are part of the core
group that is directly involved in the capacity-building
activities of UNMIT. Our active participation in
UNMIT is a manifestation of Malaysia’s long-term
commitment to Timor-Leste’s development.
Malaysia is continuously committed to assisting
Timor-Leste in its nation-building efforts. We have
provided substantial assistance to Timor-Leste,
especially through the Malaysia Technical Cooperation
Programme (MTCP) and the Malaysian Defense
Cooperation Programme (MRCP).
Since 2001, Malaysia has provided assistance to
Timor-Leste in the area of human resources
development through various training programmes. As
of November 2011, a total of 350 officials from TimorLeste have been trained through the MTCP in the areas
of public administration; crisis management and
diplomacy; the training of trainers for the Timor-Leste
Police Academy; airport management; microfinance;
prison administration and management; community
nursing; road construction and management; and
agriculture. Commencing in 2008, with third-party
funding, mainly through the Japan International
Cooperation Agency, Malaysia has also provided
technical expertise in the fields of agriculture,
procurement, macroeconomics and statistics.
Since 2002, a total of 43 officers from the TimorLeste Armed Forces have attended MRCP programmes.
Courses have included instruction for ship divers;
language training; a course on law in armed conflicts;
instruction on joint warfare and a course on United
Nations military observer service.
In 2003, Malaysia contributed $2.56 million as
part of it efforts to assist Timor-Leste in developing its
defense forces. Malaysia has also extended bilateral
assistance in capacity-building programmes and
training for PNTL personnel Malaysian police training
centres since 2001. Malaysia has also conducted

30

training programmes for participants from Timor-Leste
with joint financial assistance from Australia.
Malaysia is pleased with the excellent state of
relations it has with Timor-Leste. Malaysia is strongly
committed to working closely with Timor-Leste to
expand that relationship by harnessing the right
synergies for the mutual benefit and prosperity of our
two countries and peoples.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Ms. Cavanagh (New Zealand): I thank the
President of the Council for convening today’s debate;
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2012/43); and
Special Representative Haq for today’s briefing and for
her tireless work towards a cause very dear to the
hearts of New Zealanders. I also extend a warm
welcome to the Timorese delegation, led by President
Ramos-Horta, a good friend to New Zealand and a
dedicated servant to his people over many decades. In
the interests of time, I shall read out a summary of the
statement we have circulated.
The Secretary-General’s latest report paints a
positive picture of developments. While past
experience suggests a need for caution, all signs
suggest Timor-Leste is posed to step decisively
forward from a decade of conflict and fragility into one
of peace, development and growing self-reliance.
Three key issues demand our particular attention in the
year ahead.
First, facilitating stable, fair and credible
elections must be the top priority — and they seem to
be on track. New Zealand was pleased to host Timorese
electoral officials to observe our own elections in
November last year. We are now considering the best
framework for providing observers to the upcoming
elections in Timor-Leste.
Secondly, we must make good use of the time
remaining to the Mission to consolidate gains made
and to prepare the ground for the transfer of residual
tasks and responsibilities to national and international
partners.
Progress has been made in strengthening security,
justice and corrections capacities and core governance
and accountability mechanisms. But international
support is likely to be necessary long after the
departure of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT). In that regard, New Zealand

12-23800

S/PV.6720

looks forward to working closely with Timor-Leste on
community policing.
Similarly, consolidating transparent, democratic
governance, tackling poverty, generating employment
and achieving sustainable and inclusive growth are
inter-generational
challenges.
Moreover,
the
Government and people of Timor-Leste are still
grappling with how best to resolve outstanding issues
and allegations arising from the crises of 1999 and
2006.
We hope that further progress will be possible in
all of those areas during the time remaining to the
Mission. But careful planning to transfer key aspects of
any unfinished business to national and international
partners is important. As a long-term bilateral partner,
New Zealand is committed to playing its part. We hope
to soon finalize with the Government of Timor-Leste a
strategic framework for our bilateral programme.
Thirdly, we must ensure careful coordination
during the transition process among all relevant
stakeholders. New Zealand has been impressed by the
energy and effort invested in UNMIT’s transition
planning to date, and by the spirit of partnership with
which the Mission and the Timorese Government have
approached the task. In the next phase of its
implementation, engagement with other international
partners will be crucial. This morning’s Member States
consultation was a welcome development.
If events over the coming months proceed as we
hope and expect, then we appear to be on track for
UNMIT’s smooth drawdown and withdrawal by the
end of 2012. At the same time, the Mission must retain
sufficient flexibility to respond to unexpected
challenges or developments.
New Zealand supports the Secretary-General’s
recommendation to extend UNMIT’s mandate for a
further nine months, and for the drawdown of its
civilian and uniformed personnel. It is essential that the
drawdown be carefully managed and proceed in line
with security conditions on the ground.
Attention is turning to what will replace UNMIT
following its departure. Decisions on a post-UNMIT

12-23800

United Nations presence should be determined in line
with identified needs and national priorities for
assistance. It is ultimately for the Government that
emerges from Timor-Leste’s upcoming elections to
articulate those.
Identifying a suitable framework for facilitating
continued international engagement and effective
coordination will be crucial, whether through
continued Security Council oversight, the framework
of a United Nations political mission or the leadership
of a United Nations Development Programme Resident
Coordinator. To be most effective, the model chosen
must be a genuine United Nations presence, effectively
delivering as one, with a mix of expertise and
capacities tailored to Timor-Leste’s priorities and
needs.
The year 2012 is shaping up as a historic year for
this proud country. Successful elections and the smooth
withdrawal of UNMIT would a suitable way for TimorLeste to mark its tenth year of independence and to cap
what has been a decade of remarkable progress.
New Zealand pays tribute to the tireless effort
and commitment of United Nations personnel over the
past decade; to the steadfast support of Timor-Leste’s
many friends and partners in the international
community; and above all, to the vision, courage and
determination of the people and Government of TimorLeste, all of which have made that possible.
New Zealand is proud to have played its own part
in those efforts and remains a committed partner and
loyal friend to Timor-Leste as it steps forward with
confidence and hope towards a brighter future.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further names inscribed on the list of speakers. I would
like to thank everyone for their participation, which
has been most active and constructive.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.

31
