A/63/810–S/2009/185

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
7 April 2009
Original: English

General Assembly
Sixty-third session
Agenda item 114 (e)
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and other organizations: cooperation between the
United Nations and the Caribbean Community

Security Council
Sixty-fourth year

Identical letters dated 3 April 2009 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the General Assembly and the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit to you herewith the text of the joint statement
adopted by the participants of the Fifth General Meeting of the United Nations
system and the Caribbean Community and its associated institutions, which was
held at United Nations Headquarters in New York on 9 and 10 February 2009 (see
annex).
I should be grateful if you would arrange for this letter and its annex to be
circulated as a document of the General Assembly under agenda item 114 (e). I also
request that the joint statement be circulated as a document of the Security Council
in response to resolutions 1631 (2005) and 1809 (2008), particularly paragraph 17.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

09-29644 (E) 130409

*0929644*

A/63/810
S/2009/185

Annex
Joint statement of the Fifth General Meeting of representatives of
the Caribbean Community and the United Nations system
9 and 10 February 2009, New York
1.
The Fifth General Meeting of representatives of the United Nations system and
the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and its associated institutions was
convened at United Nations Headquarters in New York on 9 and 10 February 2009.
The Secretary-General of the United Nations, Ban Ki-moon, delivered an opening
address. The Secretary-General of CARICOM, Edwin Carrington, also made an
opening statement. The meeting, which enjoyed wide participation from
representatives of the CARICOM secretariat and its associated institutions as well
as representatives of the United Nations system, was co-chaired by Lolita
Applewhaite, Deputy Secretary-General of CARICOM, and B. Lynn Pascoe, UnderSecretary-General of the United Nations for Political Affairs.
2.
The Secretary-General of the United Nations welcomed the opportunity to
deepen cooperation between the United Nations system and CARICOM. He
expressed concern at the evidence of the increasing vulnerability of the Caribbean
region, which faces crises in food and energy security while dealing with the impact
of climate change and global financial turmoil. He also highlighted the pressing
security challenges, particularly those posed by increased trafficking in narcotics
and small arms in the region. The Secretary-General reiterated the strong
commitment of the United Nations to strengthening the partnership with CARICOM
and commended the collaborative work being undertaken between United Nations
system and CARICOM institutions.
3.
The Secretary-General of CARICOM welcomed the General Meeting as an
important forum for pursuing cooperation with the United Nations system. He
highlighted the impact of the global financial and economic crisis on the small
vulnerable States of the Community. He expressed appreciation for the continued
commitment of the United Nations system to supporting the development objectives
of CARICOM as reflected in the wide range of activities being undertaken by
CARICOM institutions and United Nations system partners. He also underscored
the need to address the security challenges facing the region. He highlighted the
decision of CARICOM to include security as the fourth pillar of the Community,
along with economic integration, foreign policy coordination and functional
cooperation. He reiterated the call for considering the reopening of a regional office
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in the Caribbean.
4.
The meeting received a report on progress in the implementation of
commitments made at the Fourth General Meeting, held in Georgetown, Guyana, in
2007, addressing in particular cooperation in the areas of sustainable development,
climate change, disaster management, food security, governance and security and
information and communication technologies. The meeting acknowledged ongoing
challenges in collecting complete, current information on all United Nations and
CARICOM cooperation activities in the region, given the existence of different
planning and monitoring frameworks, the absence of a harmonized approach to
reporting and the existence of multiple lines of accountability within the United
Nations system.

2

09-29644

A/63/810
S/2009/185

5.
The meeting considered a proposal for the establishment of a Regional
Strategic Framework for planning and monitoring collaboration between the United
Nations system and CARICOM, with a view to ensuring that activities undertaken
are aligned with the strategic objectives of the Caribbean region. It would also
ensure that United Nations system resources are deployed most efficiently to deliver
measurable benefits to the region. It would promote the awareness of achievements,
impact, best practices and lessons learned from the collaboration between the United
Nations system and CARICOM (inclusive of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean
States (OECS)) and its associated institutions. The proposed framework would focus
on regional priorities and integrate a results-based approach for the monitoring and
evaluation of all activities in the region. The meeting considered a viable structure
for the strategic framework.
6.
The meeting acknowledged considerable coordination efforts by the United
Nations system in the region, particularly emphasizing the role of the Latin
American and Caribbean Regional Directors’ Team as a working mechanism for
providing strategic multidisciplinary support and oversight to address pressing
issues and for strengthening the partnership with CARICOM. The meeting also
noted the coordination and monitoring role played by the Caribbean Development
and Cooperation Committee, a permanent subsidiary body of the Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), with representation at
the ministerial level.
7.
The meeting recognized the progress made and the work still to be done in the
implementation of the CARICOM Single Market and Economy. This included the
harmonization of laws and administrative procedures, the facilitation of movement
of skilled workers, the need for greater public awareness and buy-in to the idea of a
single market and economy; private sector engagement; the harmonization of the
CARICOM integration process with that of the advanced integration initiatives of
OECS; the expansion of the CARICOM Single Market and Economy to include
Haiti; and the monitoring and evaluation of the impact of the free movement of
skills and the related treatment of contingent rights, particularly in relation to the
movement of persons with dependants.
8.
The meeting welcomed advancement in the introduction of the framework for
the Single Market and Economy, including financial policy integration, real sector
policy integration and institution-building. In this regard, the meeting noted in
particular the efforts being made to integrate the financial services sector, the
insurance sector and the securities sector as well as to harmonize interest rates and
investment and fiscal policies. In respect of real sector development, the meeting
heard the challenges of coordinating and integrating policies on agriculture, tourism
and transportation and the need for appropriate policies on energy, including
renewable energy. Promoting energy efficiency measures was seen to have
particular importance both in terms of economic development and environmental
protection. The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) committed its
continued support to CARICOM in this regard. The meeting noted the ongoing
efforts to create and strengthen industry associations, regulatory organizations,
sectoral development institutions and institutions to encourage pooling of resources
in the region.
9.
The meeting was apprised of the extremely close interrelationship between
terrestrial, coastal and marine ecosystems and the economies in the Caribbean

09-29644

3

A/63/810
S/2009/185

region, which imposes significant challenges for the management of the region’s
environment and economies. It was underscored that a resilient environment is
essential to the long-term prosperity and quality of life in the region and effective
functioning of the CARICOM Single Market and Economy. The meeting heard that
sustainable development issues are often ignored in donor funding and other support
mechanisms. Efforts by CARICOM to develop and implement a common
environment and natural resources framework aimed at improving the
environmental quality and conditions in the Community were noted. It was
recommended that the regional coordinating mechanism established at the
subregional headquarters of ECLAC in Trinidad and Tobago to facilitate the
implementation of the Barbados Programme of Action and the Mauritius Strategy
for Implementation should become operational in order to complement the policy
coordination efforts of the United Nations system in the area of sustainable
development.
10. The meeting considered ongoing efforts to protect the Caribbean Sea and
promote the sustainable use of fisheries, improved ocean governance and maritime
delimitation. The meeting heard a request for assistance on a common fisheries
policy; expansion of aquaculture; fisheries information management; research,
training and development; and support for resource management for marine species,
especially the commercially important queen conch (Strombus gigas) and spiny
lobster (Panulirus argus) species. The need for increased knowledge and
understanding of existing multilateral environment agreements that can be used to
support sustainable development and conservation of fisheries and marine
ecosystems was identified. A further call was made for support to prepare a plan for
the implementation of the 2009 Caribbean ministerial declaration on illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing in the Caribbean. Concerning food security, the
meeting recognized progress made so far towards the achievement of Millennium
Development Goal 1 and agreed that urgent action was needed to protect the gains
made so far on food security in the Caribbean. The meeting received information on
the proposed United Nations comprehensive framework for action on agriculture
and agreed with the proposal of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations that an inter-institutional and results-based approach be adopted.
11. The meeting took note of the region’s agenda for building resilience in
response to the impact of climate change and welcomed ongoing initiatives designed
to strengthen the region’s response to climate change, notably the Caribbean
Climate Change Strategy. The meeting acknowledged United Nations and
CARICOM collaboration to achieve a common regional position on how to address
climate change and adaptation as a priority area in the regional strategic framework.
12. While efforts to strengthen the strategic framework for comprehensive disaster
management were recognized, the meeting underscored the need for continued
attention to strategies for disaster management and resilience-building in the region.
The ongoing support of the United Nations system in respect of institutional support
for preparedness, response and recovery, as well as mainstreaming disaster
management, was acknowledged.
13. The meeting emphasized the importance of capacity development both for
CARICOM member States and regional institutions. In this regard the meeting
noted the challenges faced by these States in fulfilling their reporting obligations in
respect of the Millennium Development Goals because of capacity constraints, and

4

09-29644

A/63/810
S/2009/185

welcomed the commitment of regional institutions and the United Nations system to
provide necessary support. The meeting also acknowledged the need to provide
more technical support to smaller States. The meeting heard a call from OECS for
the production of timely United Nations flagship publications which reflect
proactive and responsive research and analysis about the specific issues challenging
the Caribbean region, in particular those challenges that are peculiar to the smallest
countries. UNDP committed itself to supporting CARICOM in defining an
integrated capacity development approach towards the improvement of
organizational arrangements.
14. The meeting also noted that, in respect of information and communications
technology, full advantage had not been taken of the liberalization process in the
telecommunications sector within the region. In particular, the meeting recognized
that one of the most notable deficiencies was the insufficient use of broadband
technology, largely owing to the high cost of this technology. The meeting proposed
that information and communications technology should be included as a priority
area in the regional strategic framework.
15. The meeting took note of the fact that CARICOM member States are among
the most highly indebted countries of the world but their designation as middleincome countries stymies access to concessionary financing and other flows of
official development assistance. The meeting therefore welcomed the idea of
establishing innovative paths to engage the private sector and acknowledged the
importance of developing stronger public-private partnerships and engaging with
foundations and multinational corporations.
16. The meeting repeatedly heard of the need for strengthened data collection and
statistical analysis to provide standardized, accurate, current information on all the
challenges facing the region and to improve evidence-based programme and policy
development. The meeting acknowledged the collaboration between CARICOM and
the United Nations system in improving capacity for data collection and analysis as
a priority area for inclusion in the regional strategic framework. The meeting
recognized the need to rationalize methodologies for data collection and analysis
and to ensure wide dissemination of information to support evidence-based
policymaking and the CARICOM information and communication objectives. It was
proposed that a vulnerability index using indicators relevant to the Caribbean region
be developed.
17. The meeting noted with concern the continuing negative effect of the global
financial and economic crisis on the Caribbean region. The crisis has had an impact
on critical economic sectors such as tourism and the financial sector, on remittances
and emigration. The World Bank forecast is for foreign direct investment flows to
fall to one tenth of 2007 levels. The meeting acknowledged the need for
CARICOM — supported by the United Nations system, especially the specialized
agencies — to take swift and urgent action to prevent reversal of the gains that have
been derived from past economic growth and stability. The meeting noted the
importance of further developing and implementing policies that stimulate the
growth of the productive sectors. As an immediate action to address falling
investment flows, the United Nations Fund for Investment Partnerships expressed its
willingness to support a Caribbean Investment Office that would encourage new
investment in the region. The meeting acknowledged that the regional strategic
framework should address expanded United Nations assistance to CARICOM for

09-29644

5

A/63/810
S/2009/185

capacity-building to support the progressive implementation of sectoral integration
policies in agriculture and fisheries, tourism and especially air and maritime
transportation, whose current functioning hinders improvements in productivity and
economic growth.
18. The meeting acknowledged that the Millennium Development Goals had
received much attention by CARICOM and that, for the most part, CARICOM
countries were on track for their achievement. However, the effect of the global
financial and economic crisis would no doubt impede further progress towards the
development targets unless urgent action was taken by Governments to provide
social safety nets for those groups that were most affected by poverty,
unemployment and social marginalization. Regarding the regional strategic
framework, the meeting proposed that the United Nations system and CARICOM
explore the feasibility of establishing new targets for CARICOM countries that
would go beyond the existing objectives to include, inter alia, science, research and
development; capacity-building; vulnerability analysis; modernization of law
enforcement infrastructures and public sector administration; access to efficient and
renewable energy; and rolling back the high incidence of non-communicable
diseases.
19. The meeting recognized the high percentage of the Caribbean population
below the age of 24. The meeting was informed that there is evidence that
Caribbean adolescents and youth are confronted with new challenges that need to be
addressed to prevent psychological, social and economic vulnerabilities and
alienation. Adolescents and young women are especially impacted by gender-based
violence, including sexual violence, and reproductive health problems. Urgent,
innovative and strategic rights-based interventions would be required to address
these problems. Although many countries have youth and sectoral policies in place
to address the needs of young people, implementation is lagging most often because
of lack of funding. The meeting proposed that CARICOM, in keeping with its role
of addressing implementation gaps from a regional perspective, should establish a
regional observatory to monitor child, adolescent and youth rights. In addition, the
meeting recommended that programmatic interventions to address the needs of
young people should focus on four key areas: (a) health, including mental and
sexual and reproductive health; (b) education and skills training; (c) employment
and income generation, with microcredit inputs; and (d) life skills and citizenship
development. The United Nations Population Fund pledged its continued support to
CARICOM in the realm of youth. The United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
underscored the importance of and its commitment to supporting buy-in by youth in
the developmental thrust of the region.
20. The meeting also welcomed the first Regional Framework for Action for
Children 2008-2015, adopted at the twelfth special meeting of the CARICOM
Council for Human and Social Development. The framework takes an integrated
approach to addressing the rights to survival, development, protection, dignity and
participation of the children within the Caribbean Community. It underscores the
importance of measures to address the impact of violence on children, to increase
retention rates at the secondary and tertiary levels of the educational system and to
provide treatment to children living with HIV/AIDS and protection to those who are
vulnerable. The meeting was informed that different countries and agencies utilized
different definitions of the term “child” especially in relation to laws concerning the
minimum age of employment and apprenticeship. There is a need to standardize the

6

09-29644

A/63/810
S/2009/185

definition across the region; in particular the age range should be the same in every
Caribbean country. UNICEF recommended that special emphasis be placed on
children who are between the ages of 10 and 14, when the greatest opportunity
exists to facilitate a positive transition into adolescence and to facilitate their care
and protection from violence, exploitation, HIV/AIDS and the impact of natural
disasters.
21. While the meeting welcomed the success achieved thus far in mainstreaming
gender in socio-economic programmes, the need for the integration of gender
perspectives in policymaking was noted. The meeting took note of the economic
vulnerability of female-headed households given the disproportionate burden of care
falling on women and their higher levels of unemployment. Gender inequalities
persist, in particular in respect of indigenous women’s access to education; aspects
of health care, including reproductive health; and economic opportunities, including
credit. The meeting noted that the current economic situation would likely cause
further deterioration in this regard. The need for Governments to provide social
support for single-headed households was raised. The meeting was informed that
political representation by women was uneven, ranging from zero per cent in one
country to a current high of 29 per cent. A concern was expressed about the high
rate of violence against women in the region, especially sexual assaults, which are
subject to underreporting and largely unresponsive justice systems. The United
Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) welcomed the CARICOM
proposal to establish a special rapporteur on gender-based violence as consistent
with the goals of the current campaign of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations on violence against women. UNIFEM indicated its intention to support the
initiative.
22. The meeting recognized that the Caribbean has one of the highest net
migration rates in the world. The meeting noted that the female migration rate is
recorded as the highest in the world and the pattern of migration is complex,
including movement by workers, economic migrants, refugees and asylum-seekers.
In order to address the complexity of the migration phenomena in the region, the
meeting considered a number of possible policy actions that could foster the
meaningful contribution of migrants in their home and host countries. The meeting
agreed that systematic monitoring of migratory trends, including remittances, would
be essential and required migration statistics, shared data and information for use in
the formulation of appropriate policy responses. The United Nations and the
International Organization for Migration expressed interest in continuing to work
with CARICOM on the issue of migration. UNDP invited contributions from
CARICOM to the Human Development Report 2009, which would have migration
as its theme.
23. The meeting welcomed the establishment of the Caribbean regional strategic
framework on HIV/AIDS and recognized its central role in providing a basis for
international collaboration. However, the meeting took note of the many challenges
that still remain and considered a number of recommendations to address these
challenges. These include the establishment of an enabling environment for the
reduction of stigmatization and the enhancement of human rights; making better use
of legislative frameworks to ease discrimination and facilitate access to care and
treatment facilities; building on the achievements of existing institutions; increased
attention to prevention opportunities; and the establishment of a technical support
facility for response to HIV/AIDS in emergencies.

09-29644

7

A/63/810
S/2009/185

24. The meeting recognized that the region had the highest rates of criminal
violence per capita in the world and noted that sexual violence, human trafficking,
drug trafficking and the illicit trade in small arms were also on the increase.
CARICOM reiterated that the issue of security remained a primary concern for the
region. It was noted that the financial crisis would likely impose a negative impact
on the social fabric of societies in the region, resulting in even higher levels of
migration, crime and illegal trafficking in drugs and arms. The meeting recognized
the cyclical link between increasing rates of violent crime and urban conditions,
youth unemployment, income inequity and arms availability. The meeting expressed
concern over the severity of the medium-term impact of crime on economic growth
and development in the Caribbean region. The meeting recognized the recent
establishment of the CARICOM Implementing Agency for Crime and Security
(IMPACS) and its goal of putting in place effective mechanisms for joint security
initiatives and information-sharing. The meeting noted the opportunities for joint
work between IMPACS and the United Nations system. The meeting agreed that
regional efforts to combat transnational organized crime, including protection of
victims of trafficking, should be expanded and included as a priority area in the
regional strategic framework. Support for these efforts is anticipated from the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and would include establishment of a
focal point in the CARICOM secretariat. The Office for Disarmament Affairs of the
Secretariat of the United Nations also offered to work with CARICOM to mobilize
the interest of donors with a view to establishing a focal point for disarmament and
non-proliferation within the CARICOM secretariat.
25. The meeting recognized the Caribbean Community’s proud record with regard
to good governance. CARICOM called for more attention to constitutional change,
greater transparency and accountability and greater vigilance in human rights.
Institution-building for the Assembly of Caribbean Community Parliamentarians
was proposed as an area to be addressed, as the assembly had remained inactive for
several years. The meeting also noted that Caribbean civil society organizations
could benefit from capacity-building and that the expertise of the United Nations
system in that particular area would be welcomed. The meeting heard that the
CARICOM Charter of Civil Society required additional support to achieve legal
implementation and enforcement of reporting requirements. The meeting further
agreed that United Nations support in that area would be included in the regional
strategic framework and that a capacity-building strategy based on an assessment of
CARICOM requirements in the area of governance was necessary. The Department
of Political Affairs of the Secretariat of the United Nations offered support in a
number of related areas including strengthening early warning systems, good offices
and dispute resolution mechanisms. There was also agreement to support
constitutional reform and electoral monitoring and to replicate existing social
cohesion programmes at the regional level. Discussions between CARICOM and the
Department of Political Affairs concerning voter registration and electoral observer
missions would continue.
26. The meeting recognized the mutually reinforcing nature of development,
security and human rights as well as efforts made by CARICOM member States
aimed at ensuring continuing respect for internationally recognized civil, political,
economic, social and cultural rights. However, the meeting noted some
implementation gaps in meeting legal obligations stemming from the core
international human rights treaties to which CARICOM countries are parties. The

8

09-29644

A/63/810
S/2009/185

meeting was informed that treaty bodies recommended the abolition of the death
penalty; accession to the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights; amending laws relating to the death penalty in keeping
with article 6 of the Covenant; introducing a legal definition of torture, compatible
with article 7 of the Covenant and article 1 of the Convention against Torture; and
establishment of Paris Principles-compliant national human rights institutions. The
meeting heard that more could be done to increase levels of ratification of core
international human rights treaties, fulfil reporting obligations and strengthen
cooperation with the United Nations human rights machinery, including by
extending open invitations to special procedures mandate-holders. The meeting was
informed that 12 CARICOM countries would be reviewed by the Human Rights
Council’s Universal Periodic Review mechanism between 2009 and 2011, which
could be an opportunity for constructive engagement between the United Nations
system and CARICOM.
27. The meeting discussed the proposed regional strategic framework in the
context of the priorities identified in the thematic discussions. The meeting noted
the number of existing regional frameworks in specialized areas of work and
recognized that bilateral programming would continue between United Nations
departments, agencies, funds and programmes and CARICOM. National-level
programming would also continue. As such, the meeting agreed that the regional
strategic framework would reflect those priority areas identified during the meeting
where an integrated regional approach from United Nations system partners could
provide added value to the collaboration between the United Nations system and
CARICOM.
28. The meeting identified the following areas for attention under the regional
strategic framework: integrated sector development strategies in agriculture,
fisheries, tourism and transport; specific opportunities for further collaboration on
crime and security; further development of information and communications
technology to take advantage of liberalization through improvements in access to
broadband technology; wider implementation of intellectual property rights;
improved access to education and enhancement of the quality of primary, secondary
and tertiary education; implementation of policies to protect Caribbean biodiversity;
continued collaboration on disaster management and risk reduction; continued
collaboration on health, HIV, reproductive health and youth and gender equality;
food as well as energy security; an integrated management approach to the
Caribbean Sea; tools and methodologies for monitoring coastal aquifers; support for
the formulation of relevant policies to build resilience, particularly for small highly
indebted countries, and to address the specificities of OECS; and strategies for
encouraging capital investment through a region-wide investment entity. The
meeting also agreed that the regional strategic framework should build on
modalities in which the United Nations system has a comparative advantage, such as
the establishment of public-private partnerships; capacity-building; South-South
cooperation; access to research, data and documentation, including lessons learned
and best practices; and techniques for public education and advocacy.
29. The meeting acknowledged the regional strategic framework as an enhanced
planning and monitoring mechanism and considered options for implementation.
The meeting agreed that the regional strategic framework should reflect a three- to
five-year perspective, rather than being limited by the two-year intervals of the
United Nations-CARICOM General Meetings. The meeting acknowledged the

09-29644

9

A/63/810
S/2009/185

potential offered by the Regional Directors’ Team. The meeting recommended that
the Regional Directors’ Team should place much greater emphasis on Caribbeanspecific issues and that it could be made responsible for monitoring and reporting on
the implementation of the regional-level activities agreed to in the context of the
regional strategic framework. It was agreed that the Department of Political Affairs
would complete the draft of the regional strategic framework, including in the
document the rich discussion provided by the meeting before sending it to United
Nations agencies for comments in preparation for a follow-up meeting with
CARICOM.
30. The meeting agreed that the Department of Political Affairs, as focal point for
regional organizations, would continue to facilitate dialogue on the draft regional
strategic framework while monitoring immediate follow-up actions to ensure that
there was no loss of momentum between this General Meeting and the next one.
31. The meeting agreed that the Sixth United Nations-CARICOM General
Meeting would be held at CARICOM headquarters in Georgetown, Guyana, in
2011.

10

09-29644
