COMPLAINT BY ZAMBIA AGAINST SOUTH AFRICA 60

<irai·ely concerned at the escalation of hostile and
unprovoked acts by the racist regime of South Africa,
violating the sovereignty, air space and territorial integrit v of the Republic of Zambia,
Recullin~ its resolution 455 (1979), in which, inr,,,.
alio. it strongly condemned the collusion by racist
South Africa with the then illegal regime in Southern
Rhodesic1 in acts of aggression against the Republic of
Zambia.
Grieved at the tragic loss in human life and concerned about the damage and destruction of property
resulting from the escalated acts and armed incursions
by the racist regime of South Africa against the Re
public of Zambia,
Deeply c:uncerned that the wanton acts by the racist
regime of South Africa are aimed at the destabilization
of the Republic of /.ambia.
Cunscious of the need to take effective measure:-. lo
maintain international peace and security,
I. Strongly condemns the racist regime of South
Africa for its continued, intensified and unprovoked
acts against the Republic of Zambia, which constitute
a flagrant violation of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Zambia:
2. Demands that South Africa withdraw forthwith
all its military forces from the territory of the Republic
of Zambia, cease all violations of Zambia's air space
and, henceforth, scrupulously respect the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Republic of Zambia:
3. Solemnly warns South Africa that, in the event
of any further armed incursions against the Republic of
Zambia, the Security Council will meet to consider
further appropriate action under the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations. including Chapter VII
thereof:
4. Commends the Republic of Zambia for exercising maximum restraint in the face of serious provocations repeatedly committed against it by the racist
regime of South Africa:
'i_
Decido to remain seized of the matter.

Decisions

At its 2209th meeting, on JO April 1980, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Angola, Cuba,
Liberia, Mauritius, Nigeria and Yugoslavia to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled "Complaint by Zambia against South Africa: letter
dated 8 April 1980 from the Permanent Representative
of Zambia to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/13878)" .~ 1

At its 2210th meeting, on 11 April 1980, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Algeria.
Guyana. the United Arah Emirates and Zaire to participate. without vote, in the discus-,ion of the question.

At its 2211 th meeting, on 11 April I 980. the Council
decided to invite the representative of India to partici
pate. without vote. in the discussion of the question.

Resolution 466 ( 1980)
of 11 April 1980

TIii! Secrn-it_,. Co1111cil,

Taking note of the letter dated 8 April 1980 from the
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Zambia
contained in document S/13878.'.i
Ha,·ing considl'f"ed the statement. of the representative of the Republic of Zambia.''

w Resolution~ or d,:cisiom. on thi~ question were abo adopted by
the Council in 1976.
61 See Official Records of the Sernrity ( ",111nrn fhirtv fijih t"ea1 _
Supplement for April, May and June /980.
"' /hid .. Thirty-fifih Year, 2209th meeting.

Adopted ummimouJ/y at The
22 If th meeting.
·

THE QUESTION OF SOUTH AFRICA 63
Decisions

"The Security Council has learned with profound
concern that South African authorities seized and
continue to keep in detention Mr. Victor Matlou, an
international passenger on Lesotho Airways en
route from Swaziland to Maseru, Lesotho.
"According to information available to the Security Council, on 12 December 1979, Mr. Matlou who
is a South African refugee, boarded a Lesoth~ Airways ln~ernati~nal Flight No. 351 from Maputo.
Mozambique. via Swaziland to Maseru. Because of

After consultation with the members of the Council,
the President of the Council, on 13 March 1980, sent
the following message to the Government of South
Africa regarding that Government's seizure and continued detention of Mr. Victor Matlou:
"' Resolutions or decisions on this question were also adopted by
the Council in 1977. 197!< and 1979.

l7
