86

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

situation in Seychelles as a result of the lack of infrastructure for development,
Concerned by the adverse effects which the international economic situation has had upon the economy
of Seychelles,
Noting that Seychelles is faced with certain specific
tasks arising from its recent attainment of independence,
Recalling its resolution 3421 (XXX) of 8 December 1975 on the implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, in which it urged the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations system to extend assistance to the newly independent and
emerging States,
Recalling further recommendation 99 (IV) of 31
May 1976 of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, 5 :i particularly paragraph 4 thereof,
in which the Conference recommended that measures
of assistance should be undertaken by the appropriate
organs of the United Nations system in favour of the
newly independent States in Africa,
l. Urgently appeals to Member States, especially
the developed countries, and the international institutions concerned-in particular the United Nations Development Programme, the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development, the United Nations
Children's Fund, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Food Programme,
the World Health Organization, the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and
the International Labour Organisation-to grant Seychelles, in the light of the prevailing conditions, technical and financial assistance in an effective and continuous manner so as to enable it to establish the
necessary social and economic infrastructure which is
essential for the well-being of its people;
2. Requests the Committee for Development Planning at its fourteenth session to consider the question
of the inclusion of Seychelles in the list of the least
developed countriesM and to submit its conclusions to
the Economic and Social Council at its sixty-fourth
session;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to mobilize the
financial, technical and economic assistance of the international community mentioned in paragraph 1
above, to keep this matter under review and to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session on
the implementation of the present resolution.
101 st plenary meeting
13 December 1977
32/107.

Agreement between the United Nations
and the International Fund for Agrit-ultural Development""

The General Assembly,
Having considered Economic and Social Council
resolution 2104 (LXIII) of 3 August 1977 and the
53 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.11.D.10
and corrigendum), part one, sect. A.
54 See resolutions 2768 (XXVI) and 3487 (XXX).
5 5 See also sect. V, resolution 32/53, sect. VIII, resolution
32/102, and sect. X.B.7, decision 32/428 A.

draft agreement annexed thereto, intended to bring
the International Fund for Agricultural Development
into relationship with the United Nations in accordance
with Articles 57 and 63 of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Approves the Agreement between the United Nations
and the International Fund for Agricultural Development set forth in the annex to the present resolution.
103rd plenary meeting
15 December 1977
ANNEX
Agreement between the United Nations and the
International Fund for Agricultural Development
PREAMBLE

In accordance with the provisions of Articles 57 and 63
of the Charter of the United Nations and of section 1 of
article 8 of the Agreement Establishing the International Fund
for Agricultural Development (he.reinafter called the "Agreement"), the United Nations and the International Fund for
Agricultural Development (hereinafter called the "Fund")
agree as follows:
Article I
RECOGNITION

The United Nations recognizes the Fund as a specialized
agency, operating in accordance with the Agreement concluded
among its member States with the objective of mobilizing additional resources to be made available on concessional terms
for agricultural development in developing member States.
Article II
RECIPROCAL REPRESENTATION

I.

Representatives of the United Nations shall be:

(a)
Entitled to attend, and to participate without vote in,
meetings of the Governing Council of the Fund;

(b l Invited to participate without vote in broad policymaking meetings of other organs and committees of the Fund.

2.

Representatives of the Fund shall be:

Entitled to attend meetings of the General Assembly
of the United Nations for purposes of consultations;
(a)

(b) Entitled to attend, and to participate without vote in,
meetings of the Main Committees and other organs of the
General Assembly, in particular the World Food Council, as
well as meetings of the Economic and Social Council and of
the Trusteeship Council and of their respective subsidiary
bodies dealing with matters in which the Fund has an interest.

3. Sufficient advance notice of these meetings and their
agendas shall be given so that, in consultation, arrangements
can be made for adequate representation.
4. Written statements presented by either organization to
the other shall be distributed by the secretariat of the latter
to the members of the appropriate bodies in accordance with
their rules of procedure.

Article Ill
PROPOSAL OF AGENDA ITEMS

Subject to such preliminary consultation as may be necessary, the Fund shall include in the provisional agenda of the
appropriate organ of the Fund items proposed by the United
Nations. Similarly, the Economic and Social Council and the
World Food Council and their subsidiary bodies, as appropriate, shall include in their provisional agendas items proposed
by the Fund.
Article JV
CO-ORDINATION AND CO-OPERATION

I. In view of the co-ordinating role and global responsibilities of the United Nations in promoting economic and
social development and the need for positive and effective co-

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

operation between the United Nations and the Fund, the
Fund agrees to co-operate closely with the United Nations
in making co-ordination of the policies and activities of the
United Nations and those of the organs and agencies within
the United Nations system fully effective. The Fund agrees
further to participate in the work of the United Nations aimed
at enhancing such co-operation and co-ordination, in particular
ihrough membership in the Administrative Committee on Coordination, and, as appropriate, in the work of such other
United Nations bodies that have been established or may be
establi,hed for that purpose.
2. In its financing operations, the Fund shall exercise its
own independent judgement in accordance with the Agreement, taking fully into account the over-all policy guidelines
established by the United Nations in the field of economic
and social, and particularly agricultural, development.
Article V
CONSULTATION AND RECOMMENDATIONS

J. The Fund, having regard to the obligations of the
United Nations to promote the objectives set forth in Article 55
of the Charter and the functions and powers of the United
Nations and its appropriate organs, in particular to make
recommendations for the co-ordination of the policies and
activities of the specialized agencies, agrees to arrange for
the consideration as soon as possible, by the appropriate
organ of the Fund, of all formal recommendations which the
United Nations may make to it.

2. The Fund agrees to enter into consultation with the
United Nations upon request with respect to such recommendations, and in due course to report to the United Nations
on the action taken by the Fund to give eff.ect to such recommendations, or on the other results of their consideration.
Article VI
EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION AND DOCUMENTS

1. Subject to such arrangements as may be necessary betwe·en the United Nations and the Fund for the safeguarding
of confidential material furnished to them by their members or
other sources, full and prompt exchange of information and
documents shall be made between the United Nations and

the Fund.
2. Without p11ejudice to the generality of the provisions
of paragraph I of the present article:
(a) The Fund agrees to transmit to the United Nations
regular reports on the activities of the Fund;
(b) To the fullest extent practicable, the Fund agrees to
furnish upon request to the United Nations any special reports,
studies or information;
(c) The United Nations shall upon request furnish to the
Fund such information as may be of special interest to the
Fund.
Article VII
BUDGETARY AND FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS

I. The Fund recognizes the desirability of establishing
close budgetary and financial co-operation in administrative
matters with the United Nations in order that the administrative operations of the United Nations and the agencies within
the United Nations system shall be carried out in the most
efficient and economical manner possible and that the maximum
measure of co-ordination and uniformity with respect to these
operations shall be secured.

87

Article Vil!
ADMINISTRATIVE CO-OPERATION

I. The United Nations and the Fund recognize the desirability, in the interest of administrative and technical uniformity
and of the most efficient use of personnel and resources, of
avoiding, whenever possible, the establishment an<l operation
of competitive or overlapping facilities and services among the
United Nations and the specializ~d agencies.

2. Accordingly, the United Nations and the Fund shall
consult together concerning the establishment and use of
common administrative and technical services and facilities,
in addition to th,,se reforred to in articles IV, V, IX, X and
XII of the present Agreement in so far as the establishment
and use of such services may from time to time be found
practicable and appropriate.

3.

The consultations referred to in the present article shall

be utilized to establish the most equitable manner of financing
any special services or assistance furnished, upon request, by
the Fund to the United Nations or by the United Nations to
the Fund.
Article IX
PERSONNEL

ARRANGEMENTS

t. The Fund agrees to co-operate with the International
Civil Service Commission on matters concerning the regulation and co-ordination of the conditions of service of staff.
2.

The United Nations and the Fund agree:

(a) To consult together concerning matters of mutual
interest relating to the employment of staff, with a view to
securing as much uniformity in these matters as may be
feasihlc:
(/,) To co-operate in the interchange of staff when desirable, on a temporary or permanent basis:
(() That the Fund may participate in the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund in accordance with the Regulations
of the Pension Fund.
3. The terms and conditions on which any facilities or
services of the United Nations or the Fund in connexion with
the matters referred to in the present article are to be
extended to the oth~r shall, where necessary, be the subject
of subsidiary agreements concluded for this purpose.
Article X
STATISTICAL SERVICES

l. The Fund recognizes the United Nations as the central
agency for the collection, analysis, publication, standardization
and improvement of statistics serving the general purposes of
international organizations, without prejudice to the right of
the Fund to concern itself with any statistics so far as they
may be essential for its own purposes.
2. The United Nations and the Fund agree to strive for
the maximum co-operation, the elimination of all undesirable
duplication between them and the most efficient use of their
technical personnel in their respective processes of collection,
analysis, publication an<l dissemination of statistical information. Th:y shall combine their efforts to secure the greatest
possible usefulness and utilization of statistical information
and to minimize the burden placed upon Governments an<l
on other organizations from which such information may be
collected.

2. Any financial and budgetary arrangement entered into
between the United Nations and the Fund shall be subject to
the approval of the General Assembly of the United Nations
and the Governing Council of the Fund.

-'· The United Nations and the Fund agree l'o furnish
each other promptly with all appropriate non-confidential
,tatistical informatio:i.

3. The Fund shall transmit its administrative budget to
the United Nations so as to enable the General Assembly of
the United Nations tc examine it and make recommendations,
in accordance with paragraph 3 of Article 17 of the Charter
of the United Nations.

4. The United Nations shall, in consultation with the
F,md an<l other agencies within the United Nations system,
continue to develop administrative instruments and procedures
through which effective statistical co-operation may be secured
among all these organin1tions.

88

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

Article XI
ASSISTANCE TO THE UNITED NATIONS

Within the field of its competence and based upon its
Agr,eement, the Fund shall co-operate with and render such
assistance to the United Nations as the latter may request
under its Charter, particularly for the accomplishment of the
principles and purposes set forth in Article 55 thereof.

Article XII

any such amendment or rev1s10n shall enter into force upon
approval by the General Assembly of the United Nations and
the Governing Council of the Fund.

Article XVIII
ENTRY INTO

FORCE

The present Agreement shall enter into force upon its approval by the General Assembly of the United Nations and
the Governing Council of the Fund.

TECHNICAL ASSISTA1'CE

1. The United Nations and the Fund shall co-operate in
the provision of technical assistance for agricultural development, shall avoid undesirable duplication of activities and
services relating to such technical assistance and shall take
such action as may be necessary to achieve the effective coordination of their technical assistance activities, within the
framework of co-ordination machinery in the field of technical assistance.

2. Within the field of its competence and based upon its
relevant instruments, the Fund agrees to co-operate with the
United Nations and its organs, as well as the agencies within
the United Nations system, in promoting and facilitating the
transfer of technology for food and agricultural development
from developed to developing countries, the development of
indigenous technology and technical co-operation among developing countries in such a manne,r as to assist these countries
in attaining their objectives in these fields.

Article Xlll
INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE

1. The Fund shall furnish any information that may be
requested by the International Court of Justice pursuant to
Article 34 of the Statute of the Court.
2. The General Assembly of the United Nations authorizes
the Fund to request advisory opinions of the International
Court of Justice on legal questions arising within the scope
of the Fund's activities, other than questions concerning the
mutual crelationships of the Fund and the United Nations or
other specialized agencies. Such requests may be addressed to
the Court by the Governing Council of the Fund, or by its
Executive Board acting pursuant to an authorization by the
Governing Council. The Fund shall inform the Economic
and Social Council of any such request it addresses to the
Court.
Article XIV
RELATIONS WJTH 011-IER INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATl01'S

The Fund shall inform the Economic and Social Council
of any formal agreement which the Fund shall enter into
with any specialized agency, and in particular agrees to inform
the Council of the natur,e and scope of any such agreement
before it is concluded.

Article XV
UNITED NATIONS

LAISSEZ-PASSER

The officials of the Fund shall be entitled to use the laissezpasser of the United Nations in accordance with such special
arrangements as may be concluded between the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations and the President of the Fund.

Article XVI
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE

AGREEMENT

The Secretary-General of the United Nations and the President of the Fund may enter into such supplementary arrangements for the implementation of the present Agreement
as may be found desirable.

Article XVII
AMENDMENT AND REVISION

The present Agreement may be amended or revised by
agreement between the United Nations and the Fund, and

:~2/108.

Revision of the lists of States eligible
for membership in the Industrial Development Board

The General Assembly,
Recalling section 11, paragraph 4, of its resolution
2152 (XXI) of 17 November 1966 on the United Nations Industrial Development Organization,
Decides to include Djibouti and Viet Nam in list A
of the annex to resolution 2152 (XXI) .oe
103rd plenary meeting
15 December 1977

•

•*

As a result of the above resolution, the lists of States eligible
for membership in the Industrial Development Board will be
as follows:
A.

LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN SECTION IJ, PARAGRAPH 4 (a),
OF GENERAL ASSEMBLY RESOLUTION 2152 (XXI)

Afghanistan
Algeria
Angola
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Benin
Bhutan
Botswana
Burma
Burundi
Cape Verde
Central African Empire
Chad
China
Comoros
Congo
Democratic Kampuchea
Democratic Yemen
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Fthiopia
Fiji
Gabon
Ciambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
lndia
lndone~ia
Iran
Iraq
Israel

Ivory Coast
Jordan
Kenya
Kuwait
Lao People's Democratic
Republic
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mongolia
Morocco
Mozambique
Nepal
Niger
Nigeria
Oman
Pakistan
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Qatar
Republic of Korea
Rwanda
Sao Tome and Principe
Saudi Arabia
Senegal

" 6 Fc_ir the other changes in the lists since the adoption of
resolutwn 2152 (XXI), see resolutions 2385 (XXIII) of 19
November 1968, 2510 (XXIV) of 21 November 1969, 2637
(XXV) of 19 November 1970, 2824 (XXVI) of 16 December
1971, 2954 (XXVII) of 11 December 1972, 3088 (XXVlII)
of 6 December 1973, 3305 (XXIX) of 14 December 1974,
3401 A (XXX) of 28 November 1975, 3401 B (XXX) of
9 December 1975 and 31/160 of 21 December 1976.
