UlVITEDNATIONS

\..“.

THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR

,l

: .;.
i

‘.

th
MEETING: 24 MAY 1977
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. . . . , . . . . 1. . , . . , . . . . . , . . . . . , , .

1

Statement by the President . , . . . . , . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2006)

Complaint of the Government of Botswana against the illegal regime in Southern
Rhodesia concerning violations of its. territorial sovereignty, as contained in the
letter dated 22 December 1976 from the Permanent Representative of
Botswana to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council:
Note by the Secretary-General (S/l 2307) . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

S/PV.2006

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composgd of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2006TH

MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday,
President: Mr. Thomas S. BOYA (Benin).

24 May 1977, at 10.30 a.m.
Complaint of the Government of Botswana against the
illegal r4gime in Southern Rhodesia concerning violations
of its territorial sovereignty, as contained in the letter
dated 22 December 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Botswana to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council:
Note by the Secretary-General (S/ 12307)

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
representatives of Botswana and Sierra Leone have addressed letters to the President of the Security Council in
which they request to be permitted to participate in the
debate on the item on the agenda, Consequently, in
accordance with past practice and with the consent of the
Council, I propose to invite those representatives to
participate in the debate, without the right to vote, under
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2006)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Complaint of the Government of Botswana against the
illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia concerning violations of its territorial sovereignty, as contained in the
letter dated 22 December 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Botswana to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council:
Note by the Secretary-General (S/12307)

4. I therefore welcome the Minister for External Affairs of
Botswana and invite him to take a place at the Council
table. I invite the representative of Sierra Leone to take the
place reserved for him at the side of the Council chamber,
on the understanding that he will be invited to take a place
at the Council table whenever he wishes to speak.

The meeting was called to order at 11.1.5 a.m.
Statement by the President

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. M. Mogwe
(Botswana) took a place at the Council table and Mr. S. R.
Nicol (Sierra Leone) took the place reserved for him at the
side of the Council chamber.

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): As the
Security Council is today holding its first meeting for the
month of May, I should like to avail myself of this
opportunity to pay a tribute, on behalf of all the members
of the Security Council, to Mr. Sim6n Albert0 Consalvi,
representative of Venezuela, for the brilliant manner in
which he discharged his duties as President of the Security
Couricil for the month of April. Mr. Consalvi presided with
outstanding skill and great patience over the official
meetings of the Council as well as the consultations held
during the month of April. The question before the Council
was one of great concern and importance for my Government, and I am very happy to be able to express my
sincerest gratitude to Mr. Consalvi for the great diplomacy
he showed during the debates which led to the unanimous
adoption, on 14 April, of resolution 405 (1977).

5. The PRESIDENT (interpretation porn French): The
Security Council will now resume consideration of the item
on its agenda. I would remind the Council that, after
considering this item at its 1983rd, 1984th and 1985th
meetings, held on 12, 13 and 14 January, the Council
adopted resolution 403 (1977). The Council now has
before it document S/12307, of 28 March 1977, in which
the Secretary-General transmits the report of the Mission
sent to Botswana in implementation
of the resolution. I
also wish to remind the Council of document S/12326,
which contains the text of a letter dated 18 April 1977
from th.e Secretary-General to the Governments of all
States.

2. It is our pleasure to have among us today at the Council
table the new Permanent Representative of China, Ambassador Chen Chu. On behalf of the members of the Council,
I welcome him most warmly and assure him of our
friendship and co-operatian.

6. I call on the Secretary-General.
7. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
In Security Council
resolution 403 (1977), I was requested to report to the
Council by 31 March 1977 on the results of my efforts to
organize with immediate effect financial and other forms of
assistance to Botswana to enable it to cope with the special
. problems it was encountering as a result of hostile acts

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

1

committed against its territory
r6gime in Southern Rhodesia.

Rhodesia Railways, and the need to establish a strategic
grain reserve to counter the risk of the disruption of
supplies of food grain. I concur with the Mission’s
recommendations that the Government of Botswana should
be assisted in developing a capability to operate the railway
in the event of an emergency, and in creating a grain
reserve.

by forces of the illegal

8. The Security Council recognized that the main source
of those problems was the need to divert funds from
planned development projects to hitherto unplanned and
unbudgeted security measures. Furthermore, the United
Nations and other organizations were requested to assist
Botswana in carrying out the ongoing and planned development projects without interruption.

14. On the basis of the findings of the Mission and its
assessment of Botswana’s needs for carrying out its development projects under present circumstances, the Govemment of Botswana will need to divert a sum of almost $28
million from development resources to unplanned and
unbudgeted security measures. This sum will include the
cost of protection, transport and supervision of refugees,
and is to meet part of the recurrent costs during the next
three years. In addition, a sum of approximately $25
million will be required for unplanned emergency projects
during the next two to three years, with corresponding
increases in recurrent expenditures.

9. In pursuance of the Council’s request, I dispatched a
mission to Botswana in February 1977 to assess the
country’s needs and to carry out detailed discussions with
its Government with a view to preparing an international
programme of fInanciaI and economic assistance. The
report of the Mission is before the Council in document
S/12307.
10. It is clear from the report, as well as from other
information that has since reached me from the region, that
the security situation in the areas bordering on Southern
Rhodesia continues to deteriorate rapidly. Last week’s
incursion into Botswana by the forces of the illegal regime
emphasizes the gravity of the situation. It is evident,
therefore, that the Government of Botswana is being
compelled to expand its police force in order to discourage
further incursions and to afford greater protection for the
lives and properties of its nationals living along the borders.

15. Finally, I should like to draw the attention of the
Council to my letter of appeal dated 18 April 1977
[S/12326] which I addressed to Member States and to
concerned regional and intergovernmental organizations.
From the text of the letter it will be seen that I have
designated the Assistant Secretary-General for Special
Political Questions to be responsible at Headquarters for
co-ordinating action by the United Nations system.

11. The report also draws attention to the financial
burden resulting from the influx of refugees from Southern
Rhodesia and South Africa. Since the Mission visited
Botswana, the number of refugees from Southern Rhodesia
has continued to increase. In Francistown, which has
facilities to accommodate only 250 refugees, there are now
more than 1,400. It has become necessary, with the
assistance of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, to establish an additional reception centre at
Selebi-Pikwe. But, there again, the influx has been so great
that an emergency centre which is under construction to
accommodate 500 persons has to cope with a camp
population of 1,700 people. In these circumstances, it has
become necessary to construct a second emergency centre
in that locality. I mention these facts to underscore the
need for immediate international assistance to cope also
with the humanitarian
problems to which the Southern
Rhodesian situation has given rise.

16. As part of the measures which I propose to take in
mobilizing assistance, it is my intention to convene a
meeting at Headquarters on 6 June 1977 of representatives
of Governments interested in contributing to the programme of assistance recommended in the Mission’s report.
The Minister for External Affairs of Botswana, who is with
us today, plans to attend that meeting to provide any
additional information that delegations may require. I
propose to discuss with him other measures in promotion
of the assistance programmes which might be undertaken
by the United Nations and the Government of Botswana
either separately or jointly.
17. I trust that the Security Council will endorse the
recommendations contained in the report and that the
international community will respond generously and without delay to my appeal.
18. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): I should like, first of all,
to salute the presence among us of my beloved brother
Archibald Mogwe, Minister for External Affairs of
Botswana.

12. Members of the Council will no doubt recognize the
great importance which the Government of Botswana
attaches to its livestock industry. In order to safeguard that
industry, it will be necessary to carry out an extensive
veterinary control programme in the areas bordering on
Southern Rhodesia, particularly in view of reports that
disease control and veterinary services in Southern Rhodesia have been declining with the increasing military and
political pressures in the country. The recommendations
contained in the report would assure the Botswana people
of the necessary support for that vital sector of their
economy.

19. When I addressed the Council on 12 January of this
year [1983rd meeting] in the course of the debate
concerning grave violations of Botswana’s territorial integ
rity by armed forces of the illegal regime of Rhodesia, I
characterized the situation there as a threat to international
peace and security in the region. It was my delegation’s
position that a dangerous and unacceptable dimension had
been added to Smith’s criminal policies by the conducting
of murderous raids into neighbouring territories, under the
guise of hot pursuit, and the perpetration of acts cf
subversion, murder and kidnapping against the population

13. Two other projects for which assistance is required
concern the railway through Botswana, now operated by
2

of those countries. Botswana has been a particular target of
such acts of aggression, even though it is well known that
the Government of Botswana has prevented the use of its
territory as a launching pad for -acts against neighbouring
States. The Botswana authorities have continued to exercise
the greatest restraint, even though they would be justified
in taking retaliatory measures under Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations, which recognizes the
inherent right of self-defence.

aware; yet it is one which, apart from its humanitarian
aspect, has presented the Government of Botswana with
considerable financial, economic and social burdens. I was
very concerned to learn from paragraph 32 that over
10,000 refugees had entered Botswana from Southern
Rhodesia and that, of these, nearly 3,500 had arrived
within the first two months of this year. The expenditure
of almost half a million dollars by the Government in the
upkeep of these refugees, as well as other sizeable amounts
which it has had to expend on refugees from South Africa,
Namibia and other neighbouring countries, fully justifies, in
the view of my delegation, generous assistance from the
international community. The Government of Botswana
cannot be be expected to carry the burden of these refugees
alone. The international community has an inescapable
responsibility, and I trust that there wilI be generous
contributions from all States in putting into effect the
projects recommended in paragraphs 120 and 124 of the
report.

20. These hostile acts have not ceased, despite the demand
made by the Council in paragraph 4 of its resolution
403 (1977). The most recent attack took place last week
while the United Nations Conference at Maputo-from
which I have just returned-was in progress. That attack
servesto underscore the cruel dilemma faced by Botswana,
which has to decide between utilizing its scarce resources
for security needs and utilizing them for economic development. My delegation is glad that the Council took cognizance of the hardship confronting Botswana as a result of
the necessity to divert funds from development projects to
security needs and that it appealed to all States to respond
positively in providing assistance to Botswana in the light of
the report of Mission dispatched by the Secretary-General
to assessBotswana’s needs.

24. In addition to projects connected with the police
mobile unit and the refugee situation, I note that the
Mission’s report recommends various projects which either
were not included in the normal develo,pment plan or, if
included, would need to be modified or accelerated. I refer
to projects to safeguard Botswana’s beef industry, which is
so vital to its economy, and to safeguard Botswana against
the collapse of the railway should conditions in Southern
Rhodesia reach a breaking point, as well as projects to meet
emergency food requirements and to provide strategic food
reserves in the event of any interruption in land and rail
communications.

21. First of all, I should like to congratulate the Secretary-General for the speed with which he has responded,
both in regard to the dispatch of a mission to Botswana and
in regard to the appeal which he has addressed to the
international community based on the recommendations of
that mission.
22. My delegation has found the Mission’s report most
valuable in understanding the political, economic and
security problems which confront Botswana. I am glad to
note that the recommendations contained in the report are
based on consultations between the Mission and senior
Government officials and on information obtained by the
Mission as a result of visits to the border as well as to other
areas of concern. Paragraph 24 of the report indicates that
the illegal regime has been responsible for 53 incidents and
territorial violations since 1966. More than half of these
incidents took place in 1976; they involved kidnapping,
detention or death and the destruction of property. As
paragraphs 26-28 suggest, the security forces available to
the Government of Botswana to safeguard the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the country are modest by any
standards. Unlike most other countries, Botswana has no
army and last year had a police force of only 1,800 for a
country of 582,000 square kilometres and a population of
over 680,000. Little wonder that the Government of
Botswana has not been able to prevent the forces of the
Smith regime from violating its territory. The estimate of
$29.7 million that will have to be diverted from the normal
plan of development of Botswana to security needs is very
reasonable and accords with the rough estimate of $29
million given to the Council by the Minister for External
Affairs of Botswana in the course of his statement on 12
January [ibid./.

25. It is my delegation’s view that the assessment made by
the Mission, as well as the essential projects which it has
recommended, should be endorsed by the Council. Considering. the magnitude of the problems facing Botswana
and the fragile state of its economy, the amount of
international assistance is relatively modest: $28 million
represents the amount of development resources which
have to be diverted to meet unforeseen security needs; a
further sum of $25.5 million is required to meet the cost of
new projects which have become necessary in order to
ensure the development of the country and to provide
against urgent
contingencies.
*
26. With those matters in mind, I wish to introduce a draft
resolution [S/12334] on behalf of the non-aligned and
other members of the Council. The sponsors of this draft
resolution are Benin, India, the Libyan Arab Jamhiriya,
Mauritius, Pakistan, Panama and Romania. I understand
that the delegation of Venezuela is still awaiting instructions about becoming a co-sponsor of the draft, but I have
had indications that Venezuela will go along with it.
27. The preambular paragraphs of the draft resolution are
self-explanatory and require no comment. Operative paragraph 1 assures the Government of Botswana of the
Council’s support in its efforts to safeguard its sovereignty
and territorial integrity. Paragraphs 2, 3,4, 5 and 6 relate to
the excellent efforts which have been made by the
Secretary-General. He not only has arranged for the Council
to be provided with an objective report giving an assessment
of needs as well as background information on the

23. I am glad that the Mission’s report has given emphasis
to the refugee problems with which Botswana is confronted. This is a situation of which many people are not
3

!

you for permitting me to participate in the deliberations of
the Council. We are grateful to you and the other members
of the Council for holding this meeting to examine the
report of the Mission to Botswana contained in document
S/12307. The commitment of the sister Republic of Benin
to the cause of liberation on our continent already assures
us that you will steer this debate to a successful conclusion.

problems facing Botswana, but also has addressed an appeal
to the international community as part of the programme
for mobilizing contributions. Paragraph 7 contains a request
to the United Nations and the organizations and programmes concerned, including the Economic and Social
Council, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural
Development, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, the United Nations Development
Programme and the World Health Organization to assist
Botswana in the fields identified in the report of the
Mission to Botswana. In accordance with the affirmation in
the fifth preambular paragraph that there have been
continued attacks and acts of provocation by the illegal
racist regime in Southern Rhodesia against Botswana,
operative paragraph 8 would have the Council request the
Secretary-General to give the matter of assistance to
Botswana his continued attention and to keep the Council
informed.(Since it is our objective that the matter be kept
at the forefront of our attention, we should like the
Secretary-General to provide the Council with a report on
the progress of the international programme of assistance,
and to keep in close touch with the Government of
Botswana on this matter.

33. On 12 January 1977 [1983rd meeting] I appeared
before the Council to present the complaint of the
Republic of Botswana with regard to the provocative
attacks by the illegal racist minority r&me in Southern
Rhodesia. Today, thanks to the expeditious manner in
which this august body acted, to the business-like way in
which the Secretary-General dispatched a mission to
Botswana in consequence of the debate and to the hard
work of the Mission under the able leadership of
Mr. Abdulrahim Abby Farah, Assistant Secretary-General
for Special Political Questions, the Council is considering
the report of the Mission.

34. The Government and the people of Botswana sre
indeed grateful for the speed with which all this was done. I
take this opportunity to thank all those responsible.
35. Turning now to the report itself, I can without any
hesitation state that my Government, after having studied it
carefully, is satisfied that it is a true reflection of the
situation and conditions prevailing at the time. The Mission
arrived at its conclusions and recommendations after
careful study of the situation. The discussions between the
Mission and the Government of Botswana were open, frank
and friendly. We, in Botswana, were impressed by the
enthusiasm and objectively of the Mission in discharging its
mandate. The report is lucid and solid. The Mission should
be lauded for work so very well done.

28. Before concluding, I wish to express a hearty welcome
to our colleague, Ambassador Chen Chu of China. He is no
stranger to the Council. Indeed, for some time he was the
deputy of Ambassador Huang Hua, now the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of China. I extend to Ambassador Chen
Chu my full co-operation and I am glad that our respective
countries continue to enjoy very good relations.
29. Mr, President, it is always a special pleasure for me to
addressthe Security Council whenever it is presided over by
a beloved African brother. You, Ambassador Boya, aided
and abetted by your deputy, our brother Houngavou, have
impressed us with your dynamism and, may I say, militancy
whenever African issues have been discussedin the Council.
Your deep enthusiasm, your uncompromising patriotic
attitude and your determination to show impartiality when
the interests of your progressive country are concerned
have filled us with admiration and sometimes even with
awe. I congratulate you personally, beloved brother, as well
as your delegation, on your conduct of the proceedings of
this Council during the month of May, and I pledge to you
and to the delegation of Benin my full support and
co-operation.

36. Now that the report has been published, we are
confident that it is being studied by the various Governments and private organizations and that, as requested in
resolution 403 (1977) and in the Secretary-General’s letter
of 18 April 1977 /S/12326/ addressed to all States, the
international community and the relevant programmes and
agencies of the United Nations system will respond sympathetically and positively. Botswana will welcome financial and material assistsnce-bilateral and multilateral-from
Governments and private organizations.
37. We note with appreciation that the Secretary-General
has designated Mr. Farah, Assistant Secretary-General for
Special Political Questions, to be responsible at Headquarters for co-ordinating action by the United Nations
system-a very appropriate choice indeed, since Mr. Farah,
as leader of the Mission to Botswana, has first-hand
knowledge of the situation obtaining there.

30. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
thank the representative of Mauritius for the very kind
words which he addressed to me and the delegation of
Benin.
31. The next speaker is the Minister for External Affairs
of Botswana, His Excellency Mr. Mogwe, on whom I now
call.

38. What I have just said with regard to assistance is
important enough. But what is even more important for the
Government of Botswana is the commitment and the duty
to defend its people and to safeguard its sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence at all costs. I am glad
that operative paragraph 1 of the draft resolution just
introduced to ,the Council cIearIy states this. With or
without assistance, that imperative duty must be per-

32. Mr. MOGWE (Botswana): Mr. President, allow me to
extend to you my very warm congratulations and those of
my delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I should also like to thank
4

formed. It was for this reason that we had to divert our
scarce resources from on-going development projects to
security needs. We are asking the international community
to enable us to acquire the capability to withstand the
desperate attacks by the iliegal regime in Salisbury, for only
in this way can Botswana effectively honour its international obligation and contribute to the liberation of
Zimbabwe, to which we are totally committed,

45. There are therefore indications that we are now
entering the most serious phase of the confrontation
between rebel Rhodesia and Botswana-if, in fact, we have
not already done so. We wish to draw the attention of the
international community to this grave situation which
could easily escalate as a result of the Rhodesian regime’s
announced policy of “hot pursuit” of freedom fighters,
whether real or fake, into Botswana, Mozambique and
Zambia.

39. The diversion of resources to the security needs
referred to in resolution 403 (1977) is now taking place; in
fact, it started even before the report of the Mission to
Botswana was out, because the situation called for quick
and urgent action. We must defend our people in the border
areas effectively and promptly. To that end, our National
Assembly has passed the Botswana Defence Force Act
(1977) and the Botswana Defence Force has now been
created. Its first recruits have completed their initial
training and are now in active service. Drastic cuts have
been made from various projects to make this possible.

46. The attacks on Botswana are not mere uncoordinated
and sporadic acts. They are systematic and carefully
contrived to cause panic among our people and wreak
havoc in the refugee camps, which the regime refers to as
“guerrilla bases” to create a pretext for an attack on them,
and to intimidate us into refusing asylum to our brothers
and sisters. Botswana has always openly stated, and we
repeat now, that no amount of intimidation will force us to
refuse asylum to those who flee from oppression. This, I
repeat, is to us an article of faith.
47. From the foregoing it will be clear that, whilst we
unreservedly laud the Mission for a job well done, we
should be aware of the fact that, since its departure, the
increase in the acts of aggression against my country and
the escalation of the war in Rhodesia have brought about
new problems. The attack on the Francistown Mopane Club
revealed, more than anything else, the inadequacy of our
medical facilities to care for victims of aggression. The
unprecedented and unexpected increase in the number of
refugees-to whom the Secretary-General referred-has
caused accommodation problems, The conditions under
which those refugees live appal one’s conscience, It is not
only encouraging but also gratifying that the Council
recognizes the need to remain seized of the matter and
implores the Secretary-General to keep it informed. For its
part, the Government of Botswana will keep the SecretaryGeneral informed of developments in the area.

40. I am aware that this meeting wasconvened to consider
the report of the Mission to Botswana. But since the state
of tension continues as a result of continuing provocative
attacks against Botswana by the illegal racist minority
regime in Southern Rhodesia, I thought that the Council
might wish to be apprised of the latest developments. I shaI1
not attempt to list all the violations of Botswana’s
territorial integrity by Southern Rhodesia since January
and the Council’s debate on this matter. It will suffice to
mention only a few examples to demonstrate that the
regime, is unrepentant and continues to perpetrate aggressive acts and that the security situation along our border
with rebel Rhodesia continues to deteriorate.
41. While the Mission was visiting Botswana, rebel forces
penetrated some 13 kilometres into Botswana on 18
February and seriously wounded a certain Shabalana, a
villager living in the North-East District. In the encounter
that followed, Detective Inspector John Michael Harlow,
one of the rebel soldiers, was killed by our forces.
Paragraph 25 of the Mission’s report alludes to that incident
and to two others which occurred on 13 February,
involving exchanges of fire in the same district between our
forces and those of the illegal regime.

48. In conclusion, I commend the adoption of the report
of the Mission and its recommendations.
49. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Sierra Leone, who will
address the Council in his capacity as Chairman of the
African Group for the month of May. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

42. On 2’ March there was another exchange of fire at
Mopoka Village in the North-East District, and soon after
that, on 7 and 11 March, there were further exchanges of
fire at Matsiloje Village. All those incidents took place on
Botswana territory, thus demonstrating once again the
regime’s violation of our territorial integrity.

50. Mr. NICOL (Sierra Leone): Sir, permit me to congratulate you on your assumption of the office of President
of this august body for the month of May. The Council
could not have been more fortunate than to have you, an
African, presiding over its deliberations at a time when a
subject extremely important to Africa in general. is being
discussed. Your country’s extreme devotion to the African
cause coupled with your long experience in international
relations and diplomacy, undoubtedly qualify you for your
present responsibility. My delegation is confident that you
will conduct this debate to a successful conclusion.

43. On 6 May, agents of the Rhodesian rebel regime tossed
a hand-grenade into a Francistown club dance, killing two
people and wounding scores of others.
44. One of the most serious and well calculated recent
violations of our territorial integrity occurred on 16 May,
when Botswana was invaded and attacked at two points by
about 150 rebel troops in helicopters and troop-carriers.
They used hand-grenades similar to the one tossed into the
Mopane Club at Francistown. That indeed was the most
serious invasion yet, considering its magnitude and the fact
that heavy war machinery was employed.

51. My delegation would also like to extend its appreciation, through you, to the members of the Council for
permitting me, in my capacity as Chairman of the African
Group for the month of May, to address this body on the
subject under consideration,
5

57. Now that the work of the Mission has been completed,
its report has been submitted in document S/12307 of 28
March 1977. It is, indeed, a very satisfactory and detailed
report. I must, at this juncture, congratulate the members
of the Mission for the successful work they have accomplished, particularly in regard to the detailed information
they have collected to facilitate the work of the Council.
From this report we have a clear picture of the financial,
technical and material assistance that Botswana requires in
order to continue, uninterruptedly, with its development
programme. The Mission calculated that Botswana would
have to divert $28 million from its planned development
programme to security needs during the first three years of
its development programme. The Mission also realized that
the security problems of Botswana had made it necessaryto
introduce 11 new projects for the purpose of safeguarding
the country’s overall development. Those 11 new projects
have been estimated to cost $25.5 million. We can see from
this analysis that the total amount required by Botswana to
continue its normal development programme is $53.5
million over the next three years.

52. We vividly recall the discussions which were held here
last January concerning the complaint of Botswana against
the illegal racist r&ime in Rhodesia. During those discussions, it was revealed that serious acts of provocation were
being carried out by the military forces of the illegal
minority racist r6gime against the independent sovereign
State of Botswana. The Minister for External Affairs of
Botswana described in detail the numerous acts of aggression which had already been committed against his country.
Such acts, as was agreed by the Council, were tantamount
to a violation of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Botswana and constituted a grave threat to international
peace and security.
53. Despite the unanimous condemnation of the acts of
aggression by the illegal racist r&me against the peaceloving State of Botswana, there has hardly been any
attempt by the rebel r6gime to amend its aggressive policies
against its neighbours. Instead, more acts of provocation are
being reported daily against Botswana and Zambia. The
situation along the Rhodesia/Botswana border and the
Zambia/Rhodesia border has considerably worsened. We
now receive news of open clashes between Rhodesia and
Botswana, on the one hand, and Rhodesia and Zambia, on
the other. If the Government of Botswanahad not adopted
appropriate measures to reinforce its military forces by
diverting its resources from planned development to security needs, it would not have been able at this stage
successfully to resist the aggressive acts of the illegal
minority racist r&me.

58. Considering the magnitude and urgency of its requirements, Botswana has indicated that it would welcome both
multilateral and bilateral assistancein order to maintain the
momentum of its development programme during this
crucial period. On behalf of the African Group, I am hereby
appealing to all members of the Council and to the
international community as a whole to provide Botswana
with the financial assistance that it so urgently requires.

54. In this regard, my delegation commends and firmly
supports the measures already taken by the Government of
Botswana to safeguard its territorial integrity and sovereignty. These latest acts of aggression further confirm how
necessary it is for the international community to render
appropriate financial assistance to the Government of
Botswana to enable it not only to reinforce its armed forces
but also to continue its development programme without
interruption.

59. A draft resolution [S/12334/ was introduced by the
representative of Mauritius a few minutes ago. It recommends the acceptance of the Secretary-General’s report on
assistance to Botswana. From the African point of view, the
draft resolution is considered to be balanced and non-controversial and based on the contents of document S/12307.
I would therefore appeal to members of the Council to
adopt this draft resolution by consensus as a natural
consequence to resolution 403 (1977).

55. The delegation of Sierra Leone, on behalf of the
African Group, unequivocally condemns the continued acts
of aggression committed by the illegal racist rBgime against
Botswana and solemnly appeals to the international community to endeavour to provide financial and other
assistance to alleviate Botswana’s present economic difficulties.

60. Finally, it must be realized that the problem we now
face in Botswana should be considered in the broader
context of the racial problem in southern Africa as a whole.
International
support and solidarity with Botswana is
essential for the solution of the racist problem in Rhodesia.
We must therefore act collectively now and support
unequivocally the course of Botswana as a stepping stone to
our overall commitment
to the solution of the racist
problem in southern Africa.

56. At the conclusion of the debate in January on this
subject, the Council adopted resolution 403 (1977). By
that resolution, the Secretary-General was requested to
dispatch a mission to Botswana with a view to giving an
accurate report on the economic hardships now facing
Botswana as a result of the imperative need to divert funds
already budgeted for its development programme to hitherto unplanned security commitments brought about by the
hostile acts of aggression of the illegal minority racist
regime in Southern Rhodesia, which have increased in
frequency and seriousness in recent months. The Mission
was also mandated to assess the assistance required to
enable Botswana to continue its development programme as
well as to provide adequate security for its territorial
integrity and sovereignty.

61. Mr. AL GAYED (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya): Mr. President, allow me, first of all, to extend to you the
congratulations of my delegation on your assumption of
the duties of the presidency of the Security Council. We are
confident that, with your proven wisdom and experience,
you will guide and preside over the affairs of the Council in
a manner that will facilitate the attainment of the worthy
objectives of the United Nations. Our confidence in you is
also based on the fact that you are the representative of the
People’s Republic of Benin, a sister African country with
which my country, the Socialist People’s Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, is proud to maintain the closest bonds of
friendship and co-operation.
6

62, ,4&-$v me dS0 to COngratLllate and commend your
predecessorin that h&h post, the representative of Venesuela, for the excellent and arse manner in which he
presidedover the affairs Of the COUnCil last month.

63, 1 should also like to express the honour felt by my
at the presence here in this chamber of fis
Excellencythe Minister for Bxternal Affairs of Botswana,

d&gatioll

64, 1 take this opportunity to welcome, on behalf of my
delegation,the new representative of the People’s Republic
efcltina, Ambassador Chen C~U.
65, It was only a few months ago that the Security
Council had occasion to discuss the dangerous situation in
&hem Africa resulting from the continued domination of
Southern Rhodesia by the illegal minority regime. The
Council is once again convened to deliberate on the
dangeroussituation that hX3 arisen as a result of the flagrant
andvicious acts of aggression perpetrated by the Ian Smith
regimeagainst the Republic of Botswana.
66. The report of the Mission sent to Botswana in
pursuanceof resolution 403 (1977) is explicit and clear
concerningthe hardships facing Botswana as a result of the
continuous violations and acts of aggression committed by
the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia. There can be no
doubt about the gravity of the situation, nor about the
perils and hardships faced by Botswana. Paragraph 21 of
thereport states:
“Since the illegal declaration of independence by the
regime in Southern Rhodesia, there has been a series of
border incidents, particularly in the Central, North-East
and Chobe Districts. The Mission drove along the border
in the Central and North-East Districts where many of the
incidents had occurred, and saw evidence of the destruction of houses and the damage from bombs and attacks.”
[SeeS/1230%]

In meeting with people directJy affected by the flagrant
actsof aggression perpetrated by the Ian Smith regime, the
Missionwasinformed that:
“the border violations and attacks on Botswana citizens
in border areas have resulted in losses of livestock due to
lack of ability to use watering points on the border, . . . in
addition, the situation on the Rhodesian side of the
border could result in increased risks of diseased animals
straying into Botswana . . . the border violations and
attacks have made it mandatory that protection be
provided to citizens in border areas” [ibid., para. 231.
67. Resolution 403 (1977) strongly condemned those acts
of aggression and demanded the immediate and total
cessationof all hostile acts committed against Botswana.
Despitethat resolution, the racist minority regime Of Ian
smith has persisted in its defiance of United Nations
resolutions and has continued in its aggressive policies
towardsBotswana, In fact, such acts of aggression were

‘ommitted against Botswanaevenwhile the United Nations
Mission wasundertaking its investigations and consultations
in BotiWma. Furthermore, only a few days ago, we learned
through the mass media that the military forces of the
racist regime in Salisbury had once more invaded the
territorY of Botswana and perpetrated abominable acts of
murder and violence againstthe people.
‘j8. The Republic of Botswana,which is both a Member of
the United Nations and a member of the Crganization of
African Unity, is faced with an extremely critical and grave
situation. The report of the Mission indicates that Botswana
is faced with a situation of deteriorating security resulting
from threats to its territory and people by the illegal
minority regime in Southern Rhodesia. The economic and
social consequencesof those flagrant acts of aggressionalso
deservethe urgent consideration of the Council. It should
be pointed out that Botswanahas had to face the problem
of the influx of refugeesinto its territory. Those refugees
have been compelled to leave their own homes and villages
as a result of acts of repression, expulsion, murder and
violence perpetrated against them by the racist regimes in
South Africa and Southern Rhodesia.
69. My -delegation believes that, in view of those acts of
aggressionand in view of the increasing threat to the peace
and security of the world, the Security Council can no
longer delay the adoption of effective measures to put an
end to the illegal minority regime in Southern Rhodesia.
The peace and security of the area can only be achieved
through the granting to the people of Zimbabwe of their
right to self-determination and independence. The continued existence of the illegal racist minority regime in
Southern Rhodesia can only result in the increasedoppression of the Zimbabwe people and in repeated acts of
aggression against Botswana and other neighbouring countries. It would indeed be a regrettable situation if the
Council continued to prove ineffective and to remain
bin dered in the face of such challenges.
70, My delegation endorses the recommendations of the
Mission to Botswana, contained in document S/12307, and
urges that all possible assistanceand support be extended to
the Government of Botswana to help it overcome the
consequences of those acts of aggression. MY delegation
believes that effective measures on these lines should be
adopted by the Security Council and takes this occasion to
express its support and solidarity with the Government and
people of Botswana in their struggle to safeguard the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of their
country.
71.

Finally,

I should like to extend to the Mission our

appreciation and gratitude for the efforts it devoted to this
matter. Cur gratitude and appreciation are also due to *he

Secretary-General, whose efforts have greatly contributed
to the successof that Mission.
n;“lemeetingrose at 1215 P.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva,
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
depositaires
du monde ontier. Informez-vous
aupr&s de votre libraire
Q : Nations
U&s,
Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

NACIONES

et les agences
ou adresses-vous

UNIDAS

Las publicnciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estz’m en venta en librerfas
buidoras
an todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulta
a su librero
o dirijase
Unidas,
Seccidn de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

y casas distria: Naciones

77-70001-March

19784290
