4

General Assembly -

not possessing them and from transmitting to it the
information necessary for their manufacture ;
3. Calls upon Powers not possessing such weapons,
on a similar temporary and voluntary basis, to refrain
from manufacturing these weapons am! from otherwise
attempting to acquire them.
960th plenary meeting,
20 December 1960.
1577 (XV). Suspension of nuclear and
thermo-nuclear tests

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1252 R (Xl1I) of 4 November 1958 and 1402 (XIV) of 21 Kovember 1959,
Considering the importance and urgency of an agreement on the prohibition of nuclear and thermo-nuclear
weapons tests, with effective international control,
Noting ·with satisfaction that further progress with
regard to such an agreement has been achieved at the
negotiations in Geneva since the fourteenth session of
the General Assembly and that the States concerned have
voluntarily suspended such tests since the autumn of
1958,
1. Urges the States concerned to seek a solution for
the few remaining questions, so that the conclusion of
the agreement will be achieved at an early date;
2. Urges the States concerned in these negotiations
to continue their present voluntary suspension of the
testing of nuclear weapons;
3. Requests the parties concerned to report the results of their negotiations to the Disarmament Commission and to the General Assembly.
960th plenary meeting,
20 December 1960.

Fifteenth session

1578 (XV). Suspension of nuclear ancl
thermo-nuclear tests

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 137Q (XIV) of 20 November
1959 and 14-02 (XIV) of 21 November 1959,
Continuing to bear in mind the profound concern
evinced hy the peoples of all countries regarding the
testing of nuclear and thermo-nuclear weapons and the
consequences thereof,
Recogni::in_rJ that, as a result of the endeavours at
Geneva of the parties concerned, substantial progress
has been made towards reaching agreement on the
cessation of the testing of nuclear and thermo-nuclear
weapons, under appropriate international control.
Recogni::ing further that agreement on the ce.-;sation
of tests of nuclear and thermo-nuclear weapons is not
only imperative but urgent,
l. Urges the States concerned to make every effort
to reach agreement as soon as possible on the cessation
of tests of nuclear and thermo-nuclear weapons, under
appropriate international control;
2. Urges the States concerned in the Geneva negotiations to continue their present voluntary suspension
of the testing of nuclear and thermo-nuclear weapons,
and requests other States to n;frain from undertaking
such tests;
3. Requests the States concerned in the Geneva negotiations:
(a) To keep the Disarmament Commission periodically informed of the progress of their negotiations;
( b) To report the results of their negotiations to the
Disarmament Commission and to the General Assembly.
960th plenary meetinp,
20 December 1960.
