A /73/PV.43

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

43rd plenary meeting

Friday, 30 November 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 39 (continued)
Question of Palestine
Report of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
(А/73/35)
Report of the Secretary-General (А/73/346)
Note by the Secretary-General (А/73/201)
Draft resolutions (A/73/L.31, A/73/L.32,
А/73/L.33 and А/73/L.34)
Mr. Yaakob (Malaysia): At the outset, my delegation
wishes to thank the Permanent Representative of Senegal
for having introduced yesterday (see A/73/PV.42) the
four draft resolutions contained in documents A/73/L.31,
entitled “Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People”; A/73/L.32, entitled
“Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine”;
A/73/L.33, entitled “Special information programme
on the question of Palestine of the Department of Public
Information of the Secretariat”; and A/73/L.34, entitled
“Division for Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat”. We
also wish to thank the Permanent Representative of
Malta for introducing the report of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People (A/73/35) at yesterday’s meeting.
As in previous years, Malaysia is pleased to
co-sponsor the four important draft resolutions under
this agenda item, which remain critical in highlighting

the important aspects of the question of Palestine,
in accordance with the long-standing principles on
Palestine, supported by the international community.
More than 70 years have elapsed since the General
Assembly adopted resolution 181 (II), which provided
for the partition of Palestine, ostensibly predicated on the
establishment of two sovereign States. Unfortunately,
the establishment of only one State — Israel — was
brought to fruition in 1948.
In the intervening decades, Israel has sought to
extinguish the legitimate right to self-determination of
the Palestinian people. The civilian population of the
occupied Palestinian territories continues to endure
repression at the hands of Israel, which persists in its
flagrant violations of international law. The adoption of
the Jewish nation-State law in July 2018, the aggressive
expansion of Israeli settlements and the relentless
disproportionate use of force against unarmed civilians
involved in the Great March of Return are but recent
examples of a long-standing pattern of systematic abuse
meted out against the oppressed people of Palestine.
Efforts towards the establishment of an independent
State of Palestine based on the pre-1967 borders will
remain an integral part of the foreign policy framework
of the new Malaysian Administration. Malaysia has
consistently advanced a principled position on this
matter in various international forums, including during
its tenure as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council in 2015 and 2016. For example, on 23 December
2016, Malaysia, together with New Zealand, Senegal and
Venezuela, worked towards the adoption of resolution
2334 (2016), which signified a major breakthrough

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-40536 (E)

*1840536*

A/73/PV.43

for the Palestinian cause. The resolution affirms that
Israel’s establishment of settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem, has
no legal validity and constitutes a flagrant violation
of international law. The resolution also calls, inter
alia, for the cessation of all Israeli settlement activities
and the reversal of negative trends on the ground that
prejudice the realization of a two-State solution.
Unfortunately, Israel’s illegal conduct has continued
unabated, to the great detriment of Palestinians. It is
indeed tragic that the interests of innocent civilians,
including women and children, have long been
superseded by extraneous factors that render the major
Powers unable or unwilling to hold Israel accountable
for its actions.
Notwithstanding the asymmetries in military
power and political influence between Israel and
Palestine, the moral persuasiveness and steadfastness
of the latter’s struggle remain undiminished. Even in
the most turbulent of times, the Palestinian people
remain resilient, retaining hope for a future in which
they will assume their rightful place as a full and equal
member of the community of nations. Their aspirations
should not be denied any longer.
Malaysia continues to believe that a two-State
solution, in which the Palestinians and the Israelis live
side by side in peace, based on the pre-1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine, is the only
viable solution to this long-standing conflict. Malaysia
remains firmly committed to concerted multilateral
efforts aimed at ending the longest occupation in modern
history through the establishment of a sovereign State
of Palestine. The international community’s demand of
Israel is very simple: comply with all relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions, as well as
relevant international law.
Mr. Hermida Castillo (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): Nicaragua aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the representative of Venezuela on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and by the
Permanent Representatives of Senegal and Malta in
their respective capacities as Chair and Rapporteur of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People (see A/73/PV.42).
It is an honour to share with and read out to the
Assembly the message of President Daniel Ortega
Saavedra and First Lady and Vice-President Rosario
Murillo to commemorate the International Day of
2/26

30/11/2018

Solidarity with the Palestinian People, addressed to
our friend Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, President of the State
of Palestine.
“My esteemed brother, on the occasion of
the International Day of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People, on behalf of the Government of
Reconciliation and National Unity, the Sandinista
National Liberation Front, the people of Nicaragua,
Rosario and myself, I wish to extend to you our
most sincere expression of solidarity with the
heroic Palestinian people, while reaffirming our
full support for their tireless struggle for freedom
and the full exercise of their inalienable right to
self-determination, including the establishment of
a Palestinian State, based on the pre-4 June 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We
pay tribute today to the life, legacy, steadfastness
and conviction of our very dear brother, President
Yasser Arafat, leader of the struggle for the
liberation of Palestine, and to his commitment to
the Palestinian people. We remember his historic
visit to Nicaragua in July 1980.
“Comrade President Mahmoud Abbas, we
personally commend you and call attention to your
steadfast struggle, while advocating diplomacy
and negotiations, as well as the holding of an
international conference to find a solution to the
question of Palestine, which we welcome. Nicaragua
believes that achieving peace and stability in the
Middle East is feasible through negotiations and
the full implementation of the relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions on
the question of Palestine, in particular Security
Council resolution 2334 (2016), of December
2016, which are the legal instruments based on
international law to achieve peace and stability in
the region. Our peoples enjoy a very special and
historical relationship, and, together with the rest of
the international community, we deem it necessary
to step up efforts to realize the establishment of the
Palestinian State through peaceful means, thereby
ensuring just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
“With everlasting affection and love, we once
again express the greetings of the Sandinista
movement and are certain that, over time, our
eternally brotherly peoples will continue to
strengthen those fraternal and revolutionary
bonds, which have united us in our resolve for a
better world.”
18-40536

30/11/2018

Mr. Pirez Pérez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the representative of Malta for introducing
(see A/73/PV.42) the report of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People (A/73/35).
We express our unwavering solidarity and support to
the Palestinian Government and people for the accession
of Palestine as a full State Member of the United
Nations. Cuba reaffirms its unwavering solidarity with
the Palestinian people and its commitment to continue
supporting them in the legitimate struggle for justice,
dignity and peace, as our Foreign Minister made
clear in his message of solidarity to the Palestinian
people yesterday on behalf of the Cuban Government
and people.
Cuba also reiterates its demand to immediately
end the prolonged and illegal Israeli occupation of the
Palestinian territories and the blockade of the Gaza
Strip that has lasted for more than a decade. A twoState solution and a comprehensive, just, peaceful
and lasting settlement of the Palestinian question will
not be possible as long as Israel continues to violate
international law, the Charter of the United Nations
and the relevant United Nations resolutions, including
Security Council resolution 2334 (2016), in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.
Cuba expresses its deep concern about the situation
in the Middle East region, which is plagued by violence,
interference in internal affairs, foreign aggression and
long-standing conflicts, such as the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict at the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict. It is time
to settle historical debts with the State of Palestine and
restore the inalienable rights of its people, which have
been violated by Israel during 50 years of occupation,
repression, collective punishment, the destruction
and confiscation of Palestinian land and property,
forced displacements and colonialist settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories.
Cuba reiterates in the strongest terms its rejection
of Israel’s use of disproportionate and indiscriminate
force against Palestinian civilians in the occupied
territory, including East Jerusalem and particularly
the Gaza Strip, in grave and flagrant violation of
the Charter of the United Nations and international
humanitarian law. We condemn once again the illegal
construction and expansion of Israeli settlements in
the occupied Palestinian territory and the demolition
and seizure of Palestinian property. All such measures,
18-40536

A/73/PV.43

together with the blockade of the Gaza Strip, violate the
Fourth Geneva Convention and weaken the viability of
a two-State solution.
We reiterate our unconditional support for a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, based on the establishment of
two States, that would allow the Palestinian people to
exercise its right to self-determination and enjoy an
independent and sovereign State within the pre-1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital and the right
of return for refugees. We reject the unilateral action
taken by the United States to establish diplomatic
representation in the city of Jerusalem, thereby further
increasing tensions in the region.
Cuba once again calls for Israel’s total and
unconditional withdrawal from the Syrian Golan and
all other occupied Arab territories. We recall that any
measure or action aimed at modifying the legal, physical
and demographic status and institutional structure of
the occupied Syrian Golan, as well as Israel’s measures
to exercise its jurisdiction and administration in that
territory, constitute violations of international law and
the Charter of the United Nations.
Lastly, we call for respect for multilateralism and
the Charter, and for an end to interference in the internal
affairs of others, foreign aggression and the sponsorship
of terrorist groups to foment instability and conflict in
the Middle East, as well as the invention of pretexts and
rationales in an attempt to legitimize the unilateral use
of force and aggression against sovereign States.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Madam President, for convening today’s meeting.
I also thank the Chair of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People for
his statement (see A/73/PV.42). I take this opportunity
to express my gratitude for the valuable efforts of the
Committee, the Division for Palestinian Rights and
the special information programme on the question of
Palestine of the Department of Public Information.
Amid the dangerous crises throughout the Middle
East that have been the focus of the United Nations,
the Palestinian question remains the core and longeststanding issue that the General Assembly has been
considering. This year marks the seventieth anniversary
of the Nakba — the Palestinian catastrophe — the
tragic repercussions of which the Palestinians continue
to suffer. Over the past seven decades, that issue has
been a hallmark at the international level, leading to
3/26

A/73/PV.43

30/11/2018

the complete rejection by the international community
of the Israeli occupation and illegal settlements, as
well as violations of international law and the rights
of the Palestinian people. The international community
has also shown its full solidarity with the Palestinian
people’s efforts to exercise their inalienable rights.
As members of the international community, we must
continue to shoulder our responsibilities with regard
to that issue until a just, lasting and comprehensive
settlement is reached. That would have a positive impact
on regional and international peace and security.

As the issue of the Middle East persists, so does
the need to continue the work of the various relevant
United Nations organs, agencies and programmes, most
notably the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which
is one of the oldest and largest United Nations agencies
that plays an essential role in supporting millions of
Palestinian refugees. The State of Qatar has stepped up
its financial assistance to UNRWA by providing it with
$50 million dollars this year, which contributed to the
timely annual opening of UNRWA schools.

The State of Qatar reiterates its support for
international efforts aimed at achieving peace in the
Middle East and settling the Palestinian question, based
on the agreed terms of reference, the international
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative, as well as
the principle of the two-State solution, with Israel
and Palestine living side by side in peace and security
within the 1967 borders; an end to the Israeli occupation
of the occupied Arab territories, including the Syrian
Golan; ensuring all rights of the Palestinian people;
and achieving a just solution to the issue of refugees, in
accordance with resolution 194 (III).

In conclusion, on the occasion of the International
Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People, we
reaffirm the State of Qatar’s full solidarity with the
brotherly Palestinian people. We underscore once again
that the State of Qatar will pursue its commitment
to promoting their legitimate rights and supporting
efforts to achieve peace in the Middle East, based on
international terms of reference and the principle of
the peaceful settlement of disputes, while striving to
end all the conflicts being endured by the peoples of
the region.

The various annual resolutions on the Palestinian
question and the Middle East adopted by the General
Assembly have enjoyed long-standing international
unanimity with respect to the various aspects of that
issue, which highlights the importance of respect for
the principles of international law and the purposes of
the Charter of the United Nations. It calls for a complete
halt to all Israeli settlement activities and unilateral
measures in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem. Such measures run contrary
to international law and aim to change the legal status
and demographic composition of Jerusalem.
The situation in the Gaza Strip is worrisome, as
the humanitarian situation suffered by its population
is deteriorating as a result of the unjust blockade, now
entering its eleventh year. The State of Qatar is deeply
committed to providing humanitarian assistance. In
that regard, His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad
Al-Thani, Emir of the State of Qatar, has ordered
the provision of urgent assistance in the amount of
$150 million to alleviate the difficult situation in Gaza
and ensure the necessary supply of fuel for producing
electricity. His efforts are part of the State of Qatar’s
resolve to play a positive role in promoting stability,
which is a prerequisite to establishing peace.
4/26

Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): We join others in
reaffirming our delegation’s commitment to the
inalienable rights of the people of Palestine on the
auspicious occasion of the International Day of
Solidarity with the Palestinian People. We reiterate
our principled support for draft resolutions A/73/L.31,
A/73/L.32, А/73/L.33 and А/73/L.34, which are before
us today.
We support the rights of the Palestinian people
to self-determination and their long struggle for
peace and justice. Our unwavering solidarity with the
Palestinian people and their legitimate aspiration to
an independent State of Palestine, based on the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, stems from
our constitutional obligation.
Bangladesh condemns the heinous attacks on
the people of Palestine and denounces the illegal
settlements, including the expansion plans, and any
other action by the occupying force that obstructs
negotiations towards a viable two-State solution. The
human rights situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories remains a grave concern for the world
community and the Organization. Foreign occupation,
which has subjected the Palestinian people to gross and
systematic human rights violations and untold pain and
18-40536

30/11/2018

suffering, remains one of the root causes of conflicts
and other scourges around the world.
Bangladesh urges the comity of nations to prevail
upon Israel to immediately halt its illegal settlements in
the occupied Palestinian territories, lift the blockade in
the Gaza Strip and put an end to all forms of occupation
and violence. We remain concerned over the total
disregard by Israel of the provisions of Security Council
resolution 2234 (2016). Immediate priority must be
given to ensuring international protection for the
Palestinian people, who have suffered for decades from
the occupying Power’s policy of collective punishment.
The
continued
breaches
of
international
humanitarian law and systematic human rights
violations in the occupied Palestinian territories have
given rise to an egregious culture of impunity. In the
absence of effective international accountability, the
occupying Power continues to persecute Palestinian
civilians, imprison and abuse scores of Palestinians
in its detention centres, and dispossess and evict
thousands of Palestinian families through its unlawful
construction and expansion of settlements.
Bangladesh continues to insist on the lifting of
the illegal Israeli blockade of the Gaza Strip, which
has created a dire humanitarian situation. Provocative
policies and legal measures concerning occupied East
Jerusalem and the Holy Al-Aqsa Mosque must be
reversed in deference to the relevant United Nations
resolutions and international public opinion. We
reaffirm the overriding importance of preserving the
question of East Jerusalem as a final-status issue in the
peace process. We reiterate the Assembly’s assertion
that any decision or action that seeks to alter the
character, status or demographic composition of the
holy city of Jerusalem has no legal effect, is null and
void and must be rescinded in compliance with relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.
We reiterate our concern over the prolonged
uncertain situation endured by millions of Palestinian
refugees in a number of host countries. We reaffirm the
need to ensure enhanced, predictable and sustainable
funding for the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). We call upon Member States in a position
to do so to enable UNRWA to discharge its mandate in
a meaningful manner.
Bangladesh believes that if a lasting peace for the
people and the State of Palestine is to be achieved, the
18-40536

A/73/PV.43

timely implementation of the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the road map, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the efforts made by the Quartet is of paramount
importance. We thank Egypt for its recent initiatives
aimed at de-escalating tension in the region. As Chair
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation Council
of Foreign Ministers, we will continue to work with
the international community for a resolution of the
Palestinian question.
Before concluding, let me quote from the message
delivered by my Prime Minister on the occasion of
this year’s International Day of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People:
“We must not let the hope of peace fade away.
We must, and I believe we will, resume the peace
process without any further delay. We urge all
concerned to be pragmatic in their approach and
work together, hand in hand, for the establishment
of an independent homeland for the Palestinian
people where they can live in peace and in dignity
side by side with their neighbours.”
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to express my gratitude for
the efforts of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People to uphold
the legitimate rights of the brotherly Palestinian people
in order to enable them to exercise their rights, which
are guaranteed by the relevant international resolutions.
Today marks the seventieth anniversary of the
International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People, or what is known as the Day of Al-Nakba.
Seventy years have elapsed since the greatest
humanitarian disaster in the world. It was embodied by
the expulsion of the owners of the land, the accordance
of rights to those who did not have them and the
deprivation of the rights of their lawful holders. Seventy
years have elapsed since the displacement of an entire
people from their homeland, their properties seized and
their homes demolished. Seventy years have elapsed
and the Palestinian people continue to suffer alienation
from their homeland and the loss of families. Seventy
years have elapsed and the Palestinian people continue
to suffer the consequences of an occupation that does
not respect any international, ethical or human law.
It is regrettable that the occupation remains an issue
of debate in this century. The Arab-Israeli conflict
remains the most protracted current conflict in the
Arab region, with all its miseries, pains and violations
5/26

A/73/PV.43

against humanity. Nothing justifies the continuation
of that conflict, as the international community has
reached consensus vis-à-vis the need to uphold the
rights of the Palestinian people to self-determination
and to establish their Palestinian State based on the 1967
borders, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, in line
with the Arab Peace Initiative, which was submitted by
my country and recognized by the States of the world,
and the relevant international resolutions.
Through its repeated aggressions and violations,
Israel has demonstrated that it considers itself to be
above the law. It fails to respect international resolutions
and benefits from the silence of the international
community by not addressing its war crimes, including
the unjust blockade imposed on the Gaza Strip, which
has aggravated the humanitarian situation there. Not
satisfied merely with building the apartheid wall, which
runs counter to all democratic and humanitarian values,
Israel has also adopted the Jewish nation-State law,
which publicly consecrates racism and discrimination
against the Palestinian people, who are the rightful
landowners and right holders.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia condemns Israeli
violations and reaffirms its complete rejection of all
Israeli policies, practices and plans that are illegal,
null and void. We reject Israeli attempts to practise
racial discrimination against the Palestinian people,
erase their national identity and infringe on their
legitimate rights. My country also strongly condemns
the illegal Israeli practices of constructing settlements
on territories of the State of Palestine occupied since
1967. Israel also expands existing settlements so as
to jeopardize any remaining possibility of achieving
the two-State solution. Moreover, such settlement
practices constitute a flagrant breach of international
law and the relevant international charters, conventions
and resolutions.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia attaches paramount
importance to the Palestinian question. For us, it is the
uppermost issue, as confirmed by the Custodian of
the Two Holy Mosques, King Salman Bin Abdulaziz
Al-Saud, during the Arab League Summit, also known
as the Jerusalem Summit, held in Dhahran in April.
The Assembly recalls our honourable stance towards
the Palestinian people. The Kingdom stresses the
importance of achieving a comprehensive and lasting
peace in the Middle East as a strategic means of
ending the Arab-Israeli conflict, in line with the twoState solution, the international terms of reference
6/26

30/11/2018

and the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative, which ensures the
establishment of a Palestinian State based on the 4 June
1967 borders, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital,
and of putting an end to the Israeli occupation of all
Arab territories, including the Syrian Arab Golan and
the Lebanese territories.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is a
sponsor of the draft resolutions before us, concerning
Palestine, and will vote in favour of them, as they
embody the position of the Kingdom towards supporting
the Palestinian question. We believe in the right of the
brotherly Palestinian people to an independent State
that fulfils their dreams and ambitions.
We are stunned by the attempts of Israel and
its allies to submit a draft resolution that seeks to
divert attention from the core of that issue. The core
of the Palestinian question is the occupation and the
blockade — nothing else. Therefore, draft resolutions
submitted to divert attention from the suffering of
the Palestinian people and from the unjust practices
carried out by Israel are merely attempts to justify
the occupation. Those attempts are not accepted or
permitted by the General Assembly.
Mr. Bessedik (Algeria): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this important annual debate
on the question of Palestine and the situation in the
Middle East.
My delegation would also like to express its deep
appreciation to the members of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People for recommending the four draft resolutions
before us, and to thank the Chair and the Rapporteur
for their introductions, as well as for the introduction of
the Committee’s annual report (A/73/35).
On this International Day of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People, my delegation wishes to express, in
its national capacity, its serious preoccupation with the
continued systematic pattern of violations of the human
rights of the Palestinian people and of other Arabs in the
occupied territories. The expansion of Israeli settlement
activities, along with the brutality of the Israeli settlers,
the Israeli exploitation of the natural resources of the
occupied Palestinian territories and the Syrian Golan
Heights, the confiscation of land, the demolition of
homes and the displacement of Palestinian civilians,
are in violation of international law, international
humanitarian law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions. That includes the segregation, isolation
18-40536

30/11/2018

and obstruction of Palestinian movement by numerous
measures, including annexation, the apartheid wall,
the permit regime, hundreds of checkpoints and
the systematic collective punishment of the entire
Palestinian civilian population.
My delegation condemns the abuses that detainees
and prisoners, including children, suffer in detention
centres. My delegation condemns the excessive use
of force by the occupying Power and the application
of the death penalty. My delegation condemns Israeli
institutions in which Palestinians have no representation.
Two examples of that injustice are Israel’s brutal, illegal,
oppressive and destructive policies in the recent protests
in Gaza and its plans for Khan Al-Ahmar, a Palestinian
shepherding community. Some 200 people live in Khan
Al-Ahmar, just a few kilometres east of Jerusalem, in
an area where Israel has long endeavoured to minimize
the Palestinian presence and expand settlements. Israel
plans to raze the entire community, claiming that all
structures were built illegally. But how could it be
otherwise, since Palestinians cannot obtain building
permits? Palestinians are not inherently law-breakers,
as suggested by Israel.
The Gaza Strip, with a population of nearly
2 million, has essentially become an open-air prison.
The Israeli-imposed blockade, which has continued
for 11 years, has led to economic collapse, soaring
unemployment rates, polluted drinking water and deep
despair. Since 30 March, more than 5,000 Palestinians
have been injured by live Israeli gunfire and more
than 170 killed, including 31 minors, according to the
briefing by the Executive Director of the Israeli human
rights organization B’Tselem before the Security
Council on 18 October (see S/PV.8375).
In addition to those violations, since 1967 Israel
has continued, as the occupying Power, to violate the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War of 12 August 1949. Yet Israel
enjoys impunity. It is pertinent to mention here that
the international community is in favour of protecting
civilians and bringing an end to Israeli practices and
flagrant violations of international humanitarian law
and relevant resolutions.
Despite the numerous calls of the international
community on Israel to cease its illegal policies
and measures, the world still bears witness to the
persistence of the Israeli occupier’s policy of settlements
on Palestinian land and the application of group
18-40536

A/73/PV.43

punishment through the blockade in Gaza, in flagrant
violation of international humanitarian law and human
rights. The Israeli settlement activities on Palestinian
land, including Al-Quds Al-Sharif, and in the Syrian
Golan Heights, are a violation of international law,
including Security Council resolution 2334 (2016),
which in paragraph 1:
“[r]eaffirms that the establishment by Israel of
settlements in the Palestinian territory occupied
since 1967, including East Jerusalem, has no
legal validity and constitutes a flagrant violation
under international law and a major obstacle to the
achievement of the two-State solution and a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace”.
Security Council resolution 497 (1981) confirms
the same situation regarding the Syrian Golan Heights,
stating in paragraph 1:
“the Israeli decision to impose its laws, jurisdiction
and administration in the occupied Syrian Golan
Heights is null and void and without international
legal effect”.
The ongoing Israeli practices and violations, in
particular settlements, are major obstacles to the twoState solution. We urge the international community
to fulfil its obligations towards the Palestinian people,
who have been denied the benefit of human rights
for more than 70 years. The international community
must exert pressure on Israel to freeze all settlement
activities on Palestinian land and in the occupied Arab
territories, including the Syrian Golan Heights.
Finally, we reject any possible attempts to harm the
integrity of long-standing General Assembly resolutions
reaffirming the Palestinian people’s inalienable rights
and the core principles and internationally endorsed
parameters for the achievement of a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in line with international law, the
relevant resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Mr. Mamdouhi (Islamic Republic of Iran): For the
past 70 years, the question of Palestine has been not
only an Islamic-Arabic issue but also one of the most
complicated political and legal issues at the regional
and international levels. During this time, the people
of Palestine have experienced nothing but oppression,
displacement, misery and occupation of their lands.
They have always been deprived of their basic and
inalienable rights.
7/26

A/73/PV.43

This year, which marks the seventieth anniversary
of the tragic Nakba of the Palestinian people in 1948,
the military aggression against peaceful demonstrations
by Palestinian civilians in Gaza has led to the death of
more than 170 martyrs and the injury of thousands more
Palestinian citizens. Since its creation, the occupying
regime has ignored international law and defied the
decisions of international institutions, including many
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council. It has violated other international legal
instruments through its actions as it continues to commit
numerous war crimes, carry out its apartheid policy,
commit massive and systematic violations of human
rights, sponsor State terrorism, expand settlements and
displace an ever-increasing number of Palestinians.
We note with grave concern the latest disturbing
developments in the occupied Palestinian territories,
as reflected in the document under consideration today
(A/73/346). The injustices have continued for more
than seven decades through systematic and unabated
violations of the human rights of the Palestinian
people, including the demolition of homes, the forced
displacement of Palestinian civilians, the arrest and
detention of Palestinians, including children, persistent
acts of violence, and terror and provocations committed
by Israeli settlers and extremists at sensitive religious
sites, in particular the Al-Aqsa Mosque. In fact, the
occupation of Palestinian territories lies at the heart of
the protracted situation of crisis in the Middle East. The
Israeli regime’s criminal acts against the Palestinians
and other peoples of the region are currently the gravest
threat posed to regional and international peace and
security. Peace in the Middle East cannot be achieved
through the promotion of a discriminatory policy
of blind support for the Israeli regime’s occupation,
torture, annihilation, intimidation and aggression.
Likewise, Israel continues to flout all international
regimes that govern weapons of mass destruction by
refusing to adhere to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical Weapons Convention
and the Biological Weapons Convention. Nuclear
weapons in the hands of the Israeli regime pose the
most serious threat to the security of all States of the
Middle East.
As pointed out in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, the wrongful and unwise decision of the
President of the United States, concerning Al-Quds,
issued on 6 December 2017, in which he announced
his intention to relocate the United States Embassy
8/26

30/11/2018

to Al-Quds, was severely condemned as a naked and
immoral aggression against the rights of the Palestinian
people, as well as a provocative action that is apt to
push the region into greater violence and anarchy.
Emboldened by the United States decision and a number
of other changes in the political landscape, the Israeli
regime now seems to have decided to totally negate any
Palestinian right to statehood.
As has been the case for decades, the situation
in Palestine requires urgent international action and
attention. The Islamic Republic of Iran is of the view
that any solution to the crisis requires the termination of
the occupation, crimes and violations committed by the
Israeli regime; the restoration of the inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people to self-determination; and the
establishment of their independent and viable State of
Palestine, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.
Regarding the occupation of the Golan by the Israeli
regime, we consider the Golan to be an integral part of
the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic. We condemn
all measures taken by the illegitimate occupying Power
to undermine the territorial integrity of Syria, and we
express our deep concern over the grave deterioration
of the human rights situation and the increase in the
number of illegal Jewish settlements in the occupied
Syrian Golan.
In conclusion, I would like once again to
reiterate our unwavering commitment to a just and
comprehensive solution to the question of Palestine and
to the immediate restoration of the inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people, including their right to selfdetermination and to their independent and viable State
of Palestine, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital. In
that regard, we maintain our support for the Palestinian
people in their rightful and legitimate struggle against
the occupation and for their just quest to exercise their
right to self-determination.
Mr. Atlassi (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People and its Chair, Mr. Cheikh Niang, for the
Committee’s valuable and tireless efforts to support
justice for the Palestinian people and oversee its various
programmes designed to enable the Palestinian people
to achieve the just, legitimate, national and sovereign
independence they deserve.
The International Day of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People, which occurs on 29 November,
18-40536

30/11/2018

presented His Majesty King Mohammed VI with another
opportunity this year to send a message of solidarity to
the Chair of the Committee, reiterating his full support
for the Palestinian people and their leaders, first and
foremost, His Excellency President Mahmoud Abbas.
In that letter, he also expresses the full, steadfast
and lasting support of the Kingdom of Morocco for
the historical and legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people, most notably their right to form an independent
State that is based on the 4 June 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, and that is stable and viable,
living side by side with Israel in peace, security and
safety in accordance with international resolutions.
The Kingdom of Morocco, whose King presides
over the Al-Quds Committee, is following with great
concern the escalation that Israel has chosen to pursue
in Palestine in general, and Jerusalem in particular, to
undermine the legal status of Al-Quds Al-Sharif as
defined in resolutions of international legitimacy, which
consider it to be an inseparable part of the Palestinian
territories occupied since 1967.
In that regard, Israel seeks religious and ideological
conflicts through the temporal and spatial partitioning
of Al-Quds Al-Sharif, as well as repeated, systematic
violations against the sanctity of the Al-Aqsa Mosque
and its worshippers, while intensifying settlement
activities, including in Al-Quds Al-Sharif, in violation
of Security Council resolutions, particularly resolution
2334 (2016). In his letter, His Majesty the King of
Morocco asserts that:
“[t]he Moroccan people’s relationship with
Palestine, and in particular Al-Quds, is neither new
nor fortuitous. It is an emotional relationship that
is deeply rooted in the imagination of Moroccans,
as individuals and as a nation. Moroccan pilgrims
travelling to Mecca and Medina used to visit the
holy city of Al-Quds — the first of the two kiblahs
and home to the third holy mosque — given the
city’s religious and spiritual significance. No
wonder then that many of them, including scholars,
mystics and merchants, chose to settle in Al-Quds
and protect the holy places there.”
The issue of Al-Quds and the Palestinian question
have always been our major concern for the following
reasons. We are committed to and responsible for a
just and legitimate cause. The Palestinian question is
a central issue in the Middle East and the core conflict
in the region. Achieving a just, comprehensive and
18-40536

A/73/PV.43

lasting peace on the basis of the two-State solution
and in accordance with Security Council resolutions
and the Arab Peace Initiative is a strategic choice,
not a political manoeuvre. The issue of Al-Quds has
special significance not only to the Arab and Muslim
Ummah — given that the holy city is home to the
blessed Al-Aqsa Mosque — but also to all peace-loving
people, given that the city stands for tolerance and
interfaith coexistence. Any unilateral action affecting
Al-Quds is unacceptable, illegal and illegitimate in that
it represents a serious violation of international law,
including General Assembly resolutions and Security
Council resolutions 476 (1980) and 478 (1980), as well
as the “Uniting for Peace” resolution ES-10/19, adopted
in 2017 at the tenth emergency special session of the
General Assembly.
Resolving the Palestinian question on the basis
of the resolutions of international legitimacy would
deprive extremist and terrorist groups of their
arguments, especially as they have been exploiting the
lack of prospects for the settlement of the Palestinian
question and that of Al-Quds, using it as a pretext to
justify their criminal agenda in the region. The illegal
measures concerning Al-Quds fuel religious sentiment,
given the spiritual character of the holy city, with
the potential risk of turning a political conflict into a
religious one. That would be extremely dangerous for
international peace and security and for the desired
harmony and coexistence between different cultures
and civilizations.
His Majesty the King of Morocco has confirmed
that it is not enough to talk about Palestine without
addressing the suffering of the Palestinian people.
Morocco is aware of the difficult conditions that
Palestinians in Gaza are facing. In 2009 and 2014,
His Majesty ordered airlifts of medical and food
assistance based on our policy of solidarity, which is
a cornerstone of Morocco’s foreign policy. This year
during Ramadan, His Majesty personally oversaw the
launch of a humanitarian initiative in Gaza, Al-Quds
and Ramallah.
His Majesty has also established a field hospital of
the Royal Moroccan Armed Forces in the Gaza Strip.
That hospital offers various medical services. His
Majesty has underscored that
“[t]hose initiatives, which are for the benefit of
our Palestinian brothers, complement our actions
that we undertake as Chairperson of the Al-Quds
9/26

A/73/PV.43

Committee of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation. We carry out bilateral political and
diplomatic activities and in international forums, as
well as through field work undertaken by the Bayt
Mal Al-Quds Al-Sharif Agency. This operational
and field mechanism of the Al-Quds Committee
works under our personal supervision to carry out
concrete plans and projects for the benefit of our
Jerusalemite brothers, with the aim of maintaining
the cultural identity of the holy city and improving
the social and living conditions of the inhabitants
of Al-Quds, while supporting their struggle and
encouraging them to remain in Al-Quds”.
The only correct way to resolve the Palestinian
question is not by war, bloodshed and the killing of
innocent civilians. Rather, it is by returning in good
faith to the negotiating table within a clear framework
to achieve the two-State solution, with two States living
side by side in peace, harmony, security, coexistence
and cooperation. Morocco’s position on this conflict
remains firm and is based on the Arab Peace Initiative,
the agreed terms of reference and the establishment of
an independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, within the 4 June 1967 borders.
Therefore, the international community is now
more than ever called on to work to mobilize the peace
process in accordance with the agreed time frame and
based on international foundations and principles.
Morocco is ready to engage very actively with all
initiatives aimed at moving the peace process forward
and arriving at a settlement that would achieve security
and stability in the region.
Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank you, Madam President, for convening
this meeting on a date of particular significance to the
people of the State of Palestine and of Israel.
On 29 November 1947, the Assembly determined
the establishment of two States, Israel and Palestine.
On numerous occasions, my delegation and others
participating in the regular open debates held by the
Security Council on the question of Palestine have said
that our meetings are of an almost ritual nature. It is
so, and it has become so. The date of 29 November is
a day not of celebration but of frustration and sadness
because 71 years after it was made, that commitment
has not been fulfilled, and that failure can be measured
in the lives of human beings and in deprivations of
all kinds.
10/26

30/11/2018

In those 71 years, my country has held an
unwavering position and will continue to do so because
it is a position of principle. We recognize all the efforts
made throughout those years by the various agencies
of the United Nations, the special representatives and
coordinators, as well as the various Member States
involved. We must also reiterate our call for an end to
violence, no matter where it comes from, and the need
for Palestinian reconciliation and genuine dialogue
between Palestine and Israel.
The deplorable acts of violence and deprivation
persist unchanged. The humanitarian crisis, food
dependency, the destruction of infrastructure and the
deterioration of the living conditions of the Palestinians
continue. We continue to observe violations of the
norms of international law, international humanitarian
law and in particular the rights of Palestinian children.
That represents a complete failure to comply with
Security Council resolution 2334 (2016), which remains
the only guarantee of the existence of two States.
On 24 December 2010, my country was one of
the first to recognize the State of Palestine, and we
went on to become a sponsor of resolution 67/19 of
29 November 2012, which recognized Palestine’s new
status as a non-member observer State. We therefore
reiterate our full commitment to the spirit and nature
of all the relevant General Assembly resolutions, which
have consistently upheld the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, and our belief that any measures
taken by Israel, the occupying Power, to impose its
legislation, jurisdiction or administration in the holy
city of Jerusalem are illegal and consequently devoid
of any validity.
We also support the ongoing work within the
framework of the United Nations to ensure the right
of all Palestinian refugees to return to their homes,
as affirmed and provided for in numerous General
Assembly resolutions, most recently resolution 72/81,
adopted in December of last year. Ecuador urges the
international community to make concrete progress
in supporting a lasting, just political solution for both
parties, based on the existence of two States, Palestine
and Israel, as the only pathway to achieving peace and
stability in the Middle East, assure the Palestinian
people of their full rights and realize the establishment
of an independent State of Palestine incorporated into
the United Nations as a full-fledged member, as set
out in the 1947 resolution on the partition of Palestine
(resolution 181 (II)).
18-40536

30/11/2018

For those in the Assembly who like me have
witnessed countless meetings like this one over the past
few decades, I want to stress that solving this problem
requires a demonstration of political will on the part of
many stakeholders but above all a clear understanding
that peace is won in the hearts and minds of men,
women and children, not at the point of a gun or a
bomb. Let us pray that we will soon achieve peace in
the Middle East.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with General Assembly resolution 48/265 of 24 August
1994, I call on the observer for the Sovereign Order
of Malta.
Mr. De Rojas (Sovereign Order of Malta): I thank
you, Madam President, for giving us the opportunity
to take the floor to discuss these interconnected
items today.
One of the draft resolutions to be considered
addresses the issue of Jerusalem (A/73/L.29), which is
central to the question of Palestine. As the Assembly is
aware, Jerusalem is very dear to the Sovereign Order of
Malta, as it is the place where the Order was founded,
more than 900 years ago, and where our first hospital
was built. The mission to care for the sick, the poor
and the most vulnerable, regardless of their nationality,
ethnicity or religion, has remained the central purpose
of the Order of Malta for more than nine centuries.
Like many others, we believe that Jerusalem
belongs not to a single nation but rather to all of us, to
humankind as a whole. It is a city sacred to the world’s
three great monotheistic religions and has been a place
of pilgrimage and inspiration for countless millions
for two millenniums. When the General Assembly
first dealt with the question of Palestine in 1947, it
very wisely decided to set up a special international
regime for the city of Jerusalem within the partition
framework, to be administered by the United Nations.
The boundaries of what was called a corpus separatum
were even laid out in a detailed map that was attached
to resolution 181 (II), of 29 November 1947.
We are therefore glad to see that the draft resolution
before us recalls that resolution 181 (II) reaffirms
that the international community, through the United
Nations, has a legitimate interest in the question of
Jerusalem and the protection of the city’s unique
spiritual, religious and cultural dimensions. We are also
encouraged by its reiterations that a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution to the question of the city of
18-40536

A/73/PV.43

Jerusalem should include internationally guaranteed
provisions aimed at ensuring the freedom of religion
and conscience of its inhabitants, as well as permanent,
free and unhindered access to its holy places for people
of all religions and nationalities.
As the representative of the Holy See expressed
when he addressed the General Assembly on this subject
in December of last year (see A/ES-10/PV.37), we
believe that only an internationally guaranteed status
can preserve Jerusalem’s unique character and ensure
dialogue and reconciliation for peace in the region. We
support that view, and we welcome this new and timely
initiative by the General Assembly on the matter.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in the debate on this item.
I would like to inform members that the
consideration of draft resolutions A/73/L.31, A/73/L.32,
A/73/L.33 and A/73/L.34 will take place following the
conclusion of the debate on agenda item 38.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 39.
Agenda item 38
The situation in the Middle East
Reports of the Secretary-General (А/73/322 and
А/73/346)
Draft resolutions (А/73/L.29 and A/73/L.30)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt to introduce draft
resolutions А/73/L.29 and A/73/L.30.
Mr. Tayel (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The world
today faces many humanitarian crises that are
unfortunately concentrated in the Middle East, a region
that has recently been plagued by increasing instability.
We must bear in mind that one of the underlying causes
of that instability is the decades of injustices done to
the Arab people during the more than 50 years of their
suffering under the yoke of occupation. There have been
numerous attempts to exploit the crises in the region
in order to conceal the occupation of Arab territories,
which runs counter to basic humanitarian principles
and perpetuates an illegal situation whose adverse
effects continue to reverberate all over the region
and the world. The many years of the occupation’s
existence have led to the acceptance by some of its
practices against people who are supposed to enjoy
11/26

A/73/PV.43

the same rights as all the other peoples of the world,
especially the right to freedom, self-determination and
the sense of belonging to a homeland. The international
community is firmly committed to the rights of the
Palestinian and Syrian people. In the Assembly today,
I am therefore introducing on behalf of their sponsors
two draft resolutions under agenda item 38, entitled
“The situation in the Middle East”.
The first draft resolution, entitled “Jerusalem”
(A/73/L.29), stresses the importance as a reference of
the General Assembly and Security Council resolutions
that deal with the special status of occupied Jerusalem.
The draft resolution emphasizes that all measures
undertaken by Israel, the occupying Power, to impose
its administrative and judicial authority on the city
of Jerusalem are illegal, null and void. In the draft
resolution the international community expresses its
grave concern about the continuation of Israel’s illegal
settlement activities, including the plan known as E1,
as well as the construction of the separation wall in and
around the city of East Jerusalem, further isolating the
city from the rest of the Palestinian territories.
As we are committed to peace and to maintaining
the religious significance of the city of Jerusalem, the
draft resolution stresses the importance of taking into
account the legitimate concerns of both Palestinians
and Israelis by providing international guarantees that
ensure religious freedom for the inhabitants of the city
and free access to the holy sites for all, regardless of
their religion or nationality. The draft resolution also
calls for respect in both word and deed for the historical
status of the holy sites in Jerusalem, including the
Holy Mosque.
Today it is important to note the addition made to the
draft resolution this year emphasizing the importance
of Jerusalem to the three monotheistic religions. We
reiterate what we have stressed many times before,
which is that the issue of Jerusalem and the Palestinian
question as a whole is primarily a political, legal and
humanitarian issue, not a religious one. It can therefore
be resolved only through adherence to international
law and the relevant United Nations resolutions, which
represent the sole references to the relations among
States and peoples.
The second draft resolution, A/73/L.30, relates to
the Syrian Golan. We are once again introducing this
draft resolution in order to send an important message
from the international community emphasizing that
12/26

30/11/2018

the unprecedented humanitarian crisis in Syria that the
Syrians are enduring should not make the world forget
that an important part of Syria is occupied, and that the
Syrian people’s right to claim that occupied land will not
disappear with time or fail for any other reasons that our
brother people of Syria may face. The draft resolution
stresses once again that 35 years after the adoption of
Security Council resolution 497 (1981), Israel has still
not complied with its provisions. It makes reference to
The Hague Convention of 1907 and the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949 with regard to their applicability
to the Syrian territories that have been occupied since
1967. It also points to the illegality of the imposition of
Israeli laws on the Golan and of the Israeli settlements
there. It calls on Israel to completely withdraw from the
Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967 and to uphold what
has already been achieved in that regard.
The people of the Middle East continue to suffer
from the scourges of war and aggression and to aspire
to achieving peace, stability and peaceful coexistence.
For decades, United Nations resolutions have been in
place that reflect those aspirations, which will come
true only when we can demonstrate the political
determination and serious commitment to ending the
occupation of all the Palestinian and Arab territories, in
line with the relevant General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions as well as the principle of land for
peace and international law.
In conclusion, on behalf of all the sponsors of the
two draft resolutions as well as myself, I call on all
Member States to support the two draft resolutions. I
urge everyone in the Hall to vote for them with a view
to preventing the elimination of people’s legal rights
while stressing the strong will of the international
community and upholding the noble purposes and
principles enshrined in the Charter of the Organization.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank the representative of the Arab Republic
of Egypt for introducing today’s draft resolutions
A/73/L.30 and A/73/L.29, entitled “The Syrian Golan”
and “Jerusalem”. I also thank all the sponsors of the
draft resolution on the Syrian Golan and those who vote
in favour of it.
The General Assembly has considered the agenda
item on the situation in the Middle East every year
since its twenty-fifth session in 1970. In every session,
the Assembly has called on Israel to end its occupation
of the Arab territories and affirmed that any measures
18-40536

30/11/2018

taken by Israel, the occupying Power, to impose its
legislation, jurisdiction and administrative authority on
the city of Jerusalem and the Syrian Golan are illegal,
illegitimate, null and void. The Assembly’s resolutions
are fully aligned with the unanimous position of the
Security Council in its resolutions 478 (1980), on
occupied Jerusalem, and 497 (1981), on the occupied
Syrian Golan, both of which reject the unilateral
and provocative decisions of the Israeli occupying
authorities to annex occupied Palestinian Jerusalem
and the Syrian Golan and consider those decisions
devoid of any legal standing.
For more than seven decades, Israel has been
occupying Palestinian territories, thereby causing the
suffering of more than 5 million Palestinian refugees,
who have been expelled from their homeland and
whose land, homes and livelihoods have been seized
by Israel, which has received support and protection
from various States. That has enabled Israel to run
rampant in the region, refusing to implement the
hundreds of related resolutions adopted at the United
Nations throughout those decades. Israel has continued
its expansion across vast areas of Palestinian and Arab
territories, perpetrating documented and systematic
crimes, aggressions and violations of both international
humanitarian law and international human rights
law, all of which constitute war crimes and crimes
against humanity.
My country reiterates its firm and principled stance
in support of the Palestinian people and their right to
self-determination through the establishment of the
independent State of Palestine on the entirety of their
national land, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We
support the right of refugees to return to their homeland,
in accordance with resolution 194 (III) of 1948. Any
measures that impede or undermine those rights are
null and void and should be rejected, as they represent
a threat to peace and security in the region and the
world. That is especially true of the racist law recently
adopted by Israel known as the nation-State law, as well
as the decision of the United States Administration to
move its Embassy to the city of Jerusalem and to stop
funding the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
Israel continues to occupy a precious part of our
land in the Syrian Golan. Our people there continue
to suffer as a consequence of Israel’s occupation and
its oppressive and aggressive practices. From the very
first day of its occupation, Israel has been attempting
18-40536

A/73/PV.43

to change the legal and political status of the occupied
Syrian Golan by perpetrating systematic violations of
human rights, first by attempting since 1981 to impose
Israeli citizenship on our people there, and later through
its absurd decision to hold farcical local elections in the
occupied Syrian Golan on 30 October. All such efforts
have been thoroughly thwarted by our unfaltering
people in the area.
Israel continues to confiscate land in the occupied
Syrian Golan, expanding its settlements there, looting
its wealth, distorting its history, stealing its artefacts and
planting landmines, while also continuing to deprive the
steadfast Syrian citizens there of their right to remain in
contact with their families in their motherland of Syria.
Israel also deprives the Syrian citizens in the occupied
Syrian Golan of their right to study according to Syria’s
national education curricula. They have been deprived
of the right to carry their Syrian national identity cards
and build Syrian national hospitals in their occupied
towns in the Golan. Furthermore, Israel continues
to conduct its policies of terrorism, oppression,
racial discrimination and arbitrary detention of
Syrian citizens. It continues to make every aspect of
their lives difficult, including their right, based on
international laws and customs, to resist the occupation,
and it continues to arrest them, try them in puppet
courts, sentence them to long periods of imprisonment
and treat them as war criminals. In that connection, we
should remind the international community of Syria’s
Mandela, the prisoner Sedqi Suleiman Al-Maqet, whom
the Israeli occupation authorities re-arrested in March
2015, after he had been imprisoned in Israeli jails for
27 years. It sentenced him to an additional 14 years of
jail because he exposed through audio recordings and
photographs the fact that Israel, the occupying Power,
was cooperating with the terrorist organization Jabhat
Al-Nusra and other terrorist organizations active
throughout the disengagement zone in the Golan. We
call on our global Organization not to delay in working
to secure his release and that of the prisoner Amal Abu
Saleh and the other prisoners arrested by Israel a few
days ago, after the local elections farce.
My country reaffirms its sovereign right to the
occupied Syrian Golan, based on the borders of 4 June
1967. That right is not open to negotiation or compromise
or subject to a statute of limitations. Our occupied land
and the rights we have been denied will be restored to
us in full because we are the legitimate owners. Israel
and its settlers must leave our land in the Golan sooner
13/26

A/73/PV.43

or later. We stress that we will not forfeit our right to
recover our occupied land and liberate those of our
citizens who are suffering under Israeli occupation
in the Syrian Golan, using any and every means, as
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and in
accordance with the principles of international law and
United Nations resolutions.
In its resolution 497 (1981), the Security Council
requested the Secretary-General to report to it within
two weeks on the implementation of the resolution, and
decided that in the event of Israel’s non-compliance,
the Council would meet without delay, and no later
than 5 January 1982, to consider taking appropriate
measures in accordance with the Charter. Thirtyseven years later, and after the General Assembly’s
adoption of dozens of resolutions confirming Israel’s
non-compliance with resolution 497 (1981), we have the
right to ask what the Council is waiting for to implement
its resolution and force Israel to end its occupation of
the Syrian Golan. What is the Council waiting for to
put an end to Israel’s violations and aggression against
the territories of the Syrian Arab Republic, most
recently on 29 November in the Al-Kiswa area south of
Damascus? That represented overwhelming evidence
that Israel has entered a new phase of State terrorism,
as it is now competing with the terrorist organizations
of Da’esh and Jabhat Al-Nusra to kill civilians.
It is no longer acceptable for the United Nations
and its Member States to continue to address the
oppressive Israeli occupation routinely or without
showing solidarity that includes real steps that could
lead to tangible results. The United Nations must
therefore take immediate action to put an end to Israel’s
occupation and ensure its withdrawal from Arab
territories, including the occupied Syrian Golan, to the
4 June 1967 lines, and to implement Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981).
In conclusion, I call on all States to vote in favour
of draft resolution A/73/L.30, entitled “The Syrian
Golan”, and all draft resolutions pertaining to Palestine.
Ms. Nuzuha (Maldives): The Middle East continues
to capture the imagination of Maldivians, young and
old alike, not because we are in the Middle East or even
the immediate neighbourhood, but because we care
about the suffering of so many innocent people who are
being denied their right to life and basic human dignity,
education, sanitation and health care. We support a
settlement of the conflict in Palestine and call for an
14/26

30/11/2018

end to Israel’s illegal occupation of Palestine, which
remains at the root of the unending cycles of violence
and conflict in the entire region.
The Maldives has always believed that the
establishment of an independent and sovereign State of
Palestine based on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, living side by side and in peace with Israel,
is the only viable solution to the conflict in Palestine.
That is the solution called for by the Security Council,
particularly in its resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and
2334 (2016). The Maldives therefore calls on Israel to
fully implement the relevant Council resolutions, fully
respect the legal obligations it undertook in the Oslo
Accords and implement the Arab Peace Initiative and
the Quartet road map.
Yet the question of Palestine remains unsettled
and without meaningful progress. As recently as
September, Israel’s High Court rejected a petition to
prevent the demolition of a village in the West Bank
that would result in the displacement of hundreds
of people, leaving them homeless and without a
livelihood, a school for their children or access to
basic health care. That epitomizes the failure of the
international system to bring an end to the suffering
of the people of the Middle East. Today, we once again
join many countries in calling for a permanent end to
the unlawful occupation of Palestinian lands and for
granting the Palestinian people their legitimate right to
self-determination.
The humanitarian situation continues to worsen
in Syria, where the conflict is in its seventh year. The
battle in Aleppo reduced the country to rubble. The
entire world now fears the outbreak of another conflict
in Syria’s north-western Idlib province, which could
result in the worst humanitarian catastrophe of this
century. Should it happen, more than 3 million people
would be displaced with nowhere to seek shelter,
food or access to health care. We therefore call on the
international community to take more assertive steps
to halt the tide of suffering in Syria. Humanitarian
intervention is an absolute necessity, but a permanent
political solution must be found.
The already dire situation in the Middle East is
being exacerbated by terrorist groups such as Da’esh,
which are inflicting destruction and imposing extreme
social conditions through barbaric acts of violence
and bloodshed. They do not recognize borders or
distinguish between young and old, women and
18-40536

30/11/2018

men, nor do they respect any religion or culture. The
Maldives condemns any attempt to attribute terrorism
to any specific religion, culture or tradition. We are
also of the view that the factors of terrorism should be
tackled through international cooperation focused on
combating violent extremism.
It is important that we rise above the shackles of
the past to move towards a promising future. This is
a compromise that must be made by the people and
leaders of the countries of the region in order to save an
area that has served as the cradle of human civilization
and the birthplace of many early scientific and
technological advances. The Maldives therefore stands
ready, full of hope, to work to find a lasting solution to
this conflict, for we believe that there is always room
for hope in any hardship.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank you, Madam President,
for convening this important meeting. I would like to
address agenda items 38, “The situation in the Middle
East”, and 39, “Question of Palestine”, and with regard
to the latter item, to take special note of the fact that
yesterday was the International Day of Solidarity with
the Palestinian People.
The situation in the Middle East remains volatile
and complex. Its interlocking challenges require the
sustained attention of the international community.
In Yemen, we need to make progress urgently, as
more than 14 million people run the risk of famine. In
Syria, we have yet to see substantial and irreversible
progress on either the political or the humanitarian
front. Through it all, the Middle East peace process is
one of the central issues shaping international relations
in the region. The Israeli-Palestinian conflict feeds
into wider regional dynamics, and the lack of concrete
progress is an obstacle to improving the relations
between regional players. There is a diplomatic and
security cost to leaving that issue unresolved, and it
is borne by all. The only way to achieve a solution to
that conflict is through direct negotiations between
both the parties. It is clear that a resumption of peace
talks is needed, but the current outlook remains bleak.
The international community, including the General
Assembly, must continue to play its role in helping to
create an environment conducive to peace. While there
are many essential steps that will have to be taken, I
want to highlight three actions that the international
community can take now.
18-40536

A/73/PV.43

First, building confidence among the parties
requires enhanced international support. We appreciate
the various efforts made so far by Member States and
regional actors. For its part, Japan is committed to
continuing its unique confidence-building measures
through the Corridor for Peace and Prosperity initiative,
which encourages and supports interdependence in
the region, and the independence of the Palestinian
economy, through regional cooperation with Palestine,
Jordan and Israel.
Secondly, the international community must
maintain its strong support for a two-State solution.
That means not only by expressing political support
but also by rejecting any activity that makes the
possibility of achieving that solution less likely. The
continuing Israeli settlement activities are in violation
of international law and must cease immediately.
Violence also remains a major obstacle to peace. Japan
condemns all acts of violence, which are fundamentally
incompatible with the peaceful resolution of conflicts.
In supporting a two-State solution, the international
community also has a role to play in upholding the
internationally agreed parameters, including on the
status of Jerusalem.
Finally, we must immediately alleviate the economic
and humanitarian situation, which is particularly
dire in Gaza. While we should swiftly implement the
package agreed on in the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of International Assistance to
Palestinians, the return of the Palestinian Authority to
Gaza is crucial.
In terms of broader stabilization and security in
the Middle East and North Africa, let me briefly touch
on the Kono four principles, which Japan’s Foreign
Minister Kono announced last year. The principles
emphasize, first, intellectual and human contributions;
secondly, investment in people; thirdly, enduring
efforts; and fourthly, enhanced political efforts. Japan
has been conducting several programmes with tangible
outcomes, such as the Jericho Agro-Industrial Park in
Palestine, which is in its tenth year of operation, and our
capacity-building initiative for teachers and instructors
in the Middle East. We are committed to continuing
those efforts.
Japan believes in what we can achieve through
multilateral efforts at the United Nations. The
international community, including the Assembly, must
work in a way that creates a positive atmosphere for
15/26

A/73/PV.43

peace rather than feeding divisions. Japan will continue
to engage constructively to that end.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Russia and the countries of the Middle East are
linked by many decades of friendship and constructive,
mutually beneficial cooperation. Our relations have
withstood the test of time. We are genuinely interested
in restoring stability in the region as soon as possible.
However, the reality today is such that the situation in
the Middle East remains difficult and still demands
significant collective efforts. Only through broad-based
cooperation and multilateral diplomacy can we make
progress in resolving the acute crises in the region and
defeating terrorism.
We firmly believe that developing a shared vision
of ways to make progress towards stabilization and
normalization in the Middle East is possible despite the
differences in our approaches. The joint actions of the
guarantor countries of the Astana process have proved
that, and we are open to everyone who wants to be
involved in such efforts. Working together, we can do a
great deal to improve the situation in the Middle East.
United in the broadest possible front, something that
Russia’s President Vladimir Putin has called for, we
can make real breakthroughs in combating terrorism.
Together, we can end the bloodshed in Yemen, stabilize
Libya, help Syrian refugees return home, tackle the
challenge of global migration, support normalization
in Iraq and resolve other crises. The countries of the
region possess a wealth of the cultural, human and
natural potential that can enable them to develop
sustainably and even flourish. But that potential will be
fully realized only when interference in the domestic
affairs of States in the Middle East ends. Like other
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law, the principle of non-intervention
must be respected. We see a firm foundation in that
strict respect for our collective quest to resolve crises,
first and foremost through the United Nations and its
Security Council, which are the fundamental guarantors
of today’s international legal system.
We will not accept aggressive revisionism
aimed at various international agreements originally
arrived at based on the relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions, among other things.
Such dangerous attempts not only negate earlier
efforts to resolve conflicts, they also undermine
our Organization’s authority and generally erode
international law. We should focus all our efforts not
16/26

30/11/2018

on unilateral revisionist policies but on intensifying
mediation, with the United Nations taking a leading
role in order to launch or rekindle dialogue mechanisms
for settling the crises at the centre of which lies the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict, whose resolution is key to
improving the situation throughout the region.
Unfortunately, destabilizing trends are still
dominant in the occupied Palestinian territories,
and the prospects for a resumption of the negotiation
process are becoming increasingly remote. The gulf of
misunderstanding and mistrust between Palestinians
and Israelis is widening. Instead of calls for peace and
peaceful initiatives, what is now in the forefront is
violence, unilateral measures, inflammatory rhetoric
and attempts to create new facts on the ground,
damaging the possibility of a settlement. The tension
continues around the Gaza Strip, where just recently,
thanks to monumental efforts, a relative calm has been
achieved. We hope that it can be sustained and longterm, and that it will give the international community
a chance to revitalize efforts to address the appalling
humanitarian situation and focus on advancing the
political process. Of course, any assistance to Gaza
should be conducted in close coordination with the
legitimate Palestinian authorities under President
Abbas, and should align with efforts to resolve the
problem of restoring Palestinian unity.
Russia’s position has remained consistent. A
comprehensive, sustainable Arab-Israeli settlement and
resolution of the Palestinian question can be achieved
on an internationally recognized basis that includes the
relevant Security Council resolutions, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Madrid principles, including the
principle of land for peace in relation to all the occupied
territories, among them the Syrian Golan. A crucial
instrument in the settlement is still the concept of a twoState solution, which assumes the establishment in the
region, as a result of negotiations, of a State of Palestine
coexisting in peace and security alongside Israel. Any
policy aimed at creating new facts on the ground is
unacceptable, and we consider the expansion of Israeli
settlements, the demolition of Palestinian property
and the expulsion of Palestinian families unlawful.
We condemn all forms of violence and inflammatory
rhetoric. We believe that only a direct dialogue between
Palestinians and Israelis can make it possible to find
answers to all the final-status issues. That applies to
Jerusalem, refugees, borders and core regional security
issues. We cannot simply pick up those sensitive
18-40536

30/11/2018

problems and take them off the negotiating table before
the parties have discussed them.
Russia will continue to play an active role in the
Middle East in its capacity as a permanent member of
the Security Council and a member of the Middle East
Quartet of international mediators, which remains the
only mediation format approved by Security Council
resolutions. The proposal for convening a summit
in Russia between the leaders of Palestine and Israel
remains on the table. We will continue to assist the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) financially and
politically. UNRWA’s operations are of key significance,
as they have an important stabilizing effect in the
Palestinian territories and the countries of the Middle
East. The Agency must endure and be fully functional.
The Russian Federation supports the development
of a positive, unifying agenda for the entire international
community on the Middle East, including Palestine.
What will be crucial to our combined efforts in the
region is establishing conditions that are conducive to
strengthening a general atmosphere of trust. That has
key significance for the relations between the Arab
States, Israel and Iran. We want to remind the Assembly
that in resolution 598 (1987), the Security Council
requested the Secretary-General to work with States in
the region to come up with measures to enhance the
security and stability of the region. That is not easy,
but we have to start work on it. Russia is willing to
make every effort to assist all our regional partners,
without exception. Our ultimate goal must be to create
a genuinely inclusive regional security architecture that
can encompass every State in that part of the world.
Our concept for strengthening security in the Persian
Gulf through international guarantees is still relevant
and its implementation could begin with the holding of
a conference with the participation of the States in the
subregion. Over the long term, it could be expanded to
include other Middle Eastern States.
We want to emphasize that all the decisions taken
by the General Assembly on this issue have to follow
the logic of resolving these problems. Russia stands
ready to work with all interested parties on an open and
impartial basis on all these and other aspects.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in the debate on this item.
I would like to inform members that we will take
action on draft resolutions A/73/L.29 and A/73/L.30
18-40536

A/73/PV.43

after doing so on draft resolutions A/73/L.31,
A/73/L.32, A/73/L.33 and A/73/L.34, submitted under
agenda item 39.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 38.
Agenda item 39 (continued)
Question of Palestine
Draft resolutions (A/73/L.31, A/73/L.32,
А/73/L.33 and А/73/L.34)
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before the
Assembly takes action on the draft resolutions one
by one, members are reminded that they will have
an opportunity to explain their vote on all four draft
resolutions either before or after action is taken on all
of them.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolutions
A/73/L.31, A/73/L.32, A/73/L.33 and A/73/L.34.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the voting, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations of vote should be limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Kickert (Austria): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States. The EU would like to thank the
Palestinian delegation for the successful outcome of
our negotiations on a number of the draft resolutions on
which the General Assembly is now taking action. As
an outcome of those negotiations, the EU confirms its
position on the package.
At this time, we would like to put it on record that
with regard to all draft resolutions adopted during the
seventy-third session of the General Assembly, the
EU and its member States consider that whenever the
Palestinian Government is mentioned, it refers to the
Palestinian Authority. Furthermore, the use of the term
“Palestine” in any of those draft resolutions cannot be
construed as recognition of a State of Palestine and
is without prejudice to the individual positions of our
member States on that issue and hence on the question
of the validity of an accession to the conventions and
treaties it mentions. We also point out that the European
Union as a whole has not expressed a legal qualification
with regard to the term “forced displacement”, used in
17/26

A/73/PV.43

a number of draft resolutions submitted under agenda
item 39.
Some of the draft resolutions to be adopted today
refer to the holy sites in Jerusalem. The EU is concerned
about the worrying developments and recurrent violent
clashes at the Temple Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif. The
EU recalls the special significance of the holy sites and
calls for upholding the status quo put in place in 1967
for the Temple Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif, in line with
previous understandings and with respect to Jordan’s
special role. The EU recalls that its position with regard
to those draft resolutions does not imply a change in
its stance on the terminology concerning the Temple
Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif. The EU stresses the need
for language on the holy sites of Jerusalem to reflect
the importance and historical significance of the holy
sites for the three monotheistic religions and to respect
religious and cultural sensitivities. The future choice
of language may affect the EU’s collective support
for the draft resolutions according to the established
voting pattern.
Mrs. Furman (Israel): This explanation of vote
refers to all the draft resolutions under agenda items
38 and 39. On 29 November 1947, the United Nations
adopted resolution 181 (II), which called for the creation
of independent Arab and Jewish States living side by
side. The State of Israel accepted that resolution, and
the Arab world rejected it. On 15 May 1948, only one
day after Israel declared its independence, a coalition of
Arab armies invaded Israel. Their goal was simple — to
destroy the newly established Jewish State.
Yesterday, 29 November, was the seventy-first
anniversary of that crucial United Nations vote (see
A/PV.128). It should have been a day of celebration, but
year after year, that historic date becomes an annual
Israel-bashing session. Some countries still refuse to
accept the existence of the State of Israel in the Middle
East. We heard some of them speak yesterday (see
A/73/PV.42) and earlier today.
We are living at a time when many crises are
raging across the Middle East and around the world. It
is a shame that rather than addressing those crises, the
United Nations adopts so many biased resolutions and
devotes precious resources to politicized bodies whose
sole purpose is to attack and denounce Israel.
One of those bodies is the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People — a Committee that does nothing but spread a
18/26

30/11/2018

one-sided political narrative against one United Nations
Member State and uses the money of all Member States
to do so. Earlier this week, the Committee invited a
guest speaker who suggested that solidarity from
the international community requires embracing the
boycott, divestment and sanctions movement against
Israel. He concluded his statement with a call for a free
Palestine from the river to the sea. For those who are
not familiar with the map of the region, there is only
one meaning to what he suggested — a Palestinian
State, not side by side with Israel but instead of Israel.
The Division for Palestinian Rights supports that
Committee. Last year, the Division invited several
organizations and speakers with clear and public ties
to terrorism to participate in the Committee’s events.
Let me repeat that. A body of the Secretariat funded
by all Member States provided a platform for public
supporters and glorifiers of terrorism. That is not just a
bad use of our time but is completely against our values.
It is truly disturbing and shameful.
That is not all. The Division for Palestinian Rights
is the only office of the Secretariat promoting an agenda
that directly targets one Member State, and it fills 15
paid positions to do so. Moreover, a large portion of the
funding for the Division covers business-class airline
tickets so that participants in its anti-Israel events can
travel anywhere in the world to attend. That type of
Division and funding at the United Nations is truly
unparalleled, especially as the Department of Political
Affairs struggles to tackle its endless responsibilities
with limited human and financial resources.
I turn now to the special information programme
on the question of Palestine, led by the Department of
Public Information (DPI), which organizes an annual
seminar on peace in the Middle East. No one should be
misled by the title — the seminar has nothing to do with
peace. It has everything to do with anti-Israel sentiment
and does little to promote dialogue and understanding
between Israelis and Palestinians. This year’s seminar
had a panel entitled “Seventy years after Nakba day”.
The term “Nakba” means catastrophe. By adopting that
term at the seminar, the special information programme
of the DPI is endorsing the Palestinians’ denial of
Israel’s legitimacy. Let me be clear — calling the
establishment of Israel a catastrophe is not a statement
of solidarity with the Palestinians; it is a denial of
Israel’s right to exist.
18-40536

30/11/2018

There is no way to justify the fact that the United
Nations spends almost $6.5 million of its budget on
organizations and bodies that do nothing but try to
isolate Israel. Not only are they one-sided, but they are
dangerous and give the floor to those who work against
a peaceful solution.
The problem does not end with the allocation of
United Nations funding. It continues with the draft
resolutions on which we will vote today. Two of them
discuss the Temple Mount, a sacred place for all three
monotheistic religions: Islam, Christianity and Judaism.
Yet those draft resolutions have omitted any reference
to the Jewish or Christian connection to the Temple
Mount, or, as we call it in Hebrew, Har Habayit. That
omission is deliberate. It shows yet another instance
of the Palestinians’ refusal to recognize the proven
historical connection between Judaism, Christianity,
the Temple Mount and Jerusalem as a whole. The
international community must stop participating in
such a blatant denial of history. It must not permit such
blatant attempts to delegitimize Israel.
As for the draft resolution regarding the Golan
(A/73/L.30), the situation in Syria is dire. For the past
seven years, the Syrian regime has been systematically
killing its own people and has even used chemical
weapons against them. Meanwhile, Israel has been
taking care of thousands of injured Syrians in its
hospitals. Yet, despite the realities on the ground,
absurdity prevails in the General Assembly.
Supporting the six anti-Israel draft resolutions
presented today will neither advance nor inspire peace.
It will only inspire hate. Israel will vote against them
and I call on everyone to do the same.
Mr. Ordeman (United States of America): This
explanation of vote addresses all draft resolutions under
agenda items 38 and 39.
The United States continues to oppose the annual
submission of a disproportionate number of unfair draft
resolutions biased against Israel. As in the past, this
one-sided approach damages the prospects for peace
by undermining trust between the parties and failing
to create the kind of positive international environment
that is critical to achieving peace.
We are disappointed that, despite messages of
support for reform, Member States continue to single
out Israel with such draft resolutions. As the United
States has repeatedly made clear, that dynamic is
18-40536

A/73/PV.43

unacceptable. Again, we see draft resolutions that are
quick to condemn all manner of Israeli actions but say
almost nothing about Palestinian terrorist attacks against
innocent civilians. That is particularly acute now, when
the rocket attacks of 12 November saw more projectiles
fired on a single day than on any day since 2014. That
is also why, for the first time, we are introducing a
stand-alone draft resolution to condemn Hamas and
other militant groups for their indiscriminate attacks
on civilians and their primary role in the worsening
humanitarian and economic situation in Gaza, as well
as their actions to restrict free expression and silence
political dissent.
Regarding the draft resolutions subject to a vote
on 29 and 30 November, the United States will once
again vote against those one-sided draft resolutions
and encourages other nations to do so as well. Those
draft resolutions damage the credibility of the United
Nations, as they show a clear bias in favour of one party
and raise real questions regarding the impartiality of
the United Nations. That, in turn, serves to discredit
the Organization’s important role in supporting the
resolution of the conflict in the Middle East.
In particular, the United States has significant
concerns with draft resolutions A/73/L.31 and A/73/L.34,
“Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People” and “Division for Palestinian
Rights of the Secretariat”, respectively. Those two
draft resolutions have actual budgetary implications
and consume limited United Nations resources that
would be better deployed elsewhere. Last year, the
operations of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian people and the
Division for Palestinian Rights cost nearly $3 million.
Those two draft resolutions propagate assumptions
regarding issues that the parties have agreed should be
resolved in the context of final status negotiations and
do nothing to bring us closer to the goal we all share
of a comprehensive peace in the Middle East. Instead,
they undermine our efforts by renewing the mandates
of entities that perpetuate a clear and demonstrated bias
that serves only to drive the parties further apart.
The Palestinians are the only actor in the United
Nations system with a dedicated Division within
the Secretariat. The message that sends is that the
Palestinians never really need to come back to the
negotiating table. They can rely on flawed and biased
mechanisms such as these to push their agenda.
The United States remains firmly and consistently
19/26

A/73/PV.43

committed to achieving a comprehensive and lasting
peace between the Israelis and the Palestinians.
Any resolution adopted here today will only distract
from that process. One-sided resolutions do not help to
advance peace. The cause of peace will be served when
the bias of the United Nations against Israel ends. The
United States has consistently opposed every effort
to delegitimize Israel or undermine its security at the
United Nations, and we will continue to do so with
vigour. We hope that other Members will join us by
voting against these draft resolutions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take decisions on draft
resolutions A/73/L.31, A/73/L.32, A/73/L.33 and
A/73/L.34.
We first turn to draft resolution A/73/L.31, entitled
“Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
A/73/L.31: Algeria, Bangladesh, Brunei Darussalam,
the Comoros, Ecuador, Indonesia, Lebanon, Malaysia,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the Sudan and Viet Nam.
The President (spoke in Spanish): A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile,
China, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
20/26

30/11/2018

Libya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, TimorLeste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary,
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Nauru, Republic of Moldova, Solomon
Islands, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belarus,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Colombia,
Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mexico,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Vanuatu
The draft resolution was adopted by 100 votes to
12, with 62 abstentions (resolution 73/18).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Angola advised the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.32,
entitled “Peaceful settlement of the question
of Palestine”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
18-40536

30/11/2018

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have also
become sponsors of A/73/L.32: Algeria, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Brunei Darussalam, the Comoros, Ecuador,
Indonesia, Lebanon, Malaysia, Nicaragua, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, the Sudan and Viet Nam.
The President (spoke in Spanish): A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South
Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda,
18-40536

A/73/PV.43

Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Kiribati, Marshall
Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Fiji, Guatemala,
Honduras, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Rwanda,
Solomon Islands, Togo, Tonga, Vanuatu
The draft resolution was adopted by 156 votes to 8,
with 12 abstentions (resolution 73/19).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Angola advised the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President (spoke in Spanish): We turn
next to draft resolution A/73/L.33, entitled “Special
information programme on the question of Palestine of
the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
A/73/L.33: Algeria, Bangladesh, Brunei Darussalam,
the Comoros, Ecuador, Indonesia, Lebanon, Malaysia,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the Sudan.
The President (spoke in Spanish): A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
21/26

A/73/PV.43

Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Greece,
Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Guatemala, Israel, Marshall
Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Fiji,
Honduras, Mexico, Palau, Papua New Guinea,
Rwanda, Samoa, Solomon Islands, South Sudan,
Togo, Tonga, Vanuatu
The draft resolution was adopted by 152 votes to 8,
with 14 abstentions (resolution 73/20).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Angola advised the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/73/L.34 entitled “Division for Palestinian Rights of
the Secretariat”.
22/26

30/11/2018

I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/73/L.34, the following countries have also become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Algeria, Bangladesh,
Brunei Darussalam, the Comoros, Ecuador, Indonesia,
Lebanon, Malaysia, Mauritania, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
the Sudan and Viet Nam.
The President (spoke in Spanish): A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cabo
Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libya, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary,
Israel, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Republic of Moldova,
Solomon Islands, United States of America
18-40536

30/11/2018

Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Cameroon, Central African Republic,
Colombia, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/73/L.34 was adopted by 96 votes
to 13, with 64 abstentions (resolution 73/21).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Angola informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before giving
the floor for explanations of vote after the vote, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Ms. Tang (Singapore): I am speaking in explanation
of vote after the adoption of resolutions 73/18, 73/19,
73/20 and 73/21.
Singapore voted in favour of resolution 73/18,
entitled “Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People”, based on the
understanding that the reference in paragraph 2 to
the achievement of the two-State solution on the basis
of the pre-1967 borders should be interpreted in the
same manner as set out in paragraph 1 of resolution
73/19, entitled “Peaceful settlement of the question
of Palestine”, namely, “the two-State solution of
Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and
security within recognized borders, based on the pre1967 borders”.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 39.
18-40536

A/73/PV.43

Agenda item 38 (continued)
The situation in the Middle East
Draft resolutions (A/73/L.29 and A/73/L.30)
The President (spoke in Spanish): We shall now
proceed to take action on draft resolutions A/73/L.29
and A/73/L.30.
The Assembly will first take a decision on draft
resolution A/73/L.29, entitled “Jerusalem”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
draft resolution A/73/L.29: Algeria, Bangladesh, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brunei Darussalam,
the Comoros, Cuba, Indonesia, Lebanon, Malaysia,
Maldives, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and Viet Nam.
The President (spoke in Spanish): A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
23/26

A/73/PV.43

Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Guatemala, Israel, Kiribati,
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Nauru, Palau, Solomon Islands, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Dominican
Republic, Fiji, Honduras, Nigeria, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Rwanda, Samoa, South Sudan, Togo,
Tuvalu, Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/73/L.29 was adopted by 148
votes to 11, with 14 abstentions (resolution 73/22).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Angola informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now proceed to take a decision on draft resolution
A/73/L.30, entitled “The Syrian Golan”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/73/L.30, the following countries have also become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Brunei Darussalam,
the Comoros, Malaysia, Qatar, Senegal and the Sudan.
The President (spoke in Spanish): A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
24/26

30/11/2018

In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gambia, Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libya,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Oman, Pakistan,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Singapore, Somalia,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, TimorLeste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Kiribati, Marshall
Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru,
Palau, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Central African
Republic, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South
Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, Vanuatu
18-40536

30/11/2018

Draft resolution A/73/L.30 was adopted 99 votes to
10, with 66 abstentions (resolution 73/23).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Angola informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before giving
the floor for explanations of vote after the vote, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil) (spoke in
Spanish): I have the honour to take the floor on behalf
of the delegations of Brazil and Argentina to explain
our votes.
As we have done in previous years, with respect to
resolution 73/23, concerning the Syrian Golan, which
the General Assembly has just adopted, Brazil and
Argentina voted in favour of the resolution because we
believe that its vital nature is linked to the illegality
of the acquisition of territories by force. Article 2,
paragraph 4, of the Charter of the United Nations
prohibits the threat or use of force against the territorial
integrity of any State.
I would also like to clarify the position of
our delegations with respect to paragraph 6 of the
resolution. Our vote is without prejudice to the content
of that paragraph, particularly the reference to 4 June
1967. Brazil and Argentina believe that it is important
to make progress in the search for a solution to the
Syrian-Israeli aspect of the conflict in the Middle East
with the aim of putting an end to the occupation of the
Golan Heights. Hence, on behalf of the Governments of
Brazil and Argentina, I again highlight the importance
of resuming negotiations to find a definitive solution to
the situation in the Syrian Golan, pursuant to Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the
principle of land for peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): On behalf of the
delegation of the State of Palestine, allow me to express
our gratitude and thanks to all the countries that voted
in favour of the five resolutions related to the question
of Palestine and also in favour of resolution 73/23,
concerning the Syrian Golan. We see that massive
support, which is similar to last year’s pattern of voting,
as a sign of the strong support of the international
community for the global consensus on how to solve
18-40536

A/73/PV.43

the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the question of
Palestine. We sincerely thank the Assembly for its
steadfastness, resolve and determination in ensuring
that the global consensus for which we have all worked,
for a long period of time, is still the cornerstone to
finding a just and lasting peace to this conflict. That
will give us the strength to remain steadfast in our
homeland and to seek a peaceful, just solution to this
conflict on the basis of international law and all relevant
United Nations resolutions on the subject. We thank the
Member States for that.
To those who are advocating a stand-alone
resolution, which to my understanding will be dealt with
next Thursday afternoon, let me just ask — after the
16 resolutions that have been adopted in the committees
and in the General Assembly, why submit this draft
resolution? Are their intentions truly to open doors
for peace, or are their intentions disruptive and
irresponsible and an attempt to distract us from pushing
forward to find a solution to this conflict on the basis
of what we have agreed to over the years, namely, the
global consensus on the basis of a two-State solution
based on the borders of 1967, with East Jerusalem as
the capital of our State? That would require, of course,
putting an end to the Israeli occupation that has lasted
for almost 51 years.
We believe that those who are advocating this
initiative are not acting out of a genuine wish to open
doors for peace. After all, they are the ones who
unleashed a massive barrage of attacks against us,
starting with violating Security Council resolutions,
recognizing Jerusalem as the capital of the State of
Israel, moving the embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem,
and the most recent attacks against us for nothing that
was done from our side. We simply come to the General
Assembly to seek a legal, political, diplomatic solution
to the conflict; yet they punish us for doing so. The
latest episode of such punishment is the free, standalone draft resolution.
Of course, we refuted the argument of those who are
advancing this draft resolution, and we have circulated
our argument refuting their argument to the entire
Assembly. There is therefore no need for me to dwell
on that. However, I appeal to the Assembly to read our
memorandum and the annex thereto with regard to this
free, stand-alone draft resolution. Therefore, I appeal to
all members, when that draft resolution is put to a vote
next Thursday, to vote against it and to defend the global
consensus to which we have agreed, as reflected in the
25/26

A/73/PV.43

package of resolutions, especially the 13 political ones
whose language we negotiated with all members. We
are grateful that States voted in favour of the package.
The stand-alone draft resolution is trying to tell
all of us that the global consensus on how to resolve
this issue is no more and is not acceptable, and that
what is acceptable is only the draft resolution that they
are pushing, which names and shames and shows no
seriousness or genuineness about opening doors for
peace. I therefore appeal to members and ask that when
that draft resolution is put to a vote, they vote against it
because voting against it means that the Assembly still
upholds the global consensus on how to resolve this
situation. I hope that next Thursday, my delegation will
be able to thank the Assembly in the same way as I am
thanking it now for upholding the global consensus on
resolving the question of Palestine.
I want to thank you, Madam President, and your
Office for working with us to have an equal, reasonable
amount of time for all parties to be able to deal with
what we must deal with next Thursday afternoon.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation would like to express its sincere

26/26

30/11/2018

appreciation and gratitude to the General Assembly for
having once again, and without interruption since 1981,
adopted the resolution entitled “The Syrian Golan”
(resolution 73/23), as well as for having adopted the
other resolutions submitted under the two agenda items
concerning the Palestinian question and the situation in
the Middle East.
I reiterate my country’s gratitude to all the States
that sponsored and voted in favour of the resolution
regarding the Syrian Golan. The majority of States
Members of the United Nations continues to support
those resolutions, which reflects their tenacious
adherence to the objectives and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations, their rejection of foreign
occupation and their support for our right to regain
every inch of our territories that have been occupied by
Israel since 1967.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 38.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

18-40536
