A/56/PV.98

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-sixth session

98th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 1 May 2002, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Han Seung-soo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Republic of Korea)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Shobokshi
(Saudi Arabia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Agenda item 12 (continued)
Report of the Economic and Social Council
Draft resolution (A/56/L.76)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/56/L.76, entitled
“Participation in the plenary meetings of the Meeting
of the General Assembly devoted to information and
communication technologies for development”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/56/L.76?
Draft resolution A/56/L.76
(resolution 56/281).

was

adopted

The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 12.
Agenda item 17 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(g) Appointment of members of the Joint
Inspection Unit (A/56/110)

The Acting President: As indicated in document
A/56/110, in accordance with the procedures described
in article 3, paragraph 1, of the statute of the Joint
Inspection Unit, and having consulted the regional
groups concerned, as well as through a consultation by
secret ballot with the General Assembly, the President
of the General Assembly requested China, Cuba, the
Russian Federation, the United Republic of Tanzania
and the United States of America to propose
candidates.
As further indicated in document A/56/110, as a
result of the consultations held in accordance with
article 3, paragraph 2, of the statute of the Joint
Inspection Unit, including consultations with the
President of the Economic and Social Council and with
the Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chairman of
the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination, the President of the General Assembly
submits to the Assembly the candidatures of Mr. Even
Francisco Fontaine Ortiz (Cuba), Mr. Tang Guangting
(China), Mr. Victor Vislykh (Russian Federation),
Ms. Deborah Wynes (United States of America) and
Mr. Muhammad Yussuf (United Republic of Tanzania)
for appointment as members of the Joint Inspection
Unit for a five-year term of office beginning on
1 January 2003 and expiring on 31 December 2007.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to appoint those candidates?
It was so decided.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

02-36104 (E)

*0236104*

A/56/PV.98

The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded its consideration of sub-item (g) of
agenda item 17.
Agenda item 18 (continued)
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
Report of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples (A/56/894)
Draft resolution (A/56/894, para. 4)
Mr. Ovia (Papua New Guinea): I would like to
make some general comments on the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, under
agenda item 18.
The report in document A/56/894 contains a draft
resolution on East Timor. In this regard, I would like to
take this opportunity to thank all the members of the
Special Committee of 24 for their support. For the
information of the General Assembly, this draft
resolution was initiated by the former Permanent
Representative of Papua New Guinea, Ambassador
Peter Donigi.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank all
of our close neighbours, the Republic of Indonesia and
the former administrating Power, Portugal, for their
cooperation and understanding in agreeing to the text
before us today. The text is a consensus one, and it is
now the text of the Chairman of the Special Committee
on Decolonization. We in the Assembly all look
forward to the next stage that East Timor will embark
on after today, and more formally on 20 May. After
independence, we hope to welcome it into our midst as
one of our very own — an equal and sovereign
Member State.
The draft resolution is, in large part, procedural in
nature, but I would like to point out a number of salient
and substantive facts and implications as we, as an
active member of the Committee of 24, see them. For
my delegation, the draft resolution before us today

2

sends a very clear signal about three very important
aspects.
First of all, as all of the members of the
Committee of 24 will agree, the draft resolution, after it
has been adopted by the General Assembly today, will
end the mandate of the Special Committee over one of
the remaining 17 Non-Self Governing Territories. All
of us in the Assembly are well aware that the
Committee of 24 has been seized of this matter for at
least the past two decades, if not longer, although in
recent times the Security Council became seized of the
matter and arranged for a Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to administer the Territory. The
Committee’s mandate, however, was preserved, and it
continued to receive petitions and to arrange
participation by representatives of the Territory at its
annual meetings and seminars.
Secondly, this draft resolution serves to send a
very strong message to all administering Powers that
there is a transparent process by which all Territories
on the United Nations list under the Special Committee
must be dealt with, and that no administering Power
may pass its own legislation or do as it pleases with
any Territory or group of Territories, whatever its
physical size or population, political, economic, social
and historical circumstances.
Thirdly, the transparent process involves the
development of work programmes on a case-by-case
basis for each Territory and involves the Committee in
overseeing the proper administration of each Territory
up to and including the date of its removal from the
United Nations list.
Accordingly, although the draft resolution on East
Timor appears to be procedural, it has substantive
implications in respect of the mandate of the Special
Committee. The implication is that the administering
Power cannot bypass the Special Committee by
transferring or attempting to deal with the Territory
concerned without the involvement of the Committee.
It also shows that the Committee is serious and has in
place a transparent process for dealing with each
Territory.
For these reasons, over the past several years
Papua New Guinea has been advocating that a specific
programme of work for each Territory be developed, in
close collaboration and cooperation with the
Committee of 24, the administering Powers and the
peoples of the Territory. Such a programme of work

A/56/PV.98

must take account of all of the issues and the
circumstances pertaining to each of them.

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
the draft resolution?

In this regard, therefore, the Committee has
mandated the delegations of Antigua and Barbuda and
Papua New Guinea to lead informal discussions with
the people of the Territories and the administering
Powers to arrive at possible elements for work
programmes for the small Territories in both the
Caribbean and Pacific regions. The Papua New Guinea
delegation, together with all interested delegations, has
commenced discussions with the administering Powers
in respect to developing work programmes for Tokelau
Islands, American Samoa and Pitcairn Island in the
Pacific region.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
56/282).

We had one such meeting with the Ulu O
Tokelau — the head of Tokelau — the New Zealand
Administrator and government officials last year. We
are very grateful that Tokelau Islands and its
administering Power, New Zealand, are moving in
unison in this direction, and hopefully a work
programme will be finalized very soon.
We also met with the Government of the United
States last year and on 15 March this year, albeit at an
informal level. The United States Administration has
taken on board the draft work programme and will
soon make suggestions to the Special Committee with
regard to the Territory of American Samoa.
We have also made initial contact with the
Government of the United Kingdom with regard to
Pitcairn Island and are awaiting a response.
I would therefore like to conclude my remarks by
calling once again on all administering Powers,
especially the larger ones — the United States, the
United Kingdom and France — to continue to
cooperate fully with the Special Committee in all our
endeavours to complete our work in this our second
decade.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in the debate on this item.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution entitled “Question of East Timor”,
which is contained in paragraph 4 of the report of the
Special Committee.

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 18?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 26 (continued)
Follow-up to the outcome of the special session on
children
The Acting President: Members will recall that
in its resolution 55/276 of 22 June 2001, the General
Assembly decided that three interactive round tables
would be held during the special session of the General
Assembly on children and that each round table should
have two co-chairpersons, making a total of six cochairpersons. The co-chairpersons shall be heads of
State or Government and shall be selected from the five
regional groups. The sixth co-chairperson, who shall be
the head of State of the country of the President of the
General Assembly at its fifty-sixth session, will
co-chair round table 3.
With regard to the sixth co-chairperson, I have
been informed that the President of the Republic of
Korea will not be able to attend the special session on
children. In the light of this development, consultations
were held with the chairmen of the regional groups
regarding the replacement of the sixth co-chairperson.
I should like to inform members that it has been
agreed that the Prime Minister of the Kingdom of
Nepal will be the replacement as the sixth cochairperson to co-chair round table 3.
If there is no objection, may I take it that the
General Assembly agrees that the Prime Minister of the
Kingdom of Nepal will be the replacement as the sixth
co-chairperson to co-chair round table 3?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 26.

3

A/56/PV.98

Agenda item 8 (continued)
Adoption of the agenda and organization of work
Draft decision (A/56/L.77)
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft decision A/56/L.77.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Perfiliev (Director, General Assembly and
Economic and Social Council Affairs Division): In
connection with draft decision A/56/L.77, I should like
to inform members that this statement of programme
budget implications is provided in accordance with rule
153 of the rules of procedure, whereby draft
resolutions
involving
expenditure
should
be
accompanied by an estimate of expenditures prepared
by the Secretary-General and provided the Fifth
Committee has had an opportunity of stating the effect
of the proposal upon the budget.
The adoption of draft decision A/56/L.77 would
give rise to a requirement for expenditure in the
amount of $328,100 in respect of the scheduling of
meetings on the weekend of 14 and 15 September
2002. Additional appropriations to accommodate these
expenditures will be reflected in the first performance
report for the biennium 2002-2003 for inclusion in
revised appropriations to be considered at the fiftyseventh session of the General Assembly.
As the Fifth Committee is not currently in
session, it is understood that approval of draft decision
A/56/L.77 would imply a waiver of the requirement for
the Fifth Committee to state its effect on the budget at
this stage.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft decision A/56/L.77, entitled
“General debate of the fifty-seventh regular session of
the General Assembly”.

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft decision A/56/L.77?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Cuba, who wishes to make a
statement in explanation of position on the draft
decision just adopted.
Mr. Requeijo Gual (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation would like to state that, although we
have accepted this decision, we have serious concerns
in that regard. We raised these concerns, which are
shared by the Group of Latin American and Caribbean
States, at the Group’s monthly meetings in March and
April.
Unfortunately, the Group’s concerns were not
taken into account, or could not be taken into account,
by the presidency of the Assembly in respect of the
parameters for the General Assembly debate. We would
have preferred that the general debate be held during
the 10 customary days, regardless of the fact that we
would be working on Saturday or Sunday, and we
would have preferred also that there not be a time limit
on statements. However, given that the time limit is a
voluntary one, my delegation’s understanding is that
statements by the heads of State or heads of delegation
participating in the debate will not be interrupted.
We also trust that this new decision will not set a
precedent. Last year we were told that the
arrangements that were made would naturally not set a
precedent for this year; we fully understood that.
However, this year, for the second time, we are being
told that this decision does not set a precedent, when,
in reality, it does.
That is explanation of position we wished to
make in this respect.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of vote.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 8.
The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.

4
