TWENTY-SECOND

YEAR

th
MEETING: 25 OCTOBER1967

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1370) , . . . . , , . , . . . . , . . , . , + . . . . . . . I . .

1

Adoption of the agenda

1

.,.. ...., ,,,. ,.. ,. ... ,. .. .,. .... . .. . ..

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 24 October 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Arab Republic addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/8207);

(b) Letter dated 24 October 1967 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8208) . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV.1370

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Senmtity Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

-

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED

Held in New York
President: Mr. Senjin TSURUOKA

AND SEVENTIETH

on Wednesday,

(Japan).

25 October

MEETING
1967, at 11 a.m.

East. My country has from time to time stressed that unless
something definitive is done about the whole Arab-Israel
dispute in the Middle East the Security Council will
continue to be faced with this kind of explosion,

Presenf: The representatives of the following States:
Lrgentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethioia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of Soviet
ocialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
[orthem Ireland and United States of America.

4. During the recent general debate in plenary meeting of
the General Assembly the Commissioner for External
Affairs of Nigeria, reviewing the situation in the Middle
East, said as follows:

Provisional agenda .(S/Agenda/l370)

“It is now generally agreed that no country should be
allowed to achieve territorial gains by military conquest.
It is also agreed that we must help create a political
climate in the Middle East in which all the inhabitants in
that area of the world will live hereafter in reasonable
peace and security.“’

. Adoption of the agenda.
. The situation in the Middle East:
(or) Letter dated 24 October 1967 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Republic addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/8207);

The impression of the Nigerian delegation following the
conclusion of our general debate was that the best place in
which to try to bring about a proper state of things in the
Middle East was not on the floor of the General Assembly
but in the Security Council. We were delighted that most
other delegations, Member States of the United Nations,
agreed with this view, including the principal parties to the
Arab-Israel dispute.

(b) Letter dated 24 October 1967 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8208).
Adoption of the agenda
77le agenda was adopted.
he situation in the Middle East:
1) Letter dated 24 October 1967 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Republic addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/8207);
II Letter dated 24 October 1967 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8208)

5. Action began to be taken by members of the Security
Council as long as two or three weeks ago. I mention this in
order to reassure the generat public of all the world that
what has now happened is not a result of any lethargy on
the part of the members of the Security Council but a
misfortune for which those members cannot be held
responsible. In the last few days meetings have been held
every day under the guidance of our distinguished and very
experienced President in order to try to work out something that will enable us to put a stop to this kind of
development.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French): In accordtee with the decision taken at the 1369th meeting, and
ith the consent of the Council, I propose to invite the
presentatives of Israel, the United Arab Republic, Jordan
Id the Syrian Arab Republic to take places at the Council
ble to participate without vote in the discussion,

6. Two days ago it seemed to many of us that there might
be an opening, We could not, in the circumstances of this
case, have put it higher. Everybody began to work harder
than ever to try to see what we could make of that opening.
It was, therefore, with considerable distress that the
Nigerian delegation, like other delegations in the General
Assembly, learned that there had been an incident in the
Middle East involving a naval vessel of the Israel Government,

At the invitation of the President, Mr. G. Rafael (Israel),
I: M. A. El Kony (United Arab Republic), Mr. A. M.
Ta i’ (Jordan) and Mr. A. Daoudy (Syria) took places at
e Council table.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The first
eaker on my list this morning is the representative of
.geria on whom I now call.

7. We were waiting for reports about how this happened,
where the ship was, why it was there, who fired on it, why
it was fired on, and so on, because it seems to us that, after

Mr. ADEBO (Nigeria): I want to join with my col%ues who have already expressed themselves with a
Zling of horror and dismay at recent events in the Middle

1 official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-second
Session, Plenary Meetings, 1586th meeting, para. 137.

1

we had received all this information, this was a matter of
which the Security Council ought to take notice. Then
what happened? An action took place yesterday of a kind
which the Security Council has time and again repudiated
and condemned in this important forum-an action of a
kind that looks like reprisal action. It may be that after
investigations are completed those who are investigating
will say that this was not the case, but if this action is what
it looks to be it seems to me a very great pity indeed that it
was taken by the Israel authorities. We say this with a due
sense of responsibility because it is consistent with the
position that Nigeria has consistently taken here.

12. My reason for saying this is the same as that wlllcll
motivated the permanent members of the Security Council
when, about a week ago, they let it be known to the
President that they would welcome any initiative which the
non-permanent members of the Council might take to llelp
to resolve the whole of the Middle East situation, I
therefore appeal to them, here again, to allow an oppcrtunity for COnSUltatiOn
among the non-permanent members
of the Security Council, which might enable us to produce
a compromise draft resolution that would not damage tile
position of these two great Powers but would be aimed at
bringing immediate relief to the area that we are discussing.

8. If it is proved that the Israel ship was sunk in
circumstances in which it should not have been attacked
the Nigerian Government will join in condemning that
action. And, if there is conclusive evidence that this action
taken by the Israel authorities was a reprisal action in
consequence of that earlier incident, we will also join in
condemning that action.

13. If we intended to stop there it would be again an
irresponsible act, but the purpose of the Nigerian delegation
includes the continuation of the efforts of the nonpermanent members, immediately after, to see whetller
they could not, with even greater urgency, produce
something for the consideration of the Council that would
deal with the Arab-Israel question as a whole.

9. We are very shocked by this latter action for a number
of reasons, one of which is its severity. We have had
occasion here to complain about the severity of reprisal
action even when there has been provocation. We have had
occasion here to remind our fellow-Members of the United
Nations that whenever they suffer provocation from
another Government their proper course is to come before
the Security Council. Therefore, we feel that the Security
Council has on its hands a very important matter that
requires very deliberate consideration. It is not a matter
from which we should shy away at all, because shying away
from it will not solve the problem. This would once again
postpone the problem to the detriment of the principal
parties concerned and to the detriment of the world as a
whole.

14. To summarize, my appeal to representatives at tllis
table is this: that if you, Mr. President, will permit us to do
so, we should have a short suspension of our proceedings
this morning so that, in the light of the gravity of tile
situation in the Middle East, in the light of the reports
which have filtered through to us this morning, and in tile
light of the facts which I have presented about the needto
take a decision which would be effective, we could try to
produce, during a suspension of about an hour, something
to which we should all feel able to subscribe.
15. The PRESIDENT
(trurzslated from Frfnch): The
Nigerian representative has proposed that the meeting be
suspended for about an hour in order to allow the members
of the Council to have consultations on the question now
before us.

10. What again has distressed the Nigerian delegation is the
fact that today we have received further reports that the
action agairist the oil refineries of the United Arab Republic
is still continuing, Again, it may be that when those who
are supervising the cease-fire come to making their report
they will say it is not SO, but there is no doubt in the minds
of any of us, least of all the Nigerian delegation, that a
situation is fast developing in the Middle East which is
explosive and full of potential consequences for the world.

16. In accordance with rule 33 of the Security Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, such a motion should be
decided without debate. Are there any objections to the
Nigerian representative’s proposal?
17. Mr. ADEBO (Nigeria): I apologize for intervening, but
one of my colleagues has just invited my attention to the
clock in this chamber which points to almost 12 o’clock.
He wonders whether, even if we completed our task witllin
an hour, the time remaining before members would wishto
go to lunch would be sufficient for the purpose of deciding
upon the result of our consultations. In these cir.
cumstances, if I may be permitted to amend my suggestion,
I would recommend that we should meet again at any time
following the lunch hour which you, Mr. President, might
wish to designate.

11. I observe that the two major Powers members of the
Security Council have put forward draft resolutions which
they feel will enable us to dispose of this question. From
the experience of all of us in this Council, we know that a
partial resolution is a futile one. We all know that a
resolution which does not carry the support of the
generality of the membership of this Council does not have
the effect that it should. And it seems to us that to proceed
immediately to vote upon the draft resolutions before the
Council at this stage would be a reckless proceeding. For
that reason, with due deference to the representatives of
the United States and the Soviet Union, who have put
forward these draft resolutions /s/8213, S/8212/, I would
respectfully suggest to them that we should defer further
consideration of these draft resolutions on the floor of the
Security Council,

18. The PRESIDENT
(translated from l+uvdzl: The
Nigerian representative has modified his original Proposal
and suggests that the meeting should be reconvened this
afternoon. I would therefore suggest that we adjourn till 3
o’clock if the Council members agree. If I hear no
objection, I shall take it that the proposal is adopted.
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

2
Litho

in U.N.

Price:

$U.S.

0.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

3535 l-November

1970-2,100
