United Nations

A/RES/64/127

General Assembly

Distr.: General
27 January 2010

Sixty-fourth session
Agenda item 41

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2009
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/64/431)]

64/127. Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees on the activities of his Office 1 and the report of the Executive Committee
of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on the
work of its sixtieth session 2 and the decisions contained therein,
0F

1F

Recalling its previous annual resolutions on the work of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees since its establishment by the
General Assembly,
Expressing its appreciation for the leadership shown by the High
Commissioner, commending the staff and implementing partners of the Office of the
High Commissioner for the competent, courageous and dedicated manner in which
they discharge their responsibilities, and underlining its strong condemnation of all
forms of violence to which humanitarian personnel and United Nations and
associated personnel are increasingly exposed,
Endorses the report of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the
1.
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on the work of its sixtieth
session;2
0H

Welcomes the important work undertaken by the Office of the United
2.
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and its Executive Committee in the
course of the year, which is aimed at strengthening the international protection
regime and at assisting Governments in meeting their protection responsibilities;
Reaffirms the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees 3 and
3.
the 1967 Protocol thereto 4 as the foundation of the international refugee protection
regime, recognizes the importance of their full and effective application by States
2F

3F

_______________
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/64/12).
Ibid., Supplement No. 12A (A/64/12/Add.1).
3
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.
4
Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.
2

09-46945

*0946945*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/64/127

parties and the values they embody, notes with satisfaction that one hundred and
forty-seven States are now parties to one instrument or to both, encourages States
not parties to consider acceding to those instruments, underlines, in particular, the
importance of full respect for the principle of non-refoulement, and recognizes that
a number of States not parties to the international refugee instruments have shown a
generous approach to hosting refugees;
Notes that sixty-five States are now parties to the 1954 Convention
4.
relating to the Status of Stateless Persons 5 and that thirty-seven States are parties to
the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness, 6 encourages States that have
not done so to give consideration to acceding to those instruments, notes the work of
the High Commissioner in regard to identifying stateless persons, preventing and
reducing statelessness and protecting stateless persons, and urges the Office of the
High Commissioner to continue to work in this area in accordance with relevant
General Assembly resolutions and Executive Committee conclusions;
4F

5F

Takes note of the sixtieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions 7 and
5.
the fortieth anniversary of the Organization of African Unity Convention governing
the specific aspects of refugee problems in Africa, 8 commemorated in 2009;
6F

7F

6.
Re-emphasizes that the protection of refugees is primarily the
responsibility of States, whose full and effective cooperation, action and political
resolve are required to enable the Office of the High Commissioner to fulfil its
mandated functions, and strongly emphasizes, in this context, the importance of
active international solidarity and burden- and responsibility-sharing;
Also re-emphasizes that prevention and reduction of statelessness are
7.
primarily the responsibility of States, in appropriate cooperation with the
international community;
Further re-emphasizes that protection of and assistance to internally
8.
displaced persons are primarily the responsibility of States, in appropriate
cooperation with the international community;
Encourages the Office of the High Commissioner to pursue its efforts to
9.
strengthen its capacity to respond adequately to emergencies and thereby ensure a
more predictable response to inter-agency commitments in case of emergency;
10. Takes note of the current activities of the Office of the High
Commissioner related to protection of and assistance to internally displaced persons,
including in the context of inter-agency arrangements in this field, emphasizes that
such activities should be consistent with relevant General Assembly resolutions and
should not undermine the mandate of the Office for refugees and the institution of
asylum, and encourages the High Commissioner to continue his dialogue with States
on the role of his Office in this regard;
11. Encourages the Office of the High Commissioner to work in partnership
and in full cooperation with relevant national authorities, United Nations offices and
agencies, international and intergovernmental organizations, regional organizations
and non-governmental organizations to contribute to the continued development of

_______________
5

Ibid., vol. 360, No. 5158.
Ibid., vol. 989, No. 14458.
7
Ibid., vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
8
Ibid., vol. 1001, No. 14691.
6

2

A/RES/64/127

humanitarian response capacities at all levels, and recalls the role of the Office as
the cluster lead for protection, camp coordination and management, and emergency
shelter in complex emergencies;
12. Also encourages the Office of the High Commissioner, among other
relevant United Nations and other relevant intergovernmental organizations and
humanitarian and development actors, to continue to work with the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat to enhance the coordination,
effectiveness and efficiency of humanitarian assistance, as stated in General
Assembly resolution 63/139 of 11 December 2008 on the strengthening of the
coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations;
13. Further encourages the Office of the High Commissioner to engage in
and implement in full the objectives of the Delivering as One initiative;
14. Notes with appreciation the ongoing implementation of the process of
structural and management change undertaken by the Office of the High
Commissioner, and encourages the Office to complete the implementation of the
reforms process, including the implementation of a results-based management and
accountability framework and strategy, as well as human resources reform, and to
focus on continuous improvement to enable a more efficient response to the needs
of beneficiaries and ensure the effective and transparent use of its resources;
15. Strongly condemns attacks on refugees, asylum-seekers and internally
displaced persons as well as acts that pose a threat to their personal security and
well-being, and calls upon all States concerned and, where applicable, parties
involved in an armed conflict to take all necessary measures to ensure respect for
human rights and international humanitarian law;
16. Expresses deep concern about the increasing number of attacks against
humanitarian aid workers and convoys and, in particular, the loss of life of
humanitarian personnel working in the most difficult and challenging conditions in
order to assist those in need;
17. Emphasizes the need for States to ensure that perpetrators of attacks
committed on their territory against humanitarian personnel and United Nations and
associated personnel do not operate with impunity, and that the perpetrators of such
acts are promptly brought to justice as provided for by national laws and obligations
under international law;
18. Deplores the refoulement and unlawful expulsion of refugees and
asylum-seekers, and calls upon all States concerned to ensure respect for the
relevant principles of refugee protection and human rights;
19. Emphasizes that international protection of refugees is a dynamic and
action-oriented function that is at the core of the mandate of the Office of the High
Commissioner and that it includes, in cooperation with States and other partners, the
promotion and facilitation of, inter alia, the admission, reception and treatment of
refugees in accordance with internationally agreed standards and the ensuring of
durable, protection-oriented solutions, bearing in mind the particular needs of
vulnerable groups and paying special attention to those with specific needs, and notes
in this context that the delivery of international protection is a staff-intensive service
that requires adequate staff with the appropriate expertise, especially at the field level;
20. Affirms the importance of age, gender and diversity mainstreaming in
analysing protection needs and in ensuring the participation of refugees and other
persons of concern to the Office of the High Commissioner, as appropriate, in the
planning and implementation of programmes of the Office and State policies, and also
3

A/RES/64/127

affirms the importance of according priority to addressing discrimination, gender
inequality and the problem of sexual and gender-based violence, recognizing the
importance of addressing the protection needs of women and children in particular;
21. Strongly reaffirms the fundamental importance and the purely
humanitarian and non-political character of the function of the Office of the High
Commissioner of providing international protection to refugees and seeking
permanent solutions to refugee problems, and recalls that those solutions include
voluntary repatriation and, where appropriate and feasible, local integration and
resettlement in a third country, while reaffirming that voluntary repatriation,
supported, as necessary, by rehabilitation and development assistance to facilitate
sustainable reintegration, remains the preferred solution;
22. Expresses concern about the particular difficulties faced by the millions
of refugees in protracted situations, and emphasizes the need to redouble
international efforts and cooperation to find practical and comprehensive approaches
to resolving their plight and to realize durable solutions for them, consistent with
international law and relevant General Assembly resolutions;
23. Recognizes the importance of achieving durable solutions to refugee
problems and, in particular, the need to address in this process the root causes of
refugee movements in order to avert new flows of refugees;
24. Welcomes the initiative of the High Commissioner to convene, in Geneva
on 9 and 10 December 2009, the third Dialogue on Protection Challenges, on the
theme “Challenges for persons of concern to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees in urban settings”;
25. Recalls the important role of effective partnerships and coordination in
meeting the needs of refugees and in finding durable solutions to their situations,
welcomes the efforts under way, in cooperation with countries hosting refugees and
countries of origin, including their respective local communities, relevant United
Nations agencies, international and intergovernmental organizations, regional
organizations, as appropriate, non-governmental organizations and development
actors, to promote a framework for durable solutions, particularly in protracted
refugee situations, which includes an approach to sustainable and timely return
which encompasses repatriation, reintegration, rehabilitation and reconstruction
activities, and encourages States, in cooperation with relevant United Nations
agencies, international and intergovernmental organizations, regional organizations,
non-governmental organizations and development actors, to support, inter alia,
through the allocation of funds, the implementation of such a framework to facilitate
an effective transition from relief to development;
26. Recognizes that no solution to displacement can be durable unless it is
sustainable, and therefore encourages the Office of the High Commissioner to
support the sustainability of return and reintegration;
27. Welcomes the progress that has been achieved in increasing the number
of refugees resettled and the number of States offering opportunities for
resettlement, and the contribution that those States make to durable solutions for
refugees, and invites interested States, the Office of the High Commissioner and
other relevant partners to make use of the Multilateral Framework of
Understandings on Resettlement, 9 where appropriate and feasible;
8F

_______________
9

4

Available from www.unhcr.org.

A/RES/64/127

28. Notes with appreciation the activities undertaken by States to strengthen
the regional initiatives that facilitate cooperative policies and approaches on
refugees, and encourages States to continue their efforts to address, in a
comprehensive manner, the needs of the people who require international protection
in their respective regions, including the support provided for host communities that
receive large numbers of persons who require international protection;
29. Notes the importance of States and the Office of the High Commissioner
discussing and clarifying the role of the Office in mixed migratory flows, in order to
better address protection needs in the context of mixed migratory flows, including
by safeguarding access to asylum for those in need of international protection, and
notes the readiness of the High Commissioner, consistent with his mandate, to assist
States in fulfilling their protection responsibilities in this regard;
30. Emphasizes the obligation of all States to accept the return of their
nationals, calls upon States to facilitate the return of their nationals who have been
determined not to be in need of international protection, and affirms the need for the
return of persons to be undertaken in a safe and humane manner and with full
respect for their human rights and dignity, irrespective of the status of the persons
concerned;
31. Expresses deep concern about the challenges posed by climate change
and environmental degradation to the protection activities of the Office of the High
Commissioner and the assistance it provides to vulnerable populations of concern
across the globe, particularly in the least developed countries, and urges the Office
to continue to address such challenges in its work, within its mandate, and in
consultation with national authorities and in cooperation with competent agencies in
its operations;
32. Notes the important number of displaced in and from Iraq and its serious
impact on the social and economic situation of countries in the region, and calls
upon the international community to act in a targeted and coordinated manner to
provide protection and increased assistance to the persons displaced to enable the
countries in the region to strengthen their capacity to respond to the needs in
partnership with the Office of the High Commissioner, other United Nations agencies,
the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement and non-governmental
organizations;
33. Urges all States and relevant non-governmental and other organizations,
in conjunction with the Office of the High Commissioner, in a spirit of international
solidarity and burden- and responsibility-sharing, to cooperate and to mobilize
resources with a view to enhancing the capacity of and reducing the heavy burden
borne by host countries, in particular those that have received large numbers of
refugees and asylum-seekers, and calls upon the Office to continue to play its
catalytic role in mobilizing assistance from the international community to address
the root causes as well as the economic, environmental and social impact of
large-scale refugee populations in developing countries, in particular the least
developed countries, and countries with economies in transition;
34. Expresses deep concern about the existing and potential challenges posed
by the world financial and economic crisis to the activities of the Office of the High
Commissioner;
35. Calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner to further explore ways
and means to broaden its donor base, so as to achieve greater burden-sharing by
reinforcing cooperation with governmental donors, non-governmental donors and
the private sector;
5

A/RES/64/127

36. Recognizes that adequate and timely resources are essential for the Office
of the High Commissioner to continue to fulfil the mandate conferred upon it
through its statute 10 and by subsequent General Assembly resolutions on refugees
and other persons of concern, recalls its resolutions 58/153 of 22 December 2003,
58/270 of 23 December 2003, 59/170 of 20 December 2004, 60/129 of 16 December
2005, 61/137 of 19 December 2006, 62/124 of 18 December 2007 and 63/148 of
18 December 2008 concerning, inter alia, the implementation of paragraph 20 of the
statute of the Office, and urges Governments and other donors to respond promptly
to annual and supplementary appeals issued by the Office for requirements under its
programmes;
9F

37. Requests the High Commissioner to report on his activities to the General
Assembly at its sixty-fifth session.
65th plenary meeting
18 December 2009

_______________
10

6

Resolution 428 (V), annex.
