United Nations

S/PV.6690

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6690th meeting
Monday, 19 December 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Dunlop
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Messone
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Sangqu
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2011/772*)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-64359 (E)

*1164359*

S/PV.6690

Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): It is a pleasure
for me to have this opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the situation in Afghanistan. It so happens
that I recently visited Afghanistan for a week and I
would like to share my impressions with the Council.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2011/772*)
The President (spoke in Russian): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Afghanistan, Australia, Canada,
Iran, Japan, Liechtenstein, Malaysia, New Zealand,
Norway, Pakistan and Turkey to participate in this
meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Jawed Ludin, Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Неrvé Ladsous, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, to
participate in this meeting.
I wish to acknowledge the presence in the
Council Chamber of Mr. Ján Kubiš, the newly
appointed Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Staffan de Mistura, former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
former Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/772*, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan
and its implications for international peace and
security.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.

2

My foremost impression, based on visits to Kabul
and Mazar-e-Sharif and on reports I received from our
Afghan and international colleagues of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
is that we owe those colleagues an enormous debt of
gratitude. They are working tirelessly under extremely
difficult circumstances to implement the Mission’s
mandate. Obviously, last April’s tragic incident in
Mazar-e-Sharif left scars. But the construction of a new
compound for the UNAMA regional office there is
nearly completed, and the staff are still on active duty,
providing a continuity that is greatly encouraged and
appreciated by Governor Ata Mohammad — whom I
met — and by the region’s population in general.
The future role of the United Nations, adapting
the work of the Organization to the priorities emerging
from the transition process, and the transformation of
Afghanistan were all the subject of extensive
discussions during meetings I held with various
officials and high-level interlocutors from civil society,
the media, the international community and the armed
forces. Everyone acknowledged the essential role of
the United Nations, both in the past and in the future.
During those meetings, we maintained that the
success of the Kabul process depended upon Afghan
institutions acknowledging, and increasingly taking, on
responsibilities, the review of activities called for in
UNAMA’s mandate, and the support to Afghanistan
provided by United Nations bodies. That review, which
is currently under way following the request made by
the Council in resolution 1974 (2011), is focused in
particular on the best way for the United Nations to
support the process of assuming greater responsibility.
Many representatives from Afghan civil society
and the international community on the ground also
expressed their approval of a continued United Nations
presence, and even a strengthened one, given the
reality in the transition and post-transition periods.
Civil society representatives, both in Kabul and
during their meetings with the Secretary-General in
Bonn, firmly reiterated their positions with regard to
the human rights situation in Afghanistan. They also
forcibly reaffirmed that no circumstances justified

11-64359

S/PV.6690

moving backwards on the very significant progress
registered in that area.
The joint United Nations-Afghan Government
chairmanship of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board (JCMB) reflects the crucial role played by the
United Nations in Afghanistan with regard to
facilitation and support. I participated in the latest
JCMB meeting in Kabul, held on 30 November, the
outcome of which is reflected in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/772*). The meeting called
for increased willingness and capacity on the part of
the Afghan Government to manage its development
programme and coordinate international assistance. It
also took note of the added value provided by the
United Nations in that regard.
From Kabul I rejoined the Secretary-General’s
delegation to the International Conference on
Afghanistan in Bonn. The Conference provided a
timely opportunity, 10 years after the 2001 Bonn
Agreement, for the international community and
Afghanistan to assess, reaffirm and expand the
partnership, both during the transition and in the
post-2014 period — that is, the decade of
transformation through 2014.
During the Conference, the Secretary-General
emphasized the need for the Afghan Government and
its international partners to also focus on non-military
aspects of the transition. International assistance must
support the efforts made by Afghans to strengthen their
institutions, advance socio-economic development and
promote the rule of law and respect for human rights.
That process takes time in the best of circumstances,
and Afghanistan will be no different. It is for that
reason that the long-term commitment to Afghanistan
undertaken at Bonn by the international community —
during
the
transition
and
the
subsequent
transformation — is so important.
The declaration issued by the Conference, which
highlights the crucial role of the United Nations in
Afghanistan, is also important. During meetings on the
sidelines of the Conference, the Secretary-General
underscored the three future priorities of the United
Nations: first, to provide security and development
assistance; secondly, to promote and support an
inclusive reconciliation process led by Afghans and
based on dialogue and consensus; and, thirdly, to
continue to promote human rights, in particular the
rights of women and children.

11-64359

The United Nations is committed to the
Government and people of Afghanistan for the long
term. We have supported the Afghan population for
more than half a century. We will remain in
Afghanistan well beyond 2014, for as long as Afghans
need us.
With regard to major meetings on Afghanistan
since the latest Council deliberations, the Istanbul
Conference for Afghanistan: Security and Cooperation
in the Heart of Asia launched the Istanbul Process. The
13 participating countries reaffirmed their previous
commitments, including with regard to the country’s
territorial integrity. They also announced joint
principles to guide their support for a secure, stable
and peaceful Afghanistan.
The Istanbul Process has put in place a follow-up
framework based on concrete confidence-building
measures in response to the crucial challenges facing
Afghanistan and a large part of the region in the
security, political and economic areas. Those
challenges include the threat posed by terrorism and
drug trafficking, as well as the need for peace and to
strengthen trade links. We look forward to the concept
paper to be presented by Afghanistan early next year
ahead of the Kabul ministerial conference to be held in
July 2012, which will be an additional sign of the
taking on of greater responsibility of the Process for
the future by national authorities.
(spoke in English)
Politically, there have also been a number of
important steps forwards since our last debate (see
S/PV.6625). At the traditional Loya Jirga in November,
approximately 40 working groups made up of
representatives from every province debated the future
of the High Peace Council and of dialogue itself. They
concluded that there was no alternative to peace,
reaffirmed the Council’s mandate and recommended,
wisely, that dialogue take place with interlocutors who
are known, verifiable, can take responsibility and be
held accountable, and respect the rights and aspirations
of all Afghans, especially women.
As a result of the assassination of Professor
Rabbani, the Jirga requested the Government to
appoint a new chairperson to lead the High Peace
Council in his stead.
There was a clear reaffirmation from both the
Loya Jirga and the Bonn Conference outcomes of the

3

S/PV.6690

commitment to pursuing a peace process, but next
steps remain to be defined.
In another positive development, with a working
quorum achieved on 8 October, the lower house of
parliament — the Wolesi Jirga — has now resumed its
legislative work. The orderly resolution of the yearlong dispute over election results points to a growing
respect for institutions, processes and lawful
procedures.
With parliament’s approval, in mid-October, of
the supplemental budget to recapitalize Kabul Bank, a
positive domino effect has also had the result of
dissolving a major blockage within the development
agenda. Indeed, in November, the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) and the Government concluded
negotiations on a new IMF programme. That has
enabled international donors, first, to re-engage in
support of current development programmes through
the JCMB process, with two Board meetings held in
quick succession to approve nine new national priority
programmes; and secondly, at Bonn, to commit to
longer-term development cooperation, including a
reconfirmation of commitments to channel more aid
through the Government budget.
Through that revitalization of the Kabul process
and the reconfirmation of aid effectiveness
mechanisms, the Afghan Government will be better
positioned to meet its own commitments to improved
governance and the rule of law, greater fiscal
accountability and enhanced delivery.
In terms of counter-narcotics, the 2011 Afghan
Opium Survey, which was released in October,
revealed an increase in poppy cultivation and in the
expected production of opium this year. However,
during the past month two important steps were taken
at the regional level, which is indeed the level at which
this issue must be fought. Under the triangular
initiative sponsored by the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the ministers for counternarcotics of Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan met to sign
a declaration to strengthen joint planning and
operational capacities. The following week, UNODC
launched its 2011-2014 regional programme to enhance
cooperation with all the countries of the region,
especially with regard to information sharing.
In terms of the transition of security
responsibilities, which is a key component of the
transformative process, I saw for myself on my recent

4

visit to Afghanistan that this is proceeding apace. As
the Council is aware, at the end of November President
Karzai approved the second tranche of areas to be
handed over. But there is no room for complacency.
For the transition to be sustainable, security has to be
linked to development and the Kabul process. The
Afghan people must see tangible improvements to their
daily lives, especially in terms of economic
opportunities. It is therefore more urgent than ever
before that the civilian side of transition proceed
equally strongly and briskly. Thus Bonn has come at a
crucial time for this process to gain momentum. More
specific
commitments
from
the
international
community will be expected at next year’s conference
in Tokyo.
Also noteworthy, and promising if sustained, are
recent apparent signs of a relative decline in the
number of security incidents as we at the United
Nations record them. As of today, this year there has
been a 21 per cent rise in incidents, as compared to
2010, but that was mainly due to the elevated number
of incidents in the early part of the year. In September,
October and November, the number of incidents fell, as
compared to the previous three months. It also fell in
comparison to the same period in 2010 — although we
must remember that parliamentary elections in
September last year greatly skewed the figures for that
month.
This is good news in a sector that has had little
positive to report for a very long time. Nevertheless,
we should not deceive ourselves. We have again
witnessed large-scale attacks over recent weeks. We
must continue to exercise great caution and vigilance
as the volatile security situation continues to impact
the work of the United Nations in Afghanistan,
constraining operational access and perpetuating high
levels of risk for our staff, as well as for the Afghan
population.
We still have a long way to go with our work, as
the title of a recently released UNAMA human rights
report on the implementation of the law on the
elimination of violence against women tells us. The
rights of women and of detainees are highlighted in
this report. We will continue to pursue such reviews
and to encourage and support Afghan civil society to
play a similar role and to make Afghan voices heard.
Regrettably, we also have a long way to go on the
protection of civilians. Civilian casualties remain at

11-64359

S/PV.6690

high levels, with nearly 800 civilian deaths over the
last three-month period. Dozens of innocent
worshippers were killed on a single day in Kabul and
Mazar-e-Sharif on 6 December — an important
religious day of commemoration. Such attacks deserve
the strong condemnation they have received from the
widest range of voices, both inside and outside
Afghanistan. Unfortunately, Afghans have become all
too familiar with such pain and hardship. We must keep
our eye on the pressing humanitarian concerns that
continue to afflict this country.
The drought this year has had a devastating
impact, particularly in the north and the west, so much
so that the Emergency Relief Coordinator increased
this year’s consolidated appeal by $129 million —
nearly 30 per cent — to respond, under the leadership
of the Afghan Government, to the resulting needs. Next
year’s appeal, which was launched last week, reminds
us of the importance of bridging the gap between
humanitarian interventions and development to get at
the underlying structural problems, which can prevent
many of the natural disasters we see recurring year in,
year out. In this area, too, the Government is taking a
strong leadership position and will need our support as
part of our commitment to long-term engagement.
With a clear message of support from the
international community and the Afghan Government
in Bonn and Istanbul for the crucial role of the United
Nations in Afghanistan, it is time to look again at that
role and refocus our mandate, adjusting it to the
evolving situation on the ground. To this end, and in
line with the Council’s instructions and the call from
the Government earlier this year to the SecretaryGeneral, the process of reviewing UNAMA’s mandated
activities and of United Nations support in
Afghanistan, led by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, is under way. I am pleased to report that
during my visit to Kabul we officially launched the
review process, together with Foreign Minister
Rassoul, in the presence of other key ministers,
including Deputy Foreign Minister Ludin, who is the
Afghan Government’s focal point for the review. I wish
to thank him for his leadership.
An inter-agency team appointed by the SecretaryGeneral is working under the terms of reference that
were widely consulted and agreed with Council
members and the Afghan Government, as well as with
key partners and stakeholders. The team returned from
Afghanistan
yesterday.
They
held
extensive

11-64359

consultations with a wide range of interlocutors in New
York before deployment and during their three-week
stay in Afghanistan. The team will now conduct a
series of debriefings before compiling their findings
and recommendations, which will aim to inform the
Council’s discussions related to the mandate renewal in
March 2012.
I also wish to inform the Council that the planned
and smooth process of succession in UNAMA’s senior
leadership is under way. Mr. Staffan de Mistura, who
successfully led the Mission through a very tumultuous
period, completed his service as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on 14 December to take up a
position within his Government. I expressed the deep
appreciation and gratitude of the Secretary-General and
of myself for Mr. De Mistura’s professionalism and
dedication during his tenure. We wish him well in the
next step in his very distinguished career.
I am pleased to introduce Mr. Jan Kubiš, whom
many of you already know, who has been appointed by
the
Secretary-General
as
the
next
Special
Representative and Head of UNAMA. Mr. Kubiš is an
accomplished and successful diplomat and politician.
He has had a long and high-profile career, including as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Slovakia and as
Secretary-General of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, prior to heading the United
Nations Economic Commission for Europe, where he is
currently serving until his deployment to UNAMA on
16 January. We wish him well as well in his most
challenging task and request the Council’s
understanding and full support.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Ladsous for his briefing. I now give the floor to the
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan,
His Excellency Mr. Jawed Ludin.
Mr. Ludin (Afghanistan): It is an honour to have
the opportunity to address the Security Council of the
United Nations for the first time. I convey the gratitude
of the Afghan people to all Council members, and the
countries they represent, for their commitment to a
peaceful Afghanistan, and for maintaining a focus on
the evolving situation in my country.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Ladsous for his
useful and comprehensive briefing and for spending an
extended period of time in Afghanistan on his recent
visit. It was a pleasure to join him, and Mr. Heitman,
who is also present here, in Kabul recently for the

5

S/PV.6690

launch of the work of the mandate review team for the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA).
The year 2011 has been a year of significant
milestones for Afghanistan, and we Afghans are proud
to have been successful in most of the steps we have
taken in partnership with the international community.
Of course, as in the years before, every bit of our
achievements has come at a price. Terrorism remains a
strong threat, and Afghans have continued to make
huge sacrifices for the vision of a peaceful, prosperous
and democratic Afghanistan. However, no threat or
demand for sacrifice will deter us from achieving our
vision, and we truly appreciate the crucial help of our
international friends and partners in this historic
struggle.
Having always aspired to achieve self-reliance,
this past year we finally took the crucial step of
beginning the transition process, which will see
Afghanistan’s National Security Forces take full
responsibility for security in the country by the end of
2014. With the implementation of the second tranche
of transition, announced last month by His Excellency
President Hamid Karzai, Afghan forces are taking
charge of security for over fifty percent of the
country’s population.
Allow me to emphasize that for the Afghan
people, transition is not an imposed deadline or a mere
operational benchmark. Transition is truly the
manifestation of our determination to succeed and to
stand on our own feet. It is the guiding framework for
all our efforts, and in a fundamental sense it is the
ultimate goal of the partnership we Afghans are blessed
to have had with the international community for the
past ten years.
Transition, however, is not just about security. As
we move to take full responsibility for defending our
country and securing the lives of our people, we are
also assuming greater ownership of affairs on the
civilian front, including the political process and the
development agenda. Therefore, to make transition
meaningful and to build the capacity of our security
forces, we are redoubling our efforts to take the peace
process forward, improve governance, fight corruption
and build the requisite capacities of our Government
institutions to carry out their sovereign functions
effectively and transparently.

6

Speaking of the political solution, I wish to
reassure the Council that the Afghan Government
remains committed to the Afghan-led peace effort that
is aimed at reconciling members of the armed
opposition and enabling them to live a peaceful life in
society. The Council is aware that, in recent months,
our peace efforts have faced a number of setbacks,
notably the tragic assassination of Professor
Burhanuddin Rabbani, former President of Afghanistan
and Chairman of the High Peace Council. Nonetheless,
at the consultative Loya Jirga held last month in Kabul,
the Afghan people unanimously reaffirmed their
commitment to the peace process, giving it renewed
impetus. The national gathering conveyed the Afghan
people’s desire for the continuation of an inclusive
Afghan-led national reconciliation and reintegration
process.
Through the peace process, we will continue to
reach out to the armed opposition and reconcile with
those willing to renounce violence, break ties with
terrorist organizations and live peaceful lives under the
Constitution. We believe that the process may benefit
from the establishment of an office, within or outside
Afghanistan, which could facilitate formal talks
between the relevant Afghan authorities and
representatives of the armed opposition, including the
Taliban. Furthermore, we will continue to rely on
support from regional countries, in particular the
Islamic Republic of Pakistan, without whose support
our peace efforts will not produce the desired results.
The role of the region surrounding Afghanistan
remains central to the peaceful and prosperous future
that we Afghans envision for our country. The common
threats that we share, including the menaces of
terrorism, narcotics and so on, will not be defeated, nor
will peace in Afghanistan ever be achieved, in the
absence of constructive, results-oriented cooperation at
the regional level. Therefore, over the past 10 years,
we in Afghanistan have placed regional cooperation at
the heart of our vision for the future and we will
continue to do so in the years to come.
Thanks to the leadership of the brotherly
Republic of Turkey, the Istanbul Conference for
Afghanistan: Security and Cooperation in the Heart of
Asia, held early in November, represented a visionary
step forward towards cooperation and confidencebuilding across the region. We are both hopeful and
optimistic that the Istanbul Process on Regional
Security and Cooperation for a Secure and Stable

11-64359

S/PV.6690

Afghanistan will help to bring about a new regional
environment that is characterized by cooperation,
integration, confidence and shared efforts to achieve
security and prosperity. That vision has eluded us for
far too long. We will follow up the Istanbul Conference
with another ministerial-level conference, to be held in
Kabul in June 2012, the preparation of which has
already begun in earnest.
As the partnership between Afghanistan and the
international community evolves during and after the
transition phase, Afghans need reassurance that our
friends in the region and beyond will continue to
support our progress towards peace, stability,
prosperity and democracy. Thankfully, that reassurance
was given, in very strong terms, two weeks ago in
Germany, where over a hundred countries and
international
organizations
gathered
for
the
International Afghanistan Conference in Bonn. I wish
to express our sincere appreciation to the Federal
Republic of Germany, Afghanistan’s long-standing
friend and partner, for hosting that historic conference.
The true significance of the Bonn Conference
was that it reflected a crucial consensus on the
international level to support a peaceful, sovereign and
prosperous future for Afghanistan. That consensus was
expressed in strong language of support and
commitment, particularly in setting out the concept of
the Transformation Decade of 2015-2024 as a solid
basis for the international community’s enduring
engagement and support beyond transition.
The Conference also reaffirmed the Kabul
Process as the framework for the international
community’s cooperation with Afghanistan as we
continue to transform our country from a wardependent to a self-reliant economy. In that context, we
look forward to the Tokyo Conference, to be held in
July next year, as an opportunity to focus on
Afghanistan’s future economic agenda. I thank our
Japanese friends for their friendship and for organizing
that crucial conference.
If the Bonn Conference was a demonstration of
consensus at the international level, the consultative
Loya Jirga, held from 16 to 19 November in Kabul,
was its mirror image within Afghanistan, reflecting the
unanimous desire of the Afghan people for partnership
and engagement with the international community.
More than 2,000 Afghan representatives from all
segments of society and all corners of the country came

11-64359

together and, in a historic manifestation of democratic
will, resoundingly affirmed the Afghan Government’s
efforts to forge long-term, strategic partnerships with
the United States and other countries within and
outside the region.
In that context, we have finalized a strategic
partnership agreement with our old and historic friend,
the Republic of India, and are in the process of
negotiating similar agreements with our other friends
and partners, based on the principles of mutual respect
and the fundamental equality of sovereign nations.
Those partnerships will be the building blocks of
Afghanistan’s future relations with the international
community. They cannot, and will not, represent a
threat to any other country in the region or beyond.
As we move forward, the role of the United
Nations will remain crucial to Afghanistan’s
partnership with the international community. We
expect that the ongoing review of the UNAMA
mandate will ensure a more coherent and responsive
United Nations role in Afghanistan. In that context, I
welcome the recent visit of the review team to
Afghanistan. I look forward to continued dialogue
between Afghanistan, in Kabul and in New York, and
the United Nations in the context of the review, which
should reinforce the principles of Afghan ownership
and leadership through the transition and beyond.
Speaking of the United Nations, I would have
requested Under-Secretary-General Ladsous to convey
to Mr. Staffan de Mistura — but since Mr. De Mistura
is present via videoconference, may I convey directly
to Mr. De Mistura the deep gratitude and appreciation
of the Afghan people for his dedicated service and
excellent leadership of the United Nations in
Afghanistan. We thank him for all he has done. I
personally have enjoyed working with Mr. De Mistura
and wish him every success in his future endeavours. I
also take the opportunity to congratulate Mr. Ján Kubiš
on his appointment as the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. His
distinguished career, and the trust invested in him by
the Secretary-General, assures us of the continued
effective leadership of the United Nations in
Afghanistan.
As we meet today, at the end of the tenth year of
what has been a truly historic collaboration between
the Afghan people and the international community,

7

S/PV.6690

allow me to reaffirm Afghanistan’s unwavering
determination to achieve a peaceful, prosperous and
democratic future in close partnership with the world.
Of course, we have recorded tremendous achievements
together, and we are all aware of the challenges that lie
ahead and the imperatives for continued commitment
and cooperation.
Today, with the tremendous success of the Bonn
Conference fresh in our minds, I am here to express
appreciation for the international community’s
recommitment to Afghanistan’s future, as expressed in
Bonn earlier this month. I also thank the Council for
standing behind the Conference’s conclusions. As
Afghanistan
moves
from
transition
to
the
transformation decade, the Council’s guidance and the
international community’s commitment remain as
crucial to our future as ever before.
The President: I now give the floor to
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, who is participating in today’s
meeting by videoconference from Rome.
Mr. De Mistura: I want, as is my custom, to
make only three points and one conclusion. The first
point is a warm thanks to the Council for allowing me
not to miss this meeting of the Security Council. I
would have loved to be there today in order to present
my last report to the Council in my capacity as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and, frankly,
to thank all the members of the Council warmly and
shake their hands, one by one, in gratitude for what
they have done in supporting the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and me
during the past two years. My colleagues and I never
felt for a single moment during that time that we were
not supported and guided by the Council.
I leave UNAMA in excellent hands, as the
Council will see. Mr. Ján Kubiš is perfectly suited for
doing even better than has been done so far. He comes
with the right spirit, enthusiasm and background. I feel
that, with the Council’s help and the SecretaryGeneral’s guidance, we will be able to continue doing
what UNAMA has been trying to do for the past two
years and to respond to Afghans’ needs. We heard it
from Deputy Foreign Minister Ludin: the most
important thing for Afghans is respect for their dignity
and sovereignty while at the same time understanding
their need for a partnership, and a long-lasting one.
What has been done so far, I think, with the
Council’s guidance and support, is to help the

8

democratic process. There is now a parliament; there
are 69 women in parliament; the parliament is working;
and preparations are being made for future elections
when the time comes for them. There is support for
Afghan institutions, such as the Independent Electoral
Commission. A regional process that has started
through the Istanbul Process, and we will see those
new meetings taking place next year. We have constant
reminders from the human rights side of the United
Nations concerning human rights for women, for
civilian casualties, for those in detention, and for
children. And there is a process, albeit nascent and still
insufficient, for political reconciliation. But we do
have the Salaam Support Group from UNAMA that
will be with Mr. Kubiš, supporting any process that
Afghans want to lead. And we have been supporting
the transition, which is moving forward in the right
direction.
I also take this opportunity to thank the NATO
International Security Assistance Force, European
Union representatives and representatives of the
regional bodies for the excellent cooperation we have
had during the past two years. We have different
agendas and sometimes a different focus, but we have
all worked in the same direction and towards the same
goals. I welcome the review. Every opportunity for
revisiting what we are trying to do and should be doing
in the future — as can be seen from the Mission
outlined in the coming report — becomes an
opportunity for us to better serve Afghans and be more
effective vis-à-vis the Security Council.
Last but not least is the aspect of aid coherence,
which, with the establishment of the Joint Coordination
Board, has enabled UNAMA, in partnership with
Afghan authorities, to have a body that can move
forward on what we call the Kabul process. The
Conferences in London, Kabul, Lisbon, Istanbul and,
most recently, in Bonn have all been opportunities
where, in serving the United Nations, I have had the
privilege of seeing the process and progress moving in
a good direction for Afghanistan.
In conclusion, I have had moments of great
satisfaction at seeing Afghan achievements moving in
the right direction. We have had setbacks and terribly
sad moments, especially, as can be imagined, when my
colleagues and friends died in Mazar-e-Sharif. But
never have we felt alone, because the Afghans were
with us, showing us the way through their own
determination and resilience, and because the Council

11-64359

S/PV.6690

and the Secretary-General were always there
supporting us. That is why I want to thank the Council
warmly and why I am so happy I could be with
everyone, even from a long distance, on this occasion.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): I would like, at the
outset, to acknowledge the presence of Deputy Foreign
Minister Ludin here in the Chamber. We thank him
very much for joining us today and for his remarks. We
also thank Under-Secretary-General Ladsous for his
comprehensive briefing. Germany thanks Mr. Staffan
de Mistura wholeheartedly for his enormous
contribution to United Nations support for Afghanistan
and for his personal dedication in one of the most
challenging positions that the Organization has to offer.
The new Italian Government’s choice of Mr. De Mistura
for his important new position there is ample proof of
his outstanding qualities.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
and welcome the incoming Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and the new
head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. Ján Kubiš. My delegation
wishes to congratulate him on his new position and
assure him of the full support of the German
Government. His vast political experience will serve
the United Nations Mission very well. I would also like
to assure him of the strong support of my country and,
I assume, of the Council, for which Afghanistan is a
high priority, as has been proven by the high degree of
consensus displayed over time.
Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Kubiš is going to Kabul at yet another
defining moment in modern Afghan history, only days
after the International Afghanistan Conference in Bonn
on 5 December, which, as Mr. Ludin said, was a
historic milestone. Ten years after the first conference,
in St. Petersburg, Afghanistan is on its way to full
sovereignty again. The transition is starting to show its
first results. As announced by President Karzai, soon
more than 50 per cent of Afghan territory will be
considered to be transition areas. By 2014 the Afghan
Security Forces will have full responsibility for
Afghanistan’s security.
The truly remarkable message from Bonn is
clear: the international community renews its
partnership with Afghanistan and defines a clear and
reliable long-term perspective, based on firm mutual

11-64359

commitments. For its part of the agreement, the Afghan
Government commits to continued progress in all key
areas, such as democracy, human rights and
governance, and reaffirms its international obligations
in that regard. More generally, the so-called
transformation decade of 2015-2024 emphasizes a
strategic consensus. The international community
stands by Afghanistan. We will make sure that the
important achievements over the past decade will not
be reversed and that much-needed reforms and
capacity-building will remain priorities, for the benefit
of all Afghans. Terrorists must not be allowed to find a
safe haven in Afghanistan again.
In all of that, sustainability, including fiscal
sustainability, is a key concern. One example is that the
Afghan Security forces have almost reached their
target size. The focus must now be on further
qualification and empowerment of lasting Afghanowned structures.
Bonn also underlined the international support for
a political solution. The permanent stabilization of
Afghanistan requires an Afghan-led peace and
reconciliation process that combines the legitimate
interests of all groups within Afghan society, including
those Taliban who want to break with their past. In that
context, Afghanistan and the world community have
defined seven clear principles for such a process,
showing unequivocally that peace cannot be had at any
price. However, participants were very clear that the
outcome of a peace and reconciliation process based on
those principles needed to be respected and supported
by the region. Regional support remains essential —
and a functional relationship with its closest neighbour,
Pakistan, even more so. The German delegation is fully
supportive of the new Istanbul Process to gradually
build and renew trust and confidence in the region.
Finally, the central role of the United Nations in
Afghanistan found much support and appreciation in
Bonn. While we are optimizing the United Nations
footprint in view of transition, Germany shares the
view expressed by the Secretary-General at the
Conference that the United Nations was active in
Afghanistan well before 2001, and will be needed in
Afghanistan long after 2014.
As my delegation has repeatedly said in this
Chamber, it is our common responsibility to ensure, in
the best possible way, the safety and security of United
Nations personnel, working under significant risks and

9

S/PV.6690

at the cost of personal sacrifice. Germany condemns in
the strongest of terms the attack against the United
Nations compound in Kandahar in late October and,
once more, expresses its sincere condolences.
Reminded by the report presented today, we strongly
call for respect for the humanitarian space in which
those who come to help the most vulnerable operate.

assassinations. Unfortunately, that has had challenging
impacts on the wider reconciliation process. Local
stakeholders and the international community should
therefore continue to support the process which, in our
view, is of crucial importance for the future of the
country. The dedication that we heard today is certainly
encouraging.

Before concluding, I wish to offer some remarks
on security. We remain concerned by the overall
volatility and the continued high level of violence. The
shocking Ashura attacks against innocent worshippers
this month are the latest example. However, despite an
increase in the visibility of attacks, the overall security
situation shows clear signs of stabilization. We believe
that a negative trend might have been halted. While
transition progresses, the international engagement
needs adaptation. As one element of the transformation
of the provincial reconstruction teams before they are
phased out, Germany has decided to place its team
under civilian leadership, the Faizabad team being the
first last week.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is deeply concerned
about the continued suffering of civilians. We have
learned that civilian deaths increased by 5 per cent
during the reporting period as compared to 2010. We
therefore reiterate our position that reconciliation is the
only way for Afghanistan to stop the suffering of
civilians.

Let me end by underlining once more the
gratitude of the German Government for its Afghan
partners, particularly President Karzai, Foreign
Minister Rassoul, Deputy Foreign Minister Ludin and
Ambassador Tanin here in New York, for their
outstanding cooperation in preparation for the Bonn
Conference. Germany highly values its close friendship
with Afghanistan and will continue to exert influence
in support of the bright future Afghanistan deserves.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, allow me to thank Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous, Deputy Foreign Minister Ludin and former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Staffan
de Mistura. We especially thank Mr. De Mistura for his
excellent work and for the cooperation we had from
him during our term in the Council.
It is encouraging to learn that the year-long
post-electoral disagreement has been overcome and
that the National Assembly is in session again. Steps
made towards the resolution of the Kabul Bank issue,
the nominations of the heads of the National
Directorate of Security and the Central Bank and a
member of the Independent Commission for the
Supervision of the Implementation of the Constitution
are signs of encouragement. However, during the
reporting period, the violence in Afghanistan increased
considerably, and was characterized by high-profile

10

With regard to security developments, we
reiterate our strong concern that in 2011 the average
number of monthly security-related incidents has
increased by 21 per cent as compared to 2010. But we
are encouraged by the transition of security
responsibilities to Afghan control, particularly with the
efficiency of its second phase which, once
accomplished, will cover over half of Afghanistan’s
population.
We fully share the view of many stakeholders in
Afghanistan that, in addition to the security gains, we
must pay strong attention to the socio-economic
aspects. We commend the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in its role in
ensuring the centrality of the Government in
development. The agreement reached during the
trilateral meeting between Turkey, Afghanistan and
Pakistan, which resulted in the creation of a
cooperative mechanism for investigating Professor
Rabbani’s murder, is an encouraging development in
Afghanistan’s relationship with two of its neighbours.
As we have always emphasized, regional
cooperation is of crucial importance for the stability of
the peace and prosperity of Afghanistan. We therefore
welcome and commend every step taken towards that
goal, including the organization by the Republic of
Turkey of the Istanbul Conference for Afghanistan,
which was held on 2 November. We hope that the
Istanbul Process will help to increase regional
cooperation and confidence-building. We strongly
support the organization and outcome of the
International Afghanistan Conference in Bonn on
5 December, which focused on the commitment to

11-64359

S/PV.6690

assist Afghanistan in and after the transition and to
reinforce the Kabul Process.

Ludin, whom I also thank for his briefing. Allow me to
make the following remarks.

With regard to human rights, we condemn the
torture of conflict-related detainees in Afghan prisons.
It is of great concern that between 35 and 46 per cent
of prisoners have been tortured, as it implies that
torture is systematic. We commend UNAMA’s work on
that important issue. We also commend the United
Nations for its continued support for the Afghan
Government in its implementation of the action plan on
the prevention of child recruitment and grave
violations committed against children.

We would like to reiterate our concern over the
continued prevalence of difficult security conditions
through Afghanistan, which is the main source of
concern for Afghans and the international community.
We also condemn the civilian casualties and the attacks
that have targeted Afghan and international forces and
staff of the United Nations and other international
organizations, particularly humanitarian organizations.
We call upon all parties to fully abide by the rules of
international humanitarian law.

With regard to the implementation of the Kabul
process and aid coherence, we are glad to learn that the
process has advanced and that the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) and the Government of
Afghanistan have successfully concluded negotiations
on the IMF programme for Afghanistan, which we
hope will improve economic growth, human
development and public service delivery.

Lebanon is convinced that a successful solution
for Afghanistan requires two basic elements.

With regard to the development of humanitarian
assistance, we strongly support the addition of seven
new areas to the current set of priorities — for
example, capacity development, youth, population
issues, the reintegration of returnees and natural
resource management — in the United Nations
development assistance framework.
With that in mind, Bosnia and Herzegovina
reiterates its concern over the situation of internally
displaced persons in the country. We call upon the
international community and Afghan authorities to
provide vulnerable populations with the necessary
support to facilitate their integration.
Finally, we would like to express our gratitude to
former Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Staffan de Mistura and to the staff of UNAMA for their
valuable work aimed at building peace and stability in
Afghanistan. Bosnia and Herzegovina will always
stand by the Afghan people and is ready to continue to
provide its concrete and tangible support to peace and
stability in the country by participating in international
efforts to that end.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to thank Mr. Hervé Ladsous and Mr. Staffan
de Mistura for their briefings. I also welcome Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan Jawed

11-64359

The first is national reconciliation among all
sectors of Afghan society, because the future and the
destiny of the Afghan people will depend upon
coexistence
and
shared
governance
and
responsibilities. Experience has proven that eliminating
any sector of society is impossible and that diversity
within the framework of national unity is the genuine
formula for peace. Therefore, my country calls for
successful confidence-building measures among the
relevant stakeholders in order to reinvigorate dialogue
and
reconciliation,
especially
following
the
assassination of the former President and head of the
High Peace Council, Burhanuddin Rabbani.
Secondly, strengthened bilateral and multilateral
relations between Afghanistan and its neighbouring
countries, based upon good-neighbourliness and
mutual trust for the sovereignty and independence of
States, would contribute towards ensuring sustainable
security and stability of Afghanistan and its
surrounding countries, as well as economic integration.
It would also help to put an end to the two scourges of
the drug trade and terrorism.
On the other hand, in the light of the SecretaryGeneral’s report, Lebanon welcomes the efforts made
to improve socio-economic development, enhance
transparency, combat corruption and to eliminate
illiteracy, in particular among Afghan women. Such
efforts will facilitate realization of the requirements of
a modern, democratic State and long-term stability.
However, my country is concerned by the reports
of widespread mistreatment and torture of detainees
and the exploitation and increasing incidence of killing
and maiming of children. We call upon the United

11

S/PV.6690

Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan to continue
to exert its utmost effort to end those violations.
Lebanon welcomes what was agreed upon at the
Istanbul Conference for Afghanistan, which was held
on 2 November and which resulted in the adoption of
the Istanbul Process on Regional Security and
Cooperation for a Secure and Stable Afghanistan. The
Istanbul Conference affirmed the active, regional
vision that forms the basis for enhanced cooperation in
the region on many issues, especially with regard to
security.
We also welcome the commitments made by the
international community and the Afghan Government
in the Bonn Conference held at the beginning of the
month, aimed at the peace process, regional
cooperation, governance, security and development.
It is important for the international community to
continue to support Afghanistan after completion of the
transfer of security responsibilities to Afghan
authorities in 2014 in a manner that will guarantee
Afghanistan’s territorial integrity and independence
while continuing to strengthen its capabilities and
ensure prosperity.
In conclusion, Lebanon would like to express its
genuine appreciation for the efforts of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Staffan de
Mistura and the rest of the United Nations staff who
have worked under extremely difficult conditions to
serve Afghanistan. Mr. De Mistura had previously
served in Lebanon and Iraq and has demonstrated the
same level of dedication and effort in his service to
achieve the laudable objectives of the United Nations.
We wish him every success in his new duties. We also
wish his successor, Mr. Ján Kubiš, every success.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by thanking Mr. Hervé Ladsous for
his concise and comprehensive briefing of the Council
on the situation in Afghanistan and on the prospects for
the transition process. I welcome Mr. Jawed Ludin,
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan,
and thank him for his analysis today. A special
welcome goes to our friend Staffan de Mistura. I would
like to praise his work, because his competence, his
commitment and the personal dedication he has shown
deserve all our recognition and gratitude. He will
assume new responsibilities in his Government, and we
wish him the best.

12

We are heartened by the progress of the transition
process towards Afghan responsibility and leadership
with respect to security. There has been a significant
broadening of the areas where work is under way to
enable the Afghan forces to assume control functions
as 2014 approaches. It is essential to make firm
progress in the transition to Afghan responsibility in
security matters within the agreed timetable. Here, the
endeavours of the International Security Assistance
Force and the NATO Training Mission for Afghanistan
constitute an important contribution to increase the
capacity and professionalism of the Afghan police and
security forces.
Colombia again acknowledges of the contribution
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) to the stabilization and
democratization process and its determination to work
in coordination with the Government to establish the
bases for sustainable peace and development in
Afghanistan.
In the framework of its mandate, UNAMA must
continue to focus its efforts on critical aspects to
facilitate the political process for peace and
reconciliation,
security,
governance,
economic
development and regional cooperation. The United
Nations must continue its central role in coordinating
international efforts with the national authorities to
ensure consistency with the identified priorities for
Afghanistan and to avoid duplication of efforts.
We agree with the Secretary-General that the
scope of the transition process must be broadened. It
must be acknowledged that the progress in security
could be affected by weaknesses in socio-economic
development, governance and rule of law. It is
therefore imperative to maintain a balanced focus that
takes into account not only security, but also improving
the living conditions of the Afghan people.
Unfortunately, violence remains one of the main
factors affecting the Afghan people. Although the
number of security incidents has declined, we are
concerned by the increased number of civilian victims
and of humanitarian needs. We reiterate our call on all
parties to the conflict to fulfil their obligations under
international humanitarian law and human rights and to
take all measures necessary to ensure the protection of
civilians. Selective killings and the use of improvised
explosive devices do not contribute to the process of
dialogue and reconciliation. It is important that all

11-64359

S/PV.6690

parties to show clear signs of commitment to the
process to which the Afghan Government is
committed.
In the recent conference held in Bonn, referred to
by my colleagues and the speakers, the international
community renewed its resolve to work for a stable,
democratic and prosperous Afghanistan. We welcome
the many commitments reached on issues of
governance, security, the peace process, economic
development and regional cooperation. We agree that
an inclusive peace and reconciliation process must be
based on principles of Afghan leadership and
ownership, respect for the sovereignty and unity of
Afghanistan, respect for the Constitution and the
rejection of violence and terrorism.
Here, regional cooperation is of vital importance.
We emphasize the many bilateral and subregional
initiatives to resolve in a friendly fashion the various
humanitarian and security problems besetting
Afghanistan and its neighbours.
The consensus on deepening and broadening the
relation between Afghanistan and the international
community, which will guide the 2015-2024
Transformation Decade adopted in Bonn, must
contribute to strengthening the State and its ability to
meet the aspirations and needs of its people. The
international commitment towards Afghanistan in the
medium- and long-term should include the
strengthening of institutions, the creation of jobs and
economic opportunities and both the implementation of
justice and access to it. A sustainable transition
requires a State structure capable of guaranteeing
governability and economic stability at both the
regional and the national levels. Those are the
fundamental elements to guarantee a definitive
transition, which should be the goal of international
cooperation in Afghanistan.
Lastly, I would like to welcome to Mr. Ján Kubiš,
to whom we offer all our support as he assumes his
new duties.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
would like to welcome Deputy Foreign Minister Ludin
to the Council today and to thank him for sharing his
views with us. I would also like to thank UnderSecretary-General Ladsous for his briefing this
morning.

11-64359

Let me take a moment to express our deep
gratitude to outgoing Special Representative Staffan de
Mistura for his dedicated service and able leadership in
Afghanistan. Mr. De Mistura will be missed. We are
indebted to him and his staff for the important work
done under considerable hardship for the benefit of the
Afghan people on behalf of all Member States. I would
also like to welcome the Secretary-General’s decision
to appoint Ján Kubiš as the next Special Representative
for Afghanistan. Mr. Kubiš has a distinguished record
in international affairs and we assure him of the full
support of the United States.
Today, I would like to discuss how the
Government of Afghanistan is increasingly exercising
its sovereign authority. I would also like to say a few
words about the United States-Afghan bilateral
relationship and how the work of the international
community has affected the lives of average Afghans.
In the past few months, we saw noteworthy
Afghan leadership in the establishment of the Istanbul
Process on Regional Security and Cooperation and in
chairing the Bonn Conference. We support the Istanbul
Process and note the important role of the United
Nations in backing regional efforts to implement the
commitments and confidence-building measures agreed
to in Istanbul. In Bonn, 86 countries and 15 international
organizations affirmed their commitments to help
Afghanistan set out a blueprint for a transformation
decade in post-transition Afghanistan. We applaud the
international community’s resolve to help Afghanistan
secure the gains of the past 10 years and to make
transition irreversible. It is especially important that, in
both Istanbul and Bonn, the region and the broader
international community pledged their support to
Afghan-led reconciliation that is inclusive and
represents the legitimate interests of all the people of
Afghanistan, regardless of gender or social status. The
international community also underscored that
reconciliation must include the reaffirmation of a
sovereign, stable and united Afghanistan, the
renunciation of violence, the breaking of ties to
international terrorism, and respect for the Afghan
constitution.
As we look towards the NATO summit in
Chicago in May 2012, the international community
will continue efforts to support the Afghan people as
they begin the second tranche of a security transition.
The NATO summit and the foreign ministers’ meeting
to be held in Tokyo in July will be important

13

S/PV.6690

opportunities to review progress and clarify plans for
supporting Afghanistan into the transformation decade.
From a bilateral perspective, we look forward to
further progress on the United States-Afghan strategic
partnership document. The post-2014 United States
presence will be determined in close consultation with
the Afghan Government, but, to make two points clear
in advance, the United States is not seeking permanent
military bases in Afghanistan, and our strategic
partnership is not aimed at any of Afghanistan’s
neighbours.
As we look forward, let us not forget that much
has already been accomplished to help improve the
lives of Afghan citizens. The recent release of the
Afghanistan mortality survey shows very encouraging
signs about the work of the World Health Organization,
the United States Agency for International
Development and other international partners. More
children are living past their fifth birthday than at any
time in the past. The percentage of women seeking
medical care and advice for their newborns increased
from 16 to 60 per cent between 2003 and 2010.
Improved maternal health has led to a decline in female
adult mortality of about one-third over the past decade.
Household living standards have improved, with more
Afghan families reporting access to clean water and
electricity and to better sanitation facilities. Life
expectancy at birth has increased to 62. The death rate
among men aged 15 to 59 has approximately been
halved over the past 10 years. With donor support,
most Afghans now live within two hours’ walking
distance from a health facility.
We look forward to the comprehensive review of
the work of the United Nations in the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We
want to continue to improve and consolidate service
delivery from all United Nations agencies in
Afghanistan and to strengthen UNAMA’s support for
the country through transition and beyond. UNAMA’s
role will continue to evolve as Afghan ownership
increases, but there can be no doubt of the continuing
importance of the work of the United Nations. We
welcome Special Representative Kubiš’s input on his
priorities and vision for the mission and look forward
to discussions on how the international community can
best support UNAMA.
During the past few months, Afghanistan has
demonstrated its vision for the nation’s future as a

14

stable country ready to move from transition to
transformation and to contribute to peace and stability
in the region. The United States remains committed to
supporting Afghanistan in continuing our partnership
through 2014 and beyond.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): I would like to
join others in welcoming His Excellency Mr. Jawed
Ludin, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan, and to thank him very much for his
comprehensive statement. I would also like to thank
the
Secretary-General
for
his
latest
report
(S/2011/772*). We are very appreciative of the
briefings by Under-Secretary-General Ladsous and
Mr. Staffan de Mistura. I would also like to join others
in appreciating all the work that Mr. De Mistura has
done in Afghanistan and to congratulate him on his
new appointment as undersecretary at the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs in his country.
We are pleased that the Bonn Conference was
well attended. We would like to congratulate
Afghanistan for its outstanding chairmanship and to
thank Germany for hosting that important Conference.
Coming close on the heels of the Istanbul Conference,
which provided new and better regional cooperation,
the Bonn Conference provided an opportunity to
comprehensively review developments in Afghanistan
during the past decade and to chart the collective
vision of the international community for the future.
The outcome, as embodied in the Bonn
Conference conclusions, is an expression of the
international community’s determination and political
commitment to sustained long-term engagement with
Afghanistan. To realize that vision, we need to back up
our commitments with more resources and actions. If
the Afghan Government assumes full ownership, it also
needs support for economic development. We hope that
the upcoming conferences in 2012 — the Chicago
conference on security in May, the Kabul conference
on regional cooperation in June and the Tokyo
conference on development in July — will ensure the
continued engagement of the international community
in Afghanistan’s growth.
Afghanistan today faces at least four deficits,
primarily with respect to security, governance,
development and investment. Afghanistan will require
enormous assistance for a long time if it is to
adequately address those four deficits. There is real
danger that, as international forces withdraw from a

11-64359

S/PV.6690

combat role and in numbers, there will be a transition
recession, namely, that attention and aid will decline
just when Afghan Government security demands
increase. It is important that we draw the right lessons
from our past mistakes. We should not let Afghanistan
slip back. We need to avert the possibility that
Afghanistan could be let down or made to feel
abandoned by a withdrawal of assistance, both in terms
of quantity and in quality post-2014. Afghanistan’s
security can only be ensured through non-interference
in its internal affairs.
Concerted international and regional efforts are
imperative for laying the foundations of lasting peace
and stability in Afghanistan. It is important that the
ongoing transition remain Afghan-owned and that it be
carried out in a systematic manner, taking into account
the realities on the ground. The transition must be
multifaceted and should ensure the protection and
promotion of the human rights of all Afghans and lead
to strengthening of the Afghan State and its
institutions.
First and foremost, Afghanistan needs assistance
and support to build its capacity to tackle the critical
challenges of terrorism, including suicide terrorism, the
religious extremism that fuels it and the drug
trafficking that sustains it. We are seriously concerned
that the insurgency remains resilient. There has been
no let-up in terrorist violence, and the security gains
are still tenuous. Besides the targeting of high-profile
political and public figures, innocent civilians have
been repeatedly targeted by the Taliban, even on
solemn and auspicious occasions.
As we have repeatedly highlighted, terrorism
finds sustenance and support from a dangerous osmosis
of ideologies, ambitions, training and operations
among the syndicates of terrorism in the region, with
suicide terrorism as its main technique and targets not
limited to Afghanistan. We need concerted action to
isolate and root out the syndicate of terrorism, which
includes elements of Al-Qaida, the Taliban, Lashkare-Taiba and other terrorist and extremist groups,
operating mainly from outside Afghanistan’s borders.
The groups are ideologically and operationally fused,
and their bonds have strengthened over the years. We
need resolute determination and political will to deal
firmly with safe havens for terrorist groups outside
Afghanistan’s borders in the region.

11-64359

Our vision for the period of transition must also
take into account the conditions on the ground and the
capacity of Afghanistan’s security forces to preserve
the sovereignty, independence and integrity of the
nation. We support further strengthening of the Afghan
National Security Forces, which must go hand in hand
with strengthening their training and equipping and
with financing and developing their capabilities
beyond the transition period.
In addition to security, we also need concomitant
progress on the development front. That requires
market access, foreign investment and a coherent
international economic strategy for Afghanistan. It also
implies greater coordination and further streamlining
of the international community’s development-related
efforts, including aligning assistance with Afghanistan
national priorities.
India
has
age-old
historical,
cultural,
civilizational and economic ties with neighbouring
Afghanistan. During the past decade our relationship
has been renewed and consolidated by India’s
contribution to the rebuilding and reconstruction of
Afghanistan. India fully supports a genuinely Afghanled, Afghan-owned and Afghan-driven peace and
reconciliation process — as opposed to an
internationally led process — accompanied by an
inclusive political process and intra-Afghan dialogue
with those who renounce violence, cut off ties to
terrorist groups, abide by the Afghan Constitution and
are committed to the protection of human rights,
including the rights of women.
India believes in a strong, independent,
sovereign, stable, united, democratic and prosperous
Afghanistan, at peace with itself and its neighbours.
Recent history has shown that an end to Afghanistan’s
suffering requires an end to external interference in its
internal affairs. India has pledged up to $2 billion in
development and humanitarian assistance and signed a
comprehensive strategic partnership agreement with
Afghanistan in October, looking at 2014 and beyond.
The agreement creates an institutional framework for
our future cooperation in the fields of political and
security issues, trade and economy, capacity-building
and education and social, cultural, civil society and
people-to-people relations.
We offer our growing market to Afghanistan’s
products. Last month, India announced the virtual
elimination of sensitive lists affecting exports from all

15

S/PV.6690

least developed countries in the South Asian region to
India. India is assisting Afghanistan in building an
agricultural university to tap the potential of
agriculture in Afghanistan. We have extended our
assistance to Afghanistan for capacity-building and
increased the number of civil scholarships offered to
Afghanistan, so as to enable more students from
Afghanistan to get the requisite training in art, culture,
technology and other areas in order to further the
process of nation-building in Afghanistan.
We are also prepared to make long-term
investments in Afghanistan. Indian companies are
willing to invest up to $10 billion in the mining sector
and in setting up a steel plant and related infrastructure
in Afghanistan. Recently, an Indian consortium was
awarded mining rights for three blocks of the Hajigak
iron ore deposits by the Government of Afghanistan.
Those are concrete manifestations of our longterm political commitment to Afghanistan. If others do
the same, we could set off a virtuous cycle of healthy
economic development in Afghanistan that benefits
Afghanistan and the region and start, as President
Karzai has called it, a cooperative, rather than a
competitive, great game in the region.
Afghanistan’s growth strategy is built on the
country’s comparative advantage consisting of
abundant natural resources and its strategic
geographical location. We see Afghanistan as a hub
linking the Middle East, West Asia, Central Asia and
South Asia through trade and transit routes, railways
and highways, energy pipelines and electricity
networks, economic projects and cross-investments. It
is our expectation that such cooperation would not only
be at the intergovernmental level but would also
involve civil society and business as stakeholders.
The greatest need today is for the Afghan people
to have peace and stability. They deserve to live in
peace and to decide their future themselves, without
outside interference, coercion and intimidation. All
countries of the region must work to facilitate that. The
international community as a whole needs to work with
renewed vigour and unity of purpose towards
strengthening the efforts of the Afghan Government in
seeking solutions that are inclusive and led by the
Afghan people themselves.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that India
appreciates and supports the good work being done by
UNAMA. I would also like to welcome the new

16

Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ján
Kubiš, and to assure him of our full support.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I want to join others in
acknowledging the presence of Deputy Foreign
Minister Ludin and to thank him very much for his
inspiring statement. I would also like to thank former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Staffan de Mistura, not only for his remarkable success
but especially for the confidence that he demonstrates
for the future of Afghanistan. I also want to thank
Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous
for
his
comprehensive briefing.
This morning my intervention will focus on three
areas — security, political development and economic
and regional development. We are gratified to hear
about the concerted and strenuous efforts to sustain
peace and stability in Afghanistan. However, the
continuing security situation remains a cause for
concern. Recent reports of insurgencies across the
Afghan borders, incidents of civilian casualties and
targeted high-profile assassinations, especially the
assassination of Professor Rabbani, former Afghan
President and Chair of the High Peace Council,
threaten to decimate the fragile peace and stability
achieved over the years.
The wave of bombings across three cities, which
killed 52 people, as the country shared celebrations of
Ashura, signals the disturbing sectarian undertone of
the continuing violence. Against that backdrop, the
November 2011 World Bank Report draws a direct
correlation between the planned 2014 withdrawal of
foreign troops and a potential economic recession or
collapse in Afghanistan. The report predicts that
Afghanistan would suffer a recession in 2014, after
foreign troops leave and aid dwindles and that if the
security situation gets worse the country could face
complete economic collapse.
Given the formidable security challenges still
confronting the country, we face the critical task of
finding a compromise between the planned withdrawal
of troops and President Karzai’s request for security
support well into 2024. The need to proceed in a
manner that assures the strengthening of the Afghan
National Security Forces (ANSF) and preserves the
fragile peace cannot be overemphasized. The military
plan for the interim period should therefore focus on
sustained training of the ANSF. We identify with the
plan to increase the size of the Forces. The

11-64359

S/PV.6690

Government of Afghanistan must ensure, however, that
the necessary safeguards are in place within the
transition period to guarantee the ability of the ANSF
to assume full control over Afghan security. The
international community, for its part, must throw its
weight behind the Afghan Government, if the crucial
fight against terrorism is to be won.
In the political arena, Nigeria welcomes the
continuing progress in the reconciliation and
reintegration efforts in Afghanistan, despite the
cyclical violence, especially in the south and the east
of the country. In order to forge the national unity
envisaged within the larger political framework, the
peace process must continue to be Afghan-driven. In
that connection, we welcome the resumption of
parliamentary activities and the recent confirmation by
the National Assembly of key appointments, including
that of a member of the Independent Commission for
the Supervision of the Implementation of the
Constitution.
The resolution of the impasse in the National
Assembly is a clear indication that Afghanistan’s
nascent democracy is gradually taking root. The search
for a comprehensive peace in Afghanistan within a
reasonable time frame also requires progress in efforts
to resume peace talks with moderate elements of the
Taliban. Notwithstanding the inclusiveness of its
discussions at the November meeting, the Loya Jirga
must work harder to find a way forward on the issue.
On the economic and regional development
fronts, we would like to encourage the implementation
of a well-articulated economic policy that will sustain
economic growth and the development of Afghan
society. As we invest substantially in the security
sector, we must also increase our financial
contributions to strengthen the country’s economic
base, so as to avoid its collapse. Emphasis should be
placed on the strengthening of institutions, particularly
at the subnational level, the creation of jobs and
economic opportunities and the delivery of basic
amenities.
Long-term international support and privatesector investment will enhance revenue generation and
propel economic activities. For greater coherence and
efficiency, we underline the need to continue
channelling funds and other forms of assistance
through the Afghan budget system. The commitment
demonstrated by international partners in the Istanbul

11-64359

and Bonn Conferences to long-term support for
Afghanistan beyond 2014 is very encouraging.
However, concrete measures must be taken to follow
up on those commitments.
We commend the Government of Afghanistan for
the enormous strides it has made towards regional
cooperation. The improved dialogue and cooperation
among its neighbours has led to the implementation of
several joint commissions related to bilateral trade and
the exchange of information that could improve
synergy in efforts to fight illicit trafficking in drugs,
arms and human beings, as well as organized crime. In
that regard, we welcome the formation of the
Afghanistan-Pakistan
Joint
Commission
on
Reconciliation and Peace. We also endorse the
tripartite meetings of Afghanistan, Pakistan and the
United States. We hope that those forums will provide
the necessary springboard for addressing both the
internal and the external dimensions of the conflict.
In conclusion, we wish to extend our deep
appreciation to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General de Mistura for his characteristic
exceptional leadership. We owe a great debt to the staff
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan and all United Nations personnel for their
remarkable commitment to building a sustainable and
democratic Afghanistan. We look forward to a
productive working relationship with the SecretaryGeneral’s incoming Special Representative, Mr. Ján
Kubiš.
In its transition towards assuming full
responsibility for its political and economic future, we
assure the Government of Afghanistan of Nigeria’s
support for, and commitment to, the legitimate causes
of both the Government and the people of Afghanistan.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2011/772*) and
welcome the presence here today of Mr. Jawed Ludin,
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan. I
would also like to congratulate Mr. Ján Kubiš on his
appointment as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We
hope that he is able to swiftly take over his new duties
and reiterate that he can rely on France’s support. I
wish, of course, to thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his
work and again express to him our strongest friendship
and esteem.

17

S/PV.6690

I endorse the statement to be delivered by the
observer of the European Union and will limit my
statement to three points: the deteriorating regional
environment, our shared objectives and the role of the
United Nations in achieving those objectives.
First, with regard to the deteriorating conditions
in the regional environment, it is paradoxical that the
regional climate has deteriorated in an alarming
fashion, while progress has been made in Afghanistan.
For example, the Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board met after a one-year hiatus, a Peace Jirga was
held in an atmosphere of calm, Parliament resumed
activities after several months of stalemate and the
transition process continued, with many municipalities
and districts having been selected for the second
tranche of that process. Another example of progress is
the recapitalization of the Kabul Bank, which meant
that the International Monetary Fund could resume its
country programme.
Notwithstanding that, the regional climate has
deteriorated. Since 2008, France has championed
efforts to enhance regional cooperation, for example by
holding the ministerial meeting in La Celle SaintCloud. Afghanistan must again become a centre for
productive trade, as it had been in the past. The States
of Central Asia understood that, as did the countries
that met in September in New York to discuss a vision
for the New Silk Road. The region needs a collective
security system to fight the scourge of terrorism and
establish specific confidence-building measures
between Afghanistan and its neighbours.
During the Istanbul Conference, which also dealt
with regional security and cooperation, Afghanistan
and its neighbouring countries stated that they were
willing to work on confidence-building measures to
bring about peace and security in Afghanistan and in
the region. The countries of the region must make
specific and binding commitments in preparation for
the meeting to be held in Kabul in June 2012.
Secondly, with regard to our objectives, the goal
of the international community and Afghanistan will
continue to be the country’s lasting stability and the
Afghan people’s ownership of their national destiny.
Transition is already a reality for half of the country’s
people. The foreign presence in Afghanistan will
evolve so as to support the build-up of the Afghan
National Security Forces. France, for its part, will

18

reduce and redeploy its contingent in consultation with
our allies and the Afghan authorities.
A cooperation agreement between France and
Afghanistan, which is being concluded, will address
the build-up of the civilian component of our work. In
Bonn, on 5 December, we entered into mutual
agreements for the 2015-2024 Transformation Decade,
which will follow up on the transition process and be
consistent with the commitments made in Kabul in
2010. I should like to congratulate Germany and
Afghanistan for the success of that important event and
support the statement to be made in that regard by the
President of the Security Council.
We remain determined to prevent Afghanistan
from again becoming a haven for international
terrorism. The real but residual presence of elements
linked to Al-Qaida in Afghanistan and in the Pakistani
tribal areas is a reminder that the danger still persists,
even though it is nothing like it was 10 years ago. The
perpetrators of the recent attacks, in particular on the
Day of Ashura, and the killers of Professor
Burhanuddin Rabbani must be condemned and brought
to justice. There is room for those who wish to lay
down their arms and rejoin the Afghan constitutional
framework. For a lasting and fair peace, inter-Afghan
reconciliation must be inclusive, offer an equitable
place in Afghan society to its various components, and
respect human rights.
Thirdly, with regard the role of the United
Nations, we firmly believe that the Organization in
general and UNAMA in particular have a major role to
play in Afghanistan in the years to come. The success
of the transformation depends to a large degree on
UNAMA’s success. We therefore await with interest
the results of the current review. The United Nations
must continue to support democratic governance,
particularly in the areas of support for the electoral
process and for strengthening the rule of law and
respect for human rights. It must also support the
national and regional aspects of the peace process and
coordinate the work of the United Nations with the
assistance provided by the international community.
The fight against drug trafficking should remain central
to the work of specialized entities, particularly the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, with
support from UNAMA.
We cannot expect everything from the United
Nations after 2014, but, given the challenges that await

11-64359

S/PV.6690

Afghanistan, it is essential that we reaffirm our support
for a strong Mission in order to sustain the
transformation towards a peaceful, stable, prosperous
and regionally integrated Afghanistan.
Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2011/772*) on the situation in Afghanistan. We
acknowledge the presence here of the Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan and thank him for
his briefing. We also thank Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous and Mr. Staffan de Mistura for bringing us up
to date on the situation.
My delegation also welcomes the conclusions of
the International Afghanistan Conference that took
place in Bonn on 5 December, and we thank Germany
for that initiative.
My delegation would like first and foremost to
comment on the subject of the full implementation of
all the pillars of the transformation and transition
process through 2024. Afghanistan, which has resumed
responsibility for its own stabilization and
peacebuilding, must deal with the security challenges it
will face after the international forces leave. While
aware that 2011 has been a particularly difficult year
for Afghanistan, we commend the progress that has
been made in the political arena. The national dialogue
that we have continued to urge for is now a reality,
through an active parliament that is already preparing
to implement the Kabul process. That dialogue must
become more inclusive and more united. While we are
well aware that not all parties are participating
effectively, we continue to call on all parties to take
part in the transition process.
With regard to security, my delegation strongly
condemns the recent terrorist attacks on 6 December in
Kabul and Mazar-e-Sharif. Once again, we extend our
condolences to the families of the deceased and our
hopes for a speedy recovery for the injured. Such
attacks are unacceptable. But we want to encourage the
Afghan Government and people in their determination
and resilience, for the transition will have to endure
other security challenges. We continue to encourage
dialogue by means of existing instruments, particularly
the High Peace Council, and we urge the renunciation
of violence and terrorism. Similarly, we must
remember the importance of strengthening the capacity
of the Afghan local police in order to better protect
civilians, especially women and children, the most

11-64359

vulnerable. Finally, we encourage respect for the rule
of law and call for the perpetrators of terrorist acts to
be brought to justice.
With regard to economic and social matters, we
encourage the Afghan Government to restore its
people’s confidence in their State by strengthening
good governance. Afghanistan needs determined effort
in order to rebuild a sustainable economy. We
congratulate it on its good relations with its neighbours
and commend the various cooperation agreements
reached with those countries on trade, industry and
energy, aimed at restoring Afghanistan’s economy and
improving growth.
We of course support the role played by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and other United Nations bodies. As
Mr. Ladsous emphasized, it is important that we
continue to consider the future role of the United
Nations, particularly in the area of development. In that
regard, we should commend all the efforts undertaken
to meet the Millennium Development Goals,
particularly the finalization of the reproductive health
strategy plan and the successful polio vaccination plan
in southern Afghanistan. Finally, we welcome the
strengthening of the renewed partnership and
cooperation between Afghanistan and the various
international financial institutions, particularly the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
In conclusion, we would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, and to wish him all the best in his new
position at home. We also wish every success in his
mandate for his successor, Mr. Ján Kubiš. We support
UNAMA and all renewals of its mandate needed to
reinforce the international community’s efforts towards
transition and transformation.
We associate ourselves with and support the draft
presidential statement to be made later in this debate.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Ladsous
for his briefing and to welcome Deputy Foreign
Minister Ludin to our meeting. I would also like to
thank Mr. De Mistura for his briefing.
The Bonn Conference on 5 December was a
significant international event in Afghanistan’s current
period of transition. Its results were positive and
decided that at the conclusion of transition in 2014,

19

S/PV.6690

Afghanistan would enter the Transformation Decade of
2015-2024 and the international community would
continue to help and support it. We welcome that
decision.
Achieving
comprehensive
stability
and
reconstruction in Afghanistan is a long-term process
that will require the unremitting efforts of the Afghan
people and their Government, as well as the continued
support and help of the international community. In
that regard, I would like to emphasize the following
five points.
First, China supports the peaceful reconstruction
of an Afghanistan run and owned by Afghans.
Afghanistan’s gradual takeover of the responsibility for
maintaining national security conforms to that
principle. However, when drawing down troops, the
parties concerned must ensure Afghanistan’s security
and proceed responsibly, while making efforts to help
Afghanistan build capacity in the security area.
Secondly, China supports the peace and
reintegration process led by the Afghan Government.
We welcome the decision of the Loya Jirga in that
regard, and hope that Afghanistan will continue to
work towards promoting national reconciliation and
creating an environment favourable to it, in order to
make progress with the peace and reintegration
programme.
Thirdly,
China
supports Afghanistan
in
continuing with the Kabul process. The international
community’s efforts to improve the security situation
in Afghanistan and the living standards of the Afghan
people should complement each other. The parties
concerned should effectively fulfil their commitment to
assisting Afghanistan, support the country in
developing its economy and enhance its capacity for
sustainable development.
Fourthly, China firmly supports Afghanistan’s
developing external relations on the basis of mutual
respect, equality and mutual benefit, especially in
strengthening
good-neighbourly
relations
with
countries of its region. Relevant regional cooperation
initiatives should fully respect the sovereignty and
autonomy of Afghanistan, involve the wide
participation of countries of its region, respect the
legitimate concerns of such countries and proceed on
the basis of agreements reached after full consultations
among all sides.

20

Fifthly, China appreciates the positive efforts
made by the United Nations to advance the peaceful
reconstruction of Afghanistan. We hope that the review
of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) will help to
strengthen the central role of the United Nations in
coordinating the efforts of the international community
to assist Afghanistan. In the review process, we hope
that the United Nations will strengthen coordination
with Afghanistan and listen to and respect its views.
China wishes to express its appreciation and
gratitude to Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his outstanding
work as the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral.
China has been committed to the development of
a good-neighbourly relationship with Afghanistan. We
attach importance to and take an active part in Afghan
reconstruction. Our Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Yang Jiechi, led the Chinese delegation to the
Bonn Conference, where he comprehensively
elaborated on China’s views and proposals regarding
the situation in the country and announced an
additional ¥150 million in gratis assistance to
Afghanistan. We will continue to provide help to
Afghanistan as our capacities permit, and we are
willing to work together with the international
community to contribute to the early realization of
peace, stability and development of the country.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I wish
to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2011/772*) and Under-Secretary-General Hervé
Ladsous for his briefing this morning. I would also
thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his valedictory
comments. My thanks also go to Deputy Foreign
Minister Jawed Ludin for his interesting and insightful
comments.
I will focus my statement today on the landscape
up to and beyond 2014, but let me begin by expressing
my condolences on the loss of innocent lives in the
suicide attacks of 6 December. The United Kingdom
strongly condemns such atrocities, but we are clear that
these acts of terrorism will not undermine the
international community’s commitment to Afghanistan.
This year’s achievements on Afghanistan were
brought together in the Bonn Conference. The
international community came together at Bonn to send
a strong signal of its long-term commitment to
Afghanistan beyond the transition process. We

11-64359

S/PV.6690

congratulate Germany
successful Conference.

and

Afghanistan

for

the

I would like to highlight four of the key elements
of the blueprint that was agreed.
First, the international community reaffirmed its
readiness to support the Afghan Government in
developing the country’s economy. International
partners will direct financial support to Afghanistan to
help it achieve self-sustainability. We will work with
the Afghan Government and international partners on
detailed plans, which we hope to discuss at the Tokyo
Conference in July 2012. Alongside that, we welcome
the Afghan Government’s commitment to revitalize the
reform process agreed in Kabul last year and to
accelerate progress on the key development priorities.
Secondly, participants agreed to produce a clear
plan for the future structure and funding of the Afghan
National Security Forces beyond 2014, in advance of
the NATO Chicago summit next May.
Thirdly, the conclusions set out an agreed set of
guiding principles for the reconciliation process and its
outcomes. That builds on the recent traditional Loya
Jirga and the agreement there to an inclusive,
representative peace process.
Fourthly, the Conference also reinforced the
importance of regional engagement alongside wider
international support for Afghanistan, building on the
successful Istanbul Conference in November.
Combined, those elements provide a clear
framework for future partnership between the Afghan
Government and the international community beyond
2014. We must now ensure that we honour these
commitments as we enter the Transformation Decade
and enable Afghanistan to build on its hard-won gains
over the last ten years.
Underpinning the progress is the ongoing
transition process. The United Kingdom welcomes
President Karzai’s announcement on 27 November that
the second set of provinces and districts are to begin
security transition. The Afghans are well on track to
take lead responsibility for security across the country
by the end of 2014.
The protection of the Afghan civilian population
is at the core of the military strategy, and the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) is
working extremely hard to reduce the levels of civilian

11-64359

casualties. There are strict procedures in place, both to
minimize the risk of casualties occurring and to
investigate any incidents that do happen. The vast
majority of civilian deaths — some 77 per cent,
according to the latest figures — are caused by the
insurgents. There is a key difference: ISAF places a
high priority on reducing and preventing civilian
casualties; the insurgency, in contrast, targets civilians
indiscriminately.
A further step on the path to full Afghan
sovereignty is the importance of enabling key reforms
to support economic self-sustainability. We therefore
welcome the agreement between the Government of
Afghanistan and the International Monetary Fund on a
new programme of support. That decision shows that
the Afghan Government has made progress in
reassuring international donors and ordinary Afghans
alike that they are serious about providing a safe
economic and business environment.
As we go forward, it is critical that the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
continues to play a key role, supporting the emergence
of a secure and self-sustainable Afghan State. We look
forward to the results of the review of UNAMA and
associated United Nations activities. In particular, the
United Kingdom emphasizes the critical importance of
UNAMA’s role in, first, supporting the Government of
Afghanistan in strengthening the electoral process and
framework; second, coordinating rule of law
initiatives;
and
third,
encouraging
regional
cooperation.
I would like to end by expressing the United
Kingdom’s warm appreciation for the outstanding work
carried out by the outgoing Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Staffan de Mistura. We also
greatly welcome the appointment of the new Special
Representative, Ján Kubiš, and look forward to
working closely with him.
We agree to the draft presidential statement.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We thank UnderSecretary-General Ladsous for introducing the
quarterly report of the Secretary-General on
Afghanistan (S/2011/772*). We also thank the former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his invaluable assessments.
We thank him for the dedication and commitment he
showed during his tenure as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General. South Africa appreciates the

21

S/PV.6690

participation of the Deputy Foreign Minister of
Afghanistan, His Excellency Mr. Ludin, in today’s
meeting and thanks him for his statement. We
congratulate Mr. Ján Kubiš on his appointment as the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and pledge our support for him.
Afghanistan continues to face numerous political,
security and humanitarian challenges. South Africa
supports the concerted efforts of the Afghan
Government to address those challenges, with the
sustained assistance of the international community.
The International Conference on Afghanistan held in
earlier this month in Bonn, in which South Africa
participated, again signaled the resolve of the
international community to support the Government
and the people of Afghanistan beyond 2014 in
consolidating their transition to peace and stability.
My delegation is pleased to note that the National
Assembly resumed its functions on 8 October,
following a year-long impasse. We are further
encouraged by the conclusion of the traditional Loya
Jirga that convened from 16 to 19 November 2011,
reaffirming the importance of continued dialogue and
outreach among the various parties and groupings in
Afghanistan.
South Africa fully supports efforts to strengthen
political outreach activities. Political dialogue and
reconciliation is a critical factor for the Afghan people
and their Government for ensuring sustainable peace
for the country, which has suffered severely as a result
of continued insecurity.
South Africa is concerned by the increase in
security-related
incidents.
We
reiterate
our
condemnation of the assassination of the former
President and head of the High Peace Council,
Mr. Rabbani, in September. That tragic incident should
strengthen the resolve of Afghans to reject attempts by
those who are intent on derailing the peace and
reconciliation process. My delegation commends the
courageous conciliatory response of the Government of
Afghanistan in the face of that provocation.
We condemn the bloody attacks in Kandahar on
31 October, which claimed the lives of United Nations
personnel. We also condemn the 6 December terrorist
attacks in Kabul and Mazar-e-Sharif, which caused
numerous deaths and injuries among civilians who had
gathered on the occasion of Ashura. South Africa hopes

22

that those who committed the atrocities will be brought
to justice.
In spite of some progress, the precarious security
situation continues to have a negative humanitarian
impact on Afghan civilians, especially women and
children, who are the most vulnerable. We are
concerned by the increase in the number of internally
displaced persons, which is worsened by the severe
drought in the northern and western regions of the
country. It is therefore essential for the international
community to actively support Afghanistan in
addressing that critical issue and to fulfil all
obligations made.
As we have stated previously, my delegation
believes that there is a link between development and
security in Afghanistan. We are pleased that the Afghan
Government continues its commitment to address the
socio-economic situation facing the country. In that
context, we encourage the Government to increase its
efforts to improve institutional capacity and to offer
viable alternatives to poppy cultivation and narcotics.
Sustainable peace in Afghanistan will be
enhanced by regional cooperation. In that regard, we
welcome the outcomes of the Istanbul Conference for
Afghanistan, held on 2 November, jointly convened by
Turkey and the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), which developed confidencebuilding measures to improve regional cooperation.
Other regional initiatives, including the upcoming
trilateral summit among Afghanistan, Iran and
Pakistan, will contribute to improving relations
between Afghanistan and its immediate neighbours.
That in turn will facilitate normalization of the
situation in Afghanistan.
National ownership and leadership remains
crucial to political, security and social and economic
progress in Afghanistan. We therefore welcome the
continued progress in the implementation of the Kabul
process. For its part, the international community
should continue its supportive role in the country’s
transition from conflict to stability and prosperity.
South Africa will continue to work with its partners in
the Security Council in supporting that process.
Once again, we thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura for
his service to UNAMA and wish him well in his new
responsibilities.

11-64359

S/PV.6690

Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I thank UnderSecretary-General Hervé Ladsous for his comprehensive
briefing today and thank Ambassador Staffan de
Mistura for his participation in today’s meeting and for
his outstanding work as Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I wish
him well in his new and important duties. We also
welcome the presence of Ambassador Ján Kubiš,
congratulate him on his nomination and wish him full
success. I express Portugal’s full support to him in the
challenging work ahead. We also welcome the
participation of His Excellency Mr. Jawed Ludin and
thank him for his contribution to today’s debate.
The past few months have witnessed several
important events for Afghanistan, particularly with
regard to regional cooperation, the way forward after
2014 and the second phase of the transition process.
Regional cooperation, as several speakers have
highlighted, continues to be one of the fundamental
pillars of a new Afghanistan.
The Istanbul Conference for Afghanistan, held on
2 November, initiated the Istanbul Process, reaffirming
general principles of regional cooperation, but also
including a list of specific confidence-building
measures for consideration by the countries of the
region. We look forward to the concept paper to be
circulated in January, outlining the agenda for a
follow-up ministerial-level conference in Kabul in June
2012.
On 5 December, the Bonn Conference provided
an extremely significant opportunity for charting the
way forward for the partnership between Afghanistan
and its international partners. The Conference
reaffirmed the commitment of the international
community to support Afghanistan through the
transition, with a focus on economic development and
on the peace and reconciliation process, in line with
agreed principles.
The commitments made are all the more
important since they revolve around the Kabul process
and are based on greater transparency and better
governance. The civil society meeting, which
reaffirmed the centrality of human rights and
fundamental freedoms enshrined in the Afghan
Constitution, is particularly noteworthy and should
serve as an example to us of the strength of the Afghan
society’s capacity to mobilize around shared values and
ambitions.

11-64359

As regards the inteqal, or transition, process,
Portugal is encouraged by the progress achieved so far.
The fact that areas already under full Afghan security
responsibility do not show any particular increase in
violence and security incidents is extremely positive.
As the Chair of the Transition Coordination
Commission has noted,
“Commitments made at the Lisbon Conference
are still on track: the phased military withdrawal
has begun, the Kabul Process is reinvigorated,
and preparations for strategic partnerships are
under way.”
As the Secretary-General said in his report, the
human rights and humanitarian situations remain “a
major concern throughout the country” (S/2011/722*,
para. 27). The vast majority of civilian casualties are
attributable to anti-Government elements, and efforts
by pro-Government forces have resulted in a
significant decrease in the percentage of civilian
casualties attributable to them.
Rule of law, in particular the judiciary and
penitentiary systems, needs particular monitoring and
reform, as highlighted by the Secretary-General’s
report. Regarding the recent findings on abuses of
detainees and indeed of several cases of torture, the
cooperation provided by competent Afghan authorities
to UNAMA is the best possible way to get these
occurrences to stop. Portugal supports the remediation
plan advanced by UNAMA comprising inspection,
human rights training, monitoring and supporting
Government accountability actions.
Portugal follows with utmost attention the
situation of Afghan women and welcomes the recently
released report on the criminal justice system’s
implementation of the 2009 Law on the Elimination of
Violence against Women. We support to the fullest
extent the efforts of the Government of Afghanistan
and of UNAMA to promote and protect the human
rights of women and to advocate and monitor
implementation of this law, as well as to promote the
political participation of women in the peace and
reconciliation process. Portugal echoes the Afghan
women’s civil society and advocacy groups, as well as
the United Nations, who carried those messages
forward to the International Conference on Afghanistan
in Bonn, in order to highlight the continuing need to
support women’s rights and empowerment in
Afghanistan.

23

S/PV.6690

I conclude by recalling the overarching goals that
have inspired the recent initiatives on Afghanistan.
Portugal encourages the efforts that Afghan institutions
and Afghan civil society are making to consolidate the
gains of the last few years. As the transition process
gathers momentum and increasingly reaches greater
sections of Afghanistan, and as the phased military
withdrawal of the international military presence
continues, socio-economic development, particularly in
education, professional training and the social
promotion of women, must be considered a strategic
interest in the creation of a peaceful and prosperous
Afghanistan.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I welcome Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs Jawad Ludin and thank
him for his presentation. I also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Hervé Ladsous for his briefing. I wish to
extend our gratitude and appreciation to Special
Representative Staffan de Mistura for his leadership as
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and for his participation today.
I take this opportunity to wish him all the best in his
new assignment. I welcome Mr. Ján Kubiš and wish
him well in fulfilling his important responsibilities.
We meet today to discuss the Secretary-General’s
latest report on the activities of UNAMA
(S/2011/772*), but also to exchange views on the
results of the conferences held in Istanbul and in Bonn.
We welcome the information in the report on the
developments in the transition process in the field of
security. We appreciate the fact that areas already
under control of the Afghan forces remained relatively
stable.
It is encouraging to see that UNAMA and the
United Nations agencies have continued to further
important actions in areas such as humanitarian
assistance, development and human rights. We
welcome the three priorities of the work of the United
Nations in Afghanistan, as outlined by Mr. Ladsous.
Brazil hopes that the international community will
continue to lend its full support to Afghanistan beyond
2014, helping it move towards greater stability and
socio-economic development. It is important that the
commitments expressed during the Bonn Conference
be swiftly translated into tangible actions.
We welcome the fact that the first priority of the
United Nations in Afghanistan will be to link security
and development. Brazil has encouraged a more

24

integrated approach between security and development
in our efforts to consolidate peace. Such an approach
will certainly benefit peace consolidation in
Afghanistan. The international community should step
up actions in the fields of agriculture, job creation,
health,
education,
infrastructure
and
public
administration, in line with the priorities indicated by
the Afghan stakeholders.
We are also of the view that the transition should
be coupled with tangible progress in the reconciliation
process. A political solution is indispensable to achieve
durable peace. We hope that an inclusive dialogue
among all stakeholders, led by the Afghans themselves,
will lead to a united Afghanistan capable of facing the
threat of terrorism.
Brazil also commends the initiatives aimed at
enhancing the coordination of international economic
assistance. We welcome the initiative of holding a
ministerial conference in Japan in 2012 to discuss
strategies to further sustainable development in
Afghanistan.
The United Nations has a crucial role in
Afghanistan. Brazil expects the United Nations to be a
central actor during the transition period and
afterwards, especially with regard to civilian aspects of
international assistance to the country.
Countries in the region should also increasingly
be engaged in the strategies to stabilize Afghanistan.
Economic ties are particularly relevant. We commend
the results of the Istanbul Conference, an important
step in fostering greater confidence and cooperation
among countries in the region.
To conclude, let me express our hope that the
international community will continue to assist
Afghanistan to lay the foundation for a better and
prosperous future. Brazil pledges once again its full
support to that process.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.
We are grateful to Mr. Ladsous for his substantive
analysis of the situation in Afghanistan. We took note
with interest of the assessment by the Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, Mr. Ludin. We are
grateful to Mr. De Mistura for the account he gave, and
also for his work as Head of the United Nations

11-64359

S/PV.6690

Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. We would like to
wish every success to Mr. Kubiš.
Over the past decade, the Afghan people have
achieved a great deal, above all with respect to
establishing political institutions and economic
recovery. Despite that, the way the current situation is
developing does not, unfortunately, inspire optimism.
Instability is prevalent across the entire territory of
Afghanistan. Terrorist attacks and the assassination of
politicians and peaceful civilians continue. There have
been major losses within the Coalition and Afghan
forces.
The International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF), when working with the Afghan authorities,
must take more decisive steps to curb the threat from
the Taliban and Al Qaeda. It is important to respect the
sovereignty of other States in the planning and conduct
of counter-terrorist operations. Civilian casualties are
unacceptable. While we note the efforts of the
international forces to minimize such casualties, we
also trust that they will be more effective in the future.
That would be more helpful in normalizing the overall
situation.
The decrease in the number of foreign troops
must be accompanied by an increase in the level of
combat readiness of Afghan forces so that they
themselves can counter terrorism and drug-related
crime. The task of training Afghan forces in combat
readiness is one of the objectives that the Security
Council set when it created the mandate of ISAF.
Furthermore, we again stress that the international
military presence must have a temporary character.
ISAF must leave Afghanistan after reporting to the
Security Council on the fulfilment of its mandate,
which authorized its deployment in that country.
It is common knowledge that in Afghanistan,
terrorism is closely tied to drug-related crime. Drug
trafficking has become one of the main sources fuelling
terrorist activity and has become a threat to
international peace and stability. The drug threat must
receive a comprehensive response from the
international community with respect to all its aspects,
from destroying drug crops to listing the names of drug
barons on the sanctions list. In that context, we assign
great importance to the Third Ministerial Conference
of the Paris Pact, on “Drug Routes from Afghanistan,”
to be held on 18 February in Vienna.

11-64359

The national reconciliation process remains a key
part of Afghan settlement. The process must continue
under the leadership of Afghan authorities, but the
insurgents must comply with the three familiar
conditions: to recognize the Constitution, to repudiate
Al Qaeda and other terrorist and extremist
organizations, and to disarm. The quid pro quo for
those criteria is that they will be automatically
removed from the sanctions list. The Security Council
sanctions regime is the paramount instrument for
countering terrorism.
The situation cannot be resolved solely by force.
The country’s economy must be boosted. We support
the Istanbul Conference’s focus on strengthening
regional cooperation. We need to comprehensively
develop and perfect cooperation within existing
regional frameworks, such as the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, the Collective Security
Treaty Organization, the Dushanbe Quartet — Russia,
Afghanistan, Pakistan and Tajikistan — the Economic
Cooperation Organization and the South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation. We view the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization as a crucial
platform for regional contributions to the international
efforts for a settlement in Afghanistan. Afghanistan and
its neighbours are already participating in its work.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in should
maintain its function of coordinating international
civilian efforts in Afghanistan. To that end, planning
for the future presence of the United Nations in the
country, for its role in organizing the elections process
and for national reconciliation requires listening
carefully to the wishes of the Afghan people
themselves.
We are convinced that the coordinated efforts of
the international community and the Afghan
Government, which the Istanbul and Bonn Conferences
were intended to support, will lead to the restoration of
a peaceful, sovereign and neutral Afghanistan free of
terrorism and drugs.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
this statement on their behalf:
“The Security Council welcomes the
International Afghanistan Conference ‘Afghanistan

25

S/PV.6690

and the International Community: From
Transition to the Transformation Decade’ in Bonn
on 5 December 2011 and its conference
conclusions (S/2011/762).
“The Security Council welcomes also the
declaration in Bonn that the process of transition,
to be completed by the end of 2014, should be
followed by a Decade of Transformation (20152024) in which Afghanistan consolidates its
sovereignty through strengthening a fully
functioning, sustainable State in the service of its
people.
“The Security Council welcomes furthermore,
against this background, the strategic consensus
between the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and
the international community on a renewed and
enduring partnership for this Transformation
Decade which entails firm mutual commitments.
“The Security Council notes that the
process of Transition entails the assumption of
the leadership responsibility by the Government
of Afghanistan.
“The Security Council commends the
outcome of the ‘Istanbul Conference for
Afghanistan: Security and Cooperation in the
Heart of Asia’ of 2 November 2011.
“The Security Council underlines the
crucial role of the United Nations in Afghanistan,
expresses its gratitude for Staffan de Mistura’s
outstanding contribution to UNAMA’s work, and
looks forward to working with the Secretary
General’s incoming Special Representative, Ján
Kubiš.
“The Security Council welcomes the
intention of the Government of Japan to host a
ministerial conference in Tokyo in July of 2012.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2011/22.
We will now resume our discussion. I give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Rivard (Canada) (spoke in French): First, I
would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations and the Deputy Foreign
Minister of Afghanistan for their thoughtful
interventions.

26

On 5 December, the participants at the Bonn
Conference on Afghanistan made clear that 2014 would
not mark the end of our common engagement in that
country, but rather a milestone in our continued
commitment to make Afghanistan a secure and
sustainable democracy. Canada and its partners
underlined the importance of mutual accountability
between the Afghan Government and the international
community to ensure a successful transition to and
beyond 2014.
The New Year will bring the renewal of the
important mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan. It is clear that the Afghan
Government must inevitably assume greater part of the
responsibilities for the sovereignty of the country, but
the United Nations must also continue to play a longterm role, working with Afghan institutions, both to
help promote and protect human rights and to build on
what has been achieved with regard to the integrity of
representative democracy in the country.
Between now and 2014, Canada will be investing
$360 million in Afghanistan. Our priorities are well
defined. We will invest in the future of Afghan children
and youth through implementing programmes in
education and health. We will advance security, the
rule of law and human rights, including through the
second-largest contribution to the NATO Training
Mission in Afghanistan. We will continue to encourage
cooperation between Afghanistan and its neighbours by
way of active regional diplomacy, and we will deliver
humanitarian assistance to the Afghan people. At all
times, in the framework of our commitment to
implement Security Council resolutions on women,
peace and security, Canada will pay particular attention
to Afghan women and girls.
Canada will not end its commitment to
Afghanistan’s stability at the completion of the
transition process. Canada’s ultimate aim has been, and
continues to be, to help Afghans rebuild Afghanistan,
to make it a viable country that is better governed,
more stable and secure and never again a safe haven
for terrorists. Beyond 2014, we will stay engaged in
defending and further advancing the crucial gains made
in the protection of human rights and the establishment
of a transparent and representative democracy.
Cementing recent security gains will require a
concerted effort on the part of Afghanistan to maintain
its focus on the professionalization of the Afghan

11-64359

S/PV.6690

National Security Forces. Only in a secure environment
can the Afghan population move toward economic
development, stability and peace. In that regard, we
welcome the progress made in the districts under the
first tranche of the security transition process. We hope
it will be possible to secure similar results in areas
included in the second tranche of the transition.
Security efforts alone, however, will not be
sufficient to guarantee the success of the transition.
The transition will also require the support of
transparent governance, a more robust rule of law and a
determination to undertake the reforms necessary to
develop the private sector and to attract foreign
investment.
Afghanistan’s private sector economy will help
generate much-needed employment opportunities while
generating the State revenue necessary for successful
transformation. In this nascent phase of its
development, Canada encourages Afghanistan to work
assiduously to ensure it has an effective regulatory
framework to ensure sustainable benefits for its people
from the development of its natural resources. It is also
important to work with companies and other
stakeholders in multi-stakeholder initiatives aimed at
improving corporate social responsibility and
transparency, including the full implementation of the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative.
Canada is encouraged by progress in efforts
between the Government of Afghanistan and its
partners to advance the Afghan National Development
Strategy and national priority programmes.
(spoke in English)
Canada believes that Afghan civil society has a
central role to play in the Afghan-led transformation
process. In Bonn, Canada’s Foreign Minister, the
Honourable John Baird, placed particular emphasis on
meeting civil society representatives and reiterated that
the inclusion of women in all Afghan-led
transformation efforts remains a priority for the
Government of Canada.
The importance of maintaining a strong focus on
defending women’s rights in Afghanistan was
illustrated by the November 2011 United Nations
report on the implementation of the country’s law on
the elimination of violence against women. We cannot
forget that, as the report states, there remains a long
way to go. We firmly believe that the full and equal

11-64359

participation of women from diverse experiences and
fields, at all levels of decision-making, is essential to
developing a stronger society.
Building on progress accomplished, Canada will
continue to be an effective partner for human rights
reform. In this regard, we must not forget the right to
practice one’s faith in peace. The recent attacks that
killed and injured dozens of Shiite worshippers on the
day of Ashura remind us that Afghanistan and its
neighbours must take every measure to promote and
preserve harmonious inter-ethnic and interreligious
relations in the country. It is significant that no
retribution has been exacted, and we applaud the
Afghan people for rising above that terrible
provocation and rejecting sectarian violence. Canada
hopes that this spirit will further encourage ongoing
efforts to strengthen the protection of vulnerable
groups’ human rights.
Canada remains troubled by the humanitarian
situation in Afghanistan, caused by the ongoing
conflict and exacerbated by the worsening drought
conditions. Of particular concern are the deliberate
attacks against civilians and the continued violations of
international humanitarian law. Canada condemns
violence against humanitarian workers and calls all
parties to respect humanitarian principles to allow safe
and unhindered access to those in need.
The impact of drought in Afghanistan calls for
the most effective response to ensure that food reaches
the most vulnerable, particularly women and children,
before winter conditions prevent access. To this end,
Canada will contribute $13 million to the World Food
Programme to provide humanitarian assistance for
drought-affected populations in the northern and northeastern provinces of Afghanistan during the difficult
winter months.
The Bonn Conference provided an opportunity
for Afghanistan and the international community to
more clearly articulate the principles of the
reconciliation process. Canada supports these
principles and will continue to offer its support to
Afghan-led reconciliation efforts by encouraging active
engagement of Afghan civil society, including women
and vulnerable groups. Our firm belief is that national
political reconciliation will not hold until it reaches all
Afghans.
will

Equally important, reconciliation in Afghanistan
require the support and cooperation of

27

S/PV.6690

Afghanistan’s neighbours. Canada views as positive
the outcomes of the Istanbul meeting on security and
cooperation in the heart of Asia. Our ongoing
facilitation of Afghanistan’s and Pakistan’s efforts to
strengthen the security and management of their shared
border, by way of the Afghanistan-Pakistan
Cooperation Process, is one practical way in which we
hope to contribute to this vision.

Afghanistan today continues to invest in a better future
for its people. In that respect, we welcome the
announcement of the second tranche for the transfer of
security responsibilities to the Afghan National
Security Forces. We expect that, by the end of February
2012, half of the Afghan population will be under the
security responsibility of the Afghan National Security
Forces.

Finally, I would like to conclude by offering
Canada’s warmest thanks to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Staffan de Mistura, for his
wholehearted dedication and remarkable work to
advance the common objectives of Afghanistan and its
partners toward peace and stability. Canada welcomes
the nomination of Mr. Ján Kubiš to undertake the
continuation of the important work of the United
Nations in this period of new beginnings for the
international engagement in Afghanistan.

As Afghans assume more responsibility for the
security of their country, we should equally focus our
energies on the sustainable development and
institutional and civilian capacity-building of the
country. The development needs of Afghanistan are
immense. The continued assistance of the international
community will be required over the long term. We
believe that a strong focus on education is imperative if
we seek to achieve prosperity for the country. We
should therefore concentrate on educating future
generations of Afghan boys and girls. Likewise, we
should intensify our efforts to empower Afghan
women. We must also continue to strengthen
institutional capacity-building to enable Afghan forces
to combat terrorism and drug trafficking.

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I wish to extend warm
greetings to His Excellency Mr. Jawed Ludin, Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, who is
with us today. We welcome the insightful and
comprehensive statement he has made. I would also
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Hervé Ladsous
for his insightful briefing. We take note of the valuable
observations expressed in the report (S/2011/772*) of
the Secretary-General.
Before I proceed, let me also express our sincere
appreciation to outgoing Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura for his strong
leadership and dedication during a very critical time in
Afghanistan. Our Embassy in Kabul and our authorities
enjoyed excellent cooperation with him and his able
team. We look forward to continuing our close
collaboration with him in his new capacity.
I would also like to extend a warm welcome to
Mr. Ján Kubiš. We are confident that his wealth of
knowledge and experience will be an important asset
for Afghanistan and for the whole international
community as Afghanistan goes through another
important phase in its history. We look forward to
working in close cooperation with Mr. Kubiš in the
coming weeks.
Afghanistan has achieved significant progress in
the past 10 years. In spite of remaining challenges,

28

Turkey considers regional ownership and
cooperation as an essential element for lasting peace,
stability and prosperity, not only in Afghanistan but
also in the region as a whole. With that understanding,
Turkey hosted the Istanbul Conference for Afghanistan
on 2 November. The immediate and extended
neighbours, convened in Istanbul under the
chairmanship of Turkish and Afghan Foreign Ministers,
reaffirmed their strong commitment for a secure, stable
and prosperous Afghanistan in the region.
Recognizing the central role of the United
Nations,
the
parties
in
Istanbul
welcomed
Afghanistan’s willingness and determination to use its
regional and historical position to do its part to
promote security and peaceful economic cooperation in
the region. Mindful that the region and the
international community are not separated, they
emphasized their stake in the security and stability of
the region.
By launching the Istanbul Process, the Heart of
Asia countries announced a new vision and their
determination to own, lead and develop the efforts for
enhanced cooperation. We now look forward to the
ministerial-level follow-up meeting that will take place
in Kabul in June 2012. We believe that the Kabul

11-64359

S/PV.6690

meeting will be an important opportunity to build on
the momentum achieved by the Istanbul Process.
As we move on with the transition period, with
the eventual withdrawal of international military
forces, it has become much more essential for the
international community to continue its active and
strong support to the Afghan Government in order to
prevent the country from once again sliding into
instability, as well as to avoid setbacks in the ongoing
process of reconstruction.
We are therefore pleased with the successful
conclusion of the Bonn Conference, which reaffirmed
the international community’s commitment to
Afghanistan beyond the transition decade. The
transformation decade defined in Bonn, in which the
Afghan people will be in full charge of their future, is
an opportunity for us all to concentrate our efforts on
the long-term sustainable development of Afghanistan.
Success in Afghanistan requires our long-term
commitment. We want to reiterate that Afghan
ownership and leadership should be the key in our
collective efforts. Let me assure our Afghan brothers
that our commitment to Afghanistan is long-term. We
will continue to stand by them as long as they require.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous and Deputy Foreign
Minister Ludin for their statements this morning. I
would also like to convey the deep gratitude of my
Government for the dedication and leadership that the
outgoing Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Staffan de Mistura, has given to the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
over the past two years. I would also like to welcome
the incoming Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ján Kubiš.
The year 2011 has been a difficult one for
Afghanistan. The deliberate insurgent strategy of
targeted — and high profile — attacks, concerns about
Afghanistan’s financial and economic capacities, and
doubts in the minds of some Afghans about the
international community’s continued presence have all
dented public confidence among the Afghan people. It
is therefore important that this year is ending with a
number of significant and more positive indicators of
progress, in particular renewed activity by the National

11-64359

Assembly, agreement on the International Monetary
Fund programme for Afghanistan, the Loya Jirga in
November and the Bonn Conference on 5 December.
The Bonn Conference has further consolidated
the foundation for the international community’s longterm commitment to Afghanistan, which must extend
beyond 2014. It has successfully laid the groundwork
for the concrete discussion of two key issues in coming
months, namely, the sustainment of the Afghan
National Security Forces and coordinated development
assistance, particularly at the Tokyo conference in July
2012. It is only concrete discussion, not just
discussion, that can be decisive. We were pleased that
Bonn explicitly acknowledges the crucial and
increasing role to be played by the United Nations in
Afghanistan as we move beyond security transition to
the more fundamental task of economic transformation.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s most recent
report (S/2011/772*) on UNAMA and agree with its
key findings. We support the establishment of a broadbased peace dialogue and endorse the SecretaryGeneral calls for concerted efforts to forge a national
consensus, including with civil society, to achieve that.
The renewed focus on engagement at the provincial
and district levels that has emerged from the Loya Jirga
is particularly welcome. Renewed efforts at the
reintegration of insurgents who are prepared to lay
down their weapons remain especially urgent.
It will also be important to sustain the momentum
of the regional process agreed in Istanbul in November,
including through confidence-building measures. We
applaud Turkey’s determination to help in that regard.
Effective cooperation among Afghanistan’s neighbours
is an indispensable part of the international
community’s efforts to strengthen Afghan institutions,
and thereby to promote regional stability.
It will also be essential to ensure a transparent
and suitably prioritized economic and development
agenda and, most critically, for the international
community to develop long-term partnerships with
Afghanistan beyond 2014 that underwrite that effort.
UNAMA’s efforts will be vital, including through its
honest-broker political role between the Government of
Afghanistan and the international community and its
support for the strengthening of electoral processes and
the rule of law in Afghanistan. Ensuring the success of
the 2014 and 2015 elections will be vital to solidifying
democracy.

29

S/PV.6690

It is obvious that cooperative action will be
essential to meet Afghanistan’s economic challenges,
particularly through prioritization and reform by the
Afghan Government and by the international
community actually delivering its commitments onbudget as part of the Kabul process.
My own country, Australia, is itself in the top 10
of Afghanistan’s development partners, and we will
remain so. Afghanistan is currently the fourth largest
recipient of Australian aid, and we will be increasing
that over coming years. As the ninth largest troop
contributor, our commitment remains serious. We will
see through our primary mission of training the Afghan
National Army 4th Brigade in Uruzgan province,
consistent with the security transition, and we will
keep under consideration a continued Australian
Special Forces presence in Afghanistan beyond 2014, if
that is the wish of the Afghan Government. We
announced in November that we will begin
negotiations on a long-term framework agreement with
Afghanistan, for cooperation well beyond 2014. That
will include development assistance as well as security,
political, economic and cultural cooperation.
In conclusion, following the Bonn and Istanbul
Conferences, we hope that the message from the
international community, including from my own
country, to the Government and people of Afghanistan
is clear: we are not only with you as the transition
process unfolds, but we will also be with you long after
2014, as you put Afghanistan on the path from
transition to transformation.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
acceding country Croatia, the candidate countries the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro
and Iceland, the countries of the Stabilisation and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia, as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
Let me start by expressing our sorrow over the
loss of life during the recent attacks on Shiite
worshippers in Kabul and other Afghan cities and
extending our deep condolences to the bereaved

30

families. We also wish a speedy and full recovery for
those injured. This is a moment to recall the
importance of protecting the values of tolerance, which
have traditionally marked religious life in Afghanistan.
Let me continue by thanking the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report (S/2011/772*)
and Under-Secretary-General Hervé Ladsous for his
excellent briefing. My thanks also go to Deputy
Foreign Minister Jawed Ludin for his insightful
presentation.
In addition, I would like to express my gratitude
to the outgoing Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Staffan de Mistura, for sharing his
experiences over his tenure with us by video link.
Mr. De Mistura has overseen a period of important
developments, including parliamentary elections and
the beginning of the transition process. By his
unremitting engagement he has greatly enhanced the
positive image of the United Nations in Afghanistan
and beyond. We are very grateful for his outstanding
contribution to progress in Afghanistan.
The period we are entering now is no less
significant, and we are therefore very pleased that the
Secretary-General has recently appointed Ján Kubiš as
his new Special Representative. Let me add, in a
personal capacity and also on the basis of my former
experience, that I have had the opportunity to get to
know Mr. Kubiš in his many activities, as Prime
Minister of his country, as Secretary General of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe in
Geneva and in Central Asia. We are sure that he will be
outstanding in the position. We look forward to
cooperating with him. His tremendous experience in
foreign security policy will be of great value to our
joint efforts in Afghanistan.
As the international engagement in Afghanistan is
evolving, it is important that the international
community and Afghanistan be unambiguous about
their mutual commitments for the decade ahead. The
European Union is therefore pleased with the
conclusions agreed at the recent Bonn Conference.
Building on the outcomes of the London and Kabul
Conferences and a decade of international engagement
following the landmark Petersburg Conference of
2001, the Bonn Conference underlined firm mutual
commitments in governance, security, the peace
process, development and regional cooperation. Bonn
has opened a new perspective for continued

11-64359

S/PV.6690

international engagement beyond the end of the
transition through the new 2015-2024 Transformation
Decade.
It is also very encouraging that the Government
of Afghanistan emphasized the importance of
governance reform and recognized that democratic
institutions at the central and provincial levels need
decisive strengthening, including the independence and
effective operation of oversight bodies, notably those
overseeing public finances. The transparency and
accountability ensured by those bodies are essential, in
particular for combating corruption. The European
Union welcomes the recommitment of the Afghan
Government to the full implementation of the Kabul
commitments.
It is important that our work in the security field,
notably policing, be complemented by developing an
effective and independent justice sector. That will be
essential if Afghanistan is to build on the progress it
has made in the past decade in strengthening civil
freedoms and human rights, including women’s rights.
At the Bonn Conference we heard the voice of
Afghan civil society, and we stressed the need for
enhancing the participation of that sector in the
country’s democratic processes. We also welcome that
the Bonn Conference conclusions reaffirmed the
principle that the peace and reconciliation process must
be inclusive regarding gender and social status and
reasserted that the process and its outcome must
respect the Afghan Constitution, including its human
rights provisions and notably the rights of women. We
believe that Afghan women should be able to
participate in all aspects and on all levels of the peace
and reconciliation process. The European Union wishes
to reiterate its firm commitment to resolution 1325
(2000) on women and peace and security.
The Bonn conclusions also emphasized the
importance
of
strengthening
and
improving
Afghanistan’s electoral process, a crucial step forward
in the country’s democratization. We believe that
continuous involvement by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in
electoral reform is needed.
Counter-narcotics efforts were also addressed in
the Bonn conclusions. The rise in poppy cultivation
and potential opium production, as mentioned in the
Secretary-General’s report, is of concern. The
European Union will continue to support the Afghan

11-64359

Government in combating the narcotics industry and
welcomes UNAMA efforts in that regard.
I can assure the Council of the European Union’s
firm commitment to remain engaged as a strong and
reliable partner, including after the transition has been
completed, as detailed and specified in the European
Union council conclusions of 14 November on
Afghanistan. In addition, the European Union has
extended the mandate of its police mission until the
end of 2014. We will remain committed after the
transition to supporting Afghan efforts to strengthen
civilian policing and the rule of law.
Allow me to touch upon one aspect that deserves
particular attention and encouragement. That is the
follow-up to the Istanbul Conference for Afghanistan:
Security and Cooperation in the Heart of Asia. The
Istanbul Conference laid down a useful basis for a
process of political cooperation in Afghanistan’s
neighbourhood, owned and led by the countries of the
region. But further progress will be needed in order to
translate the promises into tangible benefits of
improved security and economic development in the
region.
It will therefore be important to work towards the
Kabul ministerial conference in 2012 with the aim of
solidifying the commitments of the Istanbul
Conference. All countries in the region stand to benefit
from a stable and prosperous Afghanistan and from a
peaceful solution to the conflict. They should therefore
be encouraged to open up trade and transit and
encourage cross-border investment, both with
Afghanistan and among themselves.
The United Nations can play a central role in
supporting any commitments in those areas entered
into by the countries in the region. Members of the
United Nations family and the Bretton Woods
institutions — including the World Trade Organization,
the World Customs Organization and many others —
can give much needed concrete assistance to
integration in the heart of Asia. The European Union
stands ready to assist initiatives as well.
In conclusion, the increase in civilian casualties
caused by anti-Government elements, including the
recent attacks on worshippers, raises the utmost
concern. Yet the progress reported on by the SecretaryGeneral also inspires hope for Afghanistan’s path from
transition to transformation. The role of the United
Nations on that path will remain vital for years to

31

S/PV.6690

come, which will include assertively coordinating the
international community and holding the Afghan
Government accountable for its commitments to the
Kabul process and Bonn conclusions.
In that regard, a continuous UNAMA presence
beyond 2014 is important. The European Union is
looking forward to the outcome of the current review
of UNAMA’s mandated activities and United Nations
support in Afghanistan. We stand ready to offer our
views on further strengthening the effectiveness of the
United Nations in Afghanistan. The aim of our joint
efforts remains clear: to improve the lives and
livelihoods of the Afghan people.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Wetland (Norway): After 10 years of
international military presence in Afghanistan, we have
moved into a new phase. The military presence will be
gradually scaled down, as the Afghans take over
responsibility for their own security. Norwegian
combat troops will be withdrawn by 2013, but Norway
will not withdraw from Afghanistan. We will remain a
partner and friend of Afghanistan during the transition
years and during the transformation decade and
beyond.
The Bonn Conference focused on civilian aspects
and delivered certainty and clarity with respect to the
long-term international commitments to Afghanistan.
The partnership between Afghanistan and the
international community is now based on firm mutual
commitments. We foresee a substantial shift from
military and security aspects to the political process
and long-term development. In that respect, we need a
constructive dialogue with Afghanistan on civilian
support and civilian presence up to and after 2014. We
note with satisfaction that the Kabul process seems to
be back on track and that a three-year International
Monetary Fund programme for Afghanistan has been
confirmed.
Only a political process can resolve the conflict.
We must involve all parties to the conflict, as well as
ethnic and political groups, civil society and women, in
particular. Arms must be replaced by politics. The
Afghan Government is facing overwhelming
challenges and needs further support from the
international community. The terrorism threat is
serious and the security situation volatile, but years of

32

training and the gradually increasing responsibility of
Afghan security forces have produced results.
Afghan security forces are one key to a stable
society. Another and equally important element is the
Government’s ability to properly perform its functions.
We have stated again and again that measures must be
taken to improve good governance and its effectiveness
in all parts of Afghanistan. The fight against corruption
must be intensified and credible democratic institutions
established.
It is imperative that the Afghan Constitution be
respected. Women’s rights and empowerment must be
honoured. Afghanistan must unfailingly respect the
country’s international obligations and, above all,
universal and basic human rights.
We find the Istanbul Process to be promising,
given its increased focus on regional cooperation. That
focus can improve stability and economic development
in the wider region also.
On repeated occasions over the years, we have
stressed that responsibility for governing and securing
Afghanistan lies with the Afghan Government. We will
continue to support its efforts to build a stable
Afghanistan. International efforts must support the
priorities of the Afghan Government. Norway has
pledged $125 million annually for civilian purposes.
We will provide that annual sum until 2013, and are
prepared to continue providing support at a high level
in the future.
Finally, our profound gratitude goes to Special
Representative de Mistura for his untiring efforts. We
welcome the appointment of Mr. Ján Kubiš as the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
look forward to continuing excellent cooperation with
him. The leading role of the United Nations in
Afghanistan is indispensable.
Again in 2011, several civilians, United Nations
staff members and International Security Assistance
Force soldiers, including a Norwegian soldier, were
regrettably killed. We honour their memory and pledge
to work with the United Nations to provide safety and
security for all personnel.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of New Zealand.
the

Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand joins
Secretary-General
in
thanking
Special

11-64359

S/PV.6690

Representative Staffan de Mistura for his leadership
and service in Afghanistan, and looks forward to
working with Mr. Ján Kubiš. We also welcome the
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan and
thank him for his statement to the Council.
New Zealand is pleased that, after a very difficult
year,
the
Secretary-General’s
latest
report
(S/2011/772*) does identify further and steady
improvements in Afghanistan. We welcome the
progress made in the Kabul process and are encouraged
by the work of the Afghan Government to resolve the
Kabul Bank situation and to achieve a successful
outcome to its negotiations with the International
Monetary Fund. However, the Secretary-General’s
report also identifies challenges still to be confronted,
and we remain committed to working with partners to
address them.
Since we last addressed this Council on the
situation in Afghanistan (see S/PV.6497), the New
Zealand provincial reconstruction team has overseen
the formal commencement of transition in Bamyan
province, one of the first to embark on that process. I
am pleased to report that transition is proceeding
smoothly. The team has made a conscious effort to
encourage the people of Bamyan to turn first to their
own Government for assistance. As a result, the local
authorities are taking the opportunities offered by
transition to assume increasing responsibility for their
own affairs.
Going forward, it will be important that the
Afghan Government be able to address Bamyan’s
needs. Transition imposes greater responsibility on
provincial officials. Central Government must support
those officials by providing adequate resources,
delegating authority and, above all, demonstrating a
willingness — indeed, it must demonstrate a
determination — to replace the few corrupt or
incompetent actors with merit-based appointees.
Otherwise, the Bamyan population will continue to
look past the provincial Government to the donor and
non-governmental organization community to deliver
basic services.
We welcome the ongoing work of the United
Nations to promote and encourage coherence among
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF),
donors and the Afghan Government — work that better
links the Government to its people. As we all cooperate
to achieve the ultimate aim of transition, we urge the

11-64359

United Nations to continue that vital work, as there is
still room for improvement in efforts to achieve better
coordination and communication. The United Nationssupported Central Statistics Organization survey of
Bamyan province was an excellent initiative, but more
attention to the dissemination of its results would have
a positive effect on the ability of local Government to
meet the needs of the population.
The transition process is fragile, but we should
not underestimate the capacity of Afghan institutions,
officials and people to respond to the needs of their
communities. With ongoing support from the
provincial reconstruction team, the international
community and, most importantly, the central
Government in Kabul, there are reasons to hope for a
successful conclusion to transition in Bamyan in 2013.
New Zealand was very concerned at the October
report of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan
(UNAMA)
on
the
widespread
mistreatment of detainees in Afghan Government
facilities . We are grateful for the United Nations’
investigation of that difficult issue and applaud
UNAMA for its careful handling of the report’s
conclusions. New Zealand has expressed its concern
directly to the Afghan Government. We welcome its
initial response, but also support ISAF’s immediate
suspension of detainee transfers to the facilities named.
Above all, we reiterate that the Government of
Afghanistan must continue to address that issue.
We also welcome UNAMA’s report on the
implementation of the 2009 Law on the Elimination of
Violence against Women . Despite some progress,
however, New Zealand’s own experience of the
application of the law by Afghan judges, prosecutors
and police is consistent with many of UNAMA’s
findings. Even in Bamyan — a province which, most
commendably, has had a woman governor since
2005 — the vast majority of cases involving violence
against women are not dealt with adequately in the
formal justice system. The resulting treatment of
victims is degrading. We urge the Afghan Government,
with United Nations support, to continue promoting the
proper application of the 2009 law, including the
replacement of corrupt or ineffective officials as
required.
New Zealand strongly supports the outcomes of
the recent international meetings on Afghanistan. The
Istanbul meeting sent an important regional signal of a

33

S/PV.6690

strong commitment to Afghanistan. We are encouraged
by the sense of commitment of all participants at the
Bonn meeting.
Like everyone else on the ground in Afghanistan,
New Zealand has worked hard to achieve good
outcomes in Bamyan, and remains committed to seeing
the transition process through to a successful
conclusion. Then it will be for the people of Bamyan
themselves and their Governments — central,
provincial and district — to secure their own long-term
future.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): I would first like to thank
the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan,
His Excellency Mr. Jawed Ludin, for his participation
today in the Council debate on Afghanistan and
particularly for his statement. I would also like to
thank Mr. Ladsous, the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his comprehensive
briefing. My appreciation also goes to Mr. De Mistura
for his informative briefing, and I would like to express
my sincere gratitude for his dedicated service during
his term as the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative. Japan has greatly appreciated all his
efforts and work over almost two years. And I also
congratulate Mr. Ján Kubiš on his appointment as the
new Special Representative. We are confident in his
ability to lead the Mission and wish him all the best.
Japan greatly appreciates the efforts of the
Afghan and German Governments in convening the
International Afghanistan Conference in Bonn, and
welcomes the renewed mutual commitments made
between Afghanistan and the international community
to achieving a stable, democratic and prosperous future
for Afghanistan. This year marks the tenth anniversary
since the new Afghanistan took its first step in nationbuilding in 2001. Throughout the decade, that nationbuilding, led by Afghanistan with the support of the
international community, has made considerable
progress. At the same time, numerous challenges still
remain to be tackled, requiring close cooperation
between Afghanistan and the international community.
First, it is vital to ensure stability and permanent
progress in the security transition, through the political
process. We welcomed the start of the transition
process in July, and the approval of the transition’s
second phase in November. An Afghan-led national

34

reconciliation, with the support of the international
community, is indispensable to furthering the transition
process. It is also important to accelerate reintegration
so that the progress and results achieved in this area
can be consolidated. Japan is pleased that nearly 3,000
reintegrees have joined the Afghanistan Peace and
Reintegration Programme. We will continue to actively
assist Afghan-led efforts with the Programme.
The second issue is achieving sustainable growth
for Afghanistan. That goal can be attained only through
a strong partnership between Afghanistan and the
international community throughout the Transformation
Decade. The international community should cooperate
with the Afghan Government in strengthening the
sustainability and self-reliance of its economic and
fiscal management, in order to alleviate the expected
macro-economic impact of the transition.
The third issue is regional cooperation. A stable
and cooperative relationship between Afghanistan and
other countries in the region is indispensable to
achieving enduring stability for Afghanistan. We
therefore welcome the outcome of the Istanbul
Conference and stress the importance of promoting
regional economic cooperation in the development of
the whole region, by strengthening Afghanistan’s links
to the regional and global economies.
We must further consolidate the transition process
and put the greatest possible effort into outlining a
clear picture for the Transformation Decade. The areas
of governance, security, the peace process, economic
and social development, and regional cooperation are
interlinked and should be addressed in a wellcoordinated manner. As the recent report of the
Secretary-General states (S/2011/772*), a balanced
approach to security and non-security considerations is
needed in order to promote the long-term stability of
Afghanistan up to and beyond 2014.
In that context, as announced at the Bonn
Conference, Japan intends to host a ministerial
conference in Tokyo next July as a follow-up to Bonn.
In addition to the coordination of international
economic assistance through the transition period, the
conference will address Afghanistan’s strategy for
sustainable development, including regional economic
cooperation. We expect to have hold discussions aimed
at identifying the Afghan Government’s most
immediate priorities in the quest for fiscal
sustainability and development needs. We hope to

11-64359

S/PV.6690

cooperate closely with Afghanistan, the international
community and the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in preparing for the
conference.

supporting women’s rights and participation as part of
the transition and peace processes in Afghanistan, and
of safeguarding the advances that have been made in
that area in the past decade.

Japan looks forward to a comprehensive review
of UNAMA’s mandate and of United Nations support
in Afghanistan. That will be a very important task for
the United Nations in the context of steering the future
course of Afghanistan. UNAMA continues to play an
important role, and Japan will continue to do its utmost
to contribute to its activities.

We believe that the United Nations, and therefore
the Council, has a crucial role to play in this respect.
With the Council’s renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) due in March 2012, we believe that a
discussion of the aspects of the situation in Afghanistan
relating to women, peace and security — with a view
to informed negotiations within the framework of the
mandate renewal — would be timely. The Government
of Liechtenstein, in partnership with the Liechtenstein
Institute on Self-Determination at Princeton University,
is therefore offering to host a workshop in
Liechtenstein on implementation of the agenda on
women, peace and security in Afghanistan from 28 to
30 January.

In conclusion, we would like to once again
express our sincere appreciation for the dedication of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General de
Mistura, and to reiterate our commitment to supporting
UNAMA’s efforts under Mr. Kubiš and all the men and
women of UNAMA who have demonstrated their deep
commitment to this difficult mission.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We welcome the
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/772*) on
the situation in Afghanistan, and would like to thank
Special Representative Staffan de Mistura for his
service. We would also particularly like to congratulate
Mr. Ján Kubiš on taking on this challenging position
and pledge our full support to him.
We also welcome the outcome of the Conference
recently held in Bonn, which sends a clear message:
Afghanistan can count on the long-term support of the
international community, both during and long after
transition is scheduled to finish by the end of 2014.
Afghanistan is progressing in the transition, which will
result in the full ownership and sovereignty of the
Afghan people and a political system founded on the
Afghan Constitution, based on the rule of law and in
accordance
with
international
human
rights
obligations.
One aspect of particular importance and
sensitivity in that complex process is the situation of
women, in the areas both of fighting all forms of
gender discrimination and of ensuring women’s
effective participation in the political process, in line
with the Council’s agenda on women and peace and
security. During the Bonn Conference, numerous
Government representatives, including our Foreign
Minister, made clear statements on the importance of

11-64359

The outcome of those discussions should be fed
into the Council’s negotiating process on UNAMA’s
mandate renewal. Participants will include Afghan
women leaders, both from the Government and civil
society, senior United Nations officials, representatives
of non-governmental organizations, academics and
State representatives, particularly of those countries
that are Security Council members.
We hope that that meeting, which was supported
by the delegations of Afghanistan and Germany, can
make a concrete contribution to the preparations for the
renewal of the mandate and also offer a unique
opportunity to the Council to integrate its thematic
work in its country-specific activities. We hope that
Council members will be able to accept that invitation.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Kethergany (Malaysia): I have the honour to
deliver the following statement on behalf of
Mr. Hussein Haniff, the Permanent Representative of
Malaysia to the United Nations.
Let me first of all welcome the presence of
Mr. Jawed Ludin, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Afghanistan, Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, and Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Afghanistan.

35

S/PV.6690

My delegation extends its appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his latest report on the situation
in Afghanistan (S/2011/772*). My delegation also
extends our appreciation to Mr. Staffan de Mistura and
members of the United Nations Assistant Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for the dedication and
resilience they have shown in carrying out their duties
under challenging conditions in the country. Let me
also join others in congratulating Mr. Ján Kubiš on his
appointment to replace Special Representative de
Mistura next year.
Ten years ago, the Security Council determined
that the situation in Afghanistan constituted a threat to
international peace and security. Acting under Chapter
VII of the United Nations Charter, the Council
authorized the creation of the International
Stabilization Assistance Force (ISAF) to assist the
Afghan Interim Administration, headed by the recently
appointed Chairman Hâmid Karzai. That turning point
in the history of Afghanistan was marked by resolution
1386 (2001), adopted on 20 December 2001.
Ten years later, we are pleased to see that
President Karzai is leading the country out of the
morass of the unfortunate conflict there. We are now
witnessing another turning point in Afghan history,
with the transfer of security responsibilities from ISAF
to the Afghan National Security Forces. However,
much more needs to be done to improve the security
situation in Afghanistan.
Malaysia joins the Security Council and the
international community in condemning the horrific
attacks in Kabul and Mazar-e-Sharif that took place on
6 December. My delegation remains concerned about
the continued targeted assassinations of high-ranking
Government officials, members of the security forces
and influential local political and religious leaders. We
also express our condolences to the survivors of those
who perished in the attack by insurgents on the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees facility in Kandahar on 31 October. Our
thoughts go to the victims and families of those
affected by all those tragic incidents.
Of no less importance, however, is the increasing
number of civilians killed in Afghanistan; that is an
issue about which my delegation is particularly
concerned. Last month, the Council heard
Ms. Navanethem Pillay, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, express the concern

36

that the increase in civilian casualties was occurring
“in a climate characterized by a lack of accountability
for serious violations of international law” (see
S/PV.6650).
While the deliberate targeting of civilians by
anti-Government elements should rightfully be
condemned, it is even more disturbing to note that
pro-Government and NATO-led ISAF forces may be
responsible for a significant percentage of civilian
casualties. Malaysia therefore calls upon all parties to
respect both the letter and spirit of international
humanitarian law, in order to win the hearts and minds
of the Afghan people.
Winning the battle for hearts and minds is
something that Malaysia has persistently advocated,
given our experience in dealing with armed
insurgencies during the formative years of our own
nationhood. Indeed, it was in that same spirit that we
accepted the invitation by the Afghan Government to
join the ISAF, and, in July 2010, 40 members of the
Malaysian Armed Forces medical contingent were
deployed to the Bamyan province. Their mandate is to
provide medical, dental and health-care services to the
Afghan civilian population. They have since been
recognized by their ISAF partners and the local
populace as providers of innovative solutions, sensitive
to the local social and religious context.
I cannot stress enough the value that Malaysia
places on winning the hearts and minds of the Afghan
people. Accordingly, and out of respect for the
country’s democracy and Constitution, non-violence
and the rights of all Afghan people, my delegation
supports
the
Afghan-led
and
Afghan-owned
reconciliation and reintegration process, which is a
political process that deserves the focused attention
and support of the international community. We should
now be concentrating on non-military options in order
to complement and subsequently seal the gains that
Afghanistan has achieved to date. My delegation
believes that the way forward is to open a clear line of
communication with those leaders who disagree with
the Government but who have renounced violence and
accepted the Afghan Constitution.
Malaysia strongly believes that human capacitybuilding represents an important building block in
nation-building and, in the case of Afghanistan, in
rebuilding the country. Human capacity-building is
also the most practical way forward for Afghanistan to

11-64359

S/PV.6690

achieve greater and more sustainable growth and
development. To that end, Malaysia will continue to
provide technical assistance to Afghanistan through our
various technical training and capacity-building
programmes.

enhancement of that role in political and security
fields. We hope that the review of UNAMA’s mandate
will enable the United Nations to make more
meaningful contributions to peace and development of
Afghanistan.

As of October 2011, a total of 399 Afghans have
benefited from the many Malaysian Technical
Cooperation Programme courses offered in such areas
as diplomacy, public administration, the judiciary,
banking, engineering and customs administration. The
Malaysian Defence Cooperation Programme has
provided training for several Afghan military officers
in tactics and the Arabic language. Malaysia also
facilitates joint capacity-building initiatives through
our Third Country Training Programme, such as the
Malaysia-Australia Education Project for Afghanistan,
which provides trainer training for Afghan lecturers
and teachers in Kuala Lumpur.

On its part, Pakistan is committed to peace,
stability and development in Afghanistan. On 15 December,
our honourable Prime Minister, His Excellency
Mr. Syed Yusuf Raza Gilani, stated in the Parliament of
Pakistan:

Malaysia’s commitment to supporting the
international community’s efforts to assist Afghanistan
was further underlined by the participation of our
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Anifah Aman, at the
recent International Conference on Afghanistan in
Bonn. In that regard, my delegation reiterates its
commitment to Afghanistan in the areas of governance,
security, the peace process, economic and social
development and regional cooperation, as agreed at the
Bonn Conference.
In conclusion, the International Conference on
Afghanistan had the theme, “From Transition to the
Transformation Decade of 2015-2024”. Malaysia looks
forward to continuing to play a meaningful role in
Afghanistan’s development, not just for the 10 years of
the transformation decade, but for many more decades
to come.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We congratulate you,
Mr. President and your team for ably guiding the work
of the Security Council for the month of December,
and we thank you for convening today’s debate. I
would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous for his briefing.
Pakistan greatly values the role of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
in coordinating a comprehensive international effort in
Afghanistan. In the past, we have welcomed the

11-64359

“I would also like to reiterate that Pakistan, as a
peace-loving country, remains committed to
promoting stability and peace in our region, in
particular Afghanistan.
“We have, in all earnestness, extended a hand of
friendship to the people and government of
Afghanistan. As immediate neighbours and
sincere well-wishers of the people of
Afghanistan, we remain committed to promote
the best of relations in all spheres”.
In his report (S/2011/722*) under consideration
today, the Secretary-General termed Pakistan’s
bilateral relations with Afghanistan as paramount in
furthering peace, reconciliation and stability. That is a
valid observation. We are committed to peace,
reconciliation and stability in Afghanistan. Pakistan
looks forward to contribute, as effectively as possible,
in an environment free from recrimination and blamegaming and on the basis of mutual respect and trust.
Speculative statements made in a knee-jerk reaction to
events vitiate the atmosphere and erode mutual trust.
Such blame-gaming must stop. Pakistan cannot be held
responsible for the problems and the challenges
afflicting Afghanistan.
Afghanistan, the international community and
Pakistan must work closely and together as responsible
partners in a cooperative manner and not rush to
judgment or question each other’s intentions. It is
imperative that we avoid references, such as that made
by the representative of France earlier today, which
seek to find a convenient scapegoat, while continuing
to miss the larger picture.
We are not preaching something that we do not
practice. Pakistan has never resorted to blame-gaming,
even when militants cross over from the other side and
attack our troops and innocent civilians.

37

S/PV.6690

The attack on the Pakistan border post on
26 November, which resulted in the martyrdom of
25 soldiers, was a grave incident. It constituted a
transgression of Pakistan’s territorial integrity and a
flagrant violation of the Charter of the United Nations.
As a result of the 26 November attack, Pakistan was
constrained to absent itself from the Bonn Conference.
While taking that decision, the Federal Cabinet of
Pakistan had,
“expressed the hope that the international
community will reaffirm its support for peace and
development in Afghanistan at the forthcoming
Bonn Conference. Pakistan looks forward to the
success of this Conference”.
I will echo our Foreign Minister in acknowledging
the invaluable contribution of Germany towards peace
in Afghanistan, as well as the commitment of the
German leadership to the cause, demonstrated in their
efforts to host the Bonn process. We want the
international community to succeed in Afghanistan
because such success is in Pakistan’s own national
interest.
I would be remiss if I did not congratulate
Mr. Ján Kubiš on his appointment as the new Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
for
Afghanistan. We assure him of all cooperation and
wish him success.
The President (spoke in Russian): I give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Council this month. I also wish to
thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
situation in Afghanistan (S/2011/772*) and extend my
warm greetings to our good colleague, Mr. De Mistura,
whose mission in Afghanistan will come to an end in
the near future. Mr. De Mistura’s dedication to
strengthening peace and stability in Afghanistan is
praiseworthy. I would also like to congratulate His
Excellency Mr. Ján Kubiš on his appointment as the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and wish him all success in his
new assignment.
The briefings by Mr. De Mistura and by
Mr. Jawed Ludin, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs

38

of Afghanistan and other statements presented today
touched on key points regarding the situation in
Afghanistan, UNAMA’s mandate and the prospects of
international engagement following the International
Conference on Afghanistan that was held recently in
Bonn. I therefore wish to take a few minutes to
succinctly touch upon some important developments in
Afghanistan, from the Iranian perspective.
We have always warned about the negative
consequences of the presence of foreign forces in
Afghanistan and the concerns of Afghanistan’s
neighbouring countries about the real intentions behind
such presence. I want to refer, here, to the case of the
drone which took off from a United States base in
Kandahar, Afghanistan, and violated Iran’s airspace.
That American unmanned spy plane, dubbed the “Beast
of Kandahar”, flew 250 kilometres deep into Iranian
territory, up to a region near the city of Tabas, and was
then brought down by the Armed Forces of the Islamic
Republic of Iran.
This act of blatant military air aggression was
unprovoked and in contravention of all universally
accepted, existing international norms relating to
sovereignty and the inviolability of the airspace of
sovereign countries. I wonder why this type of
airplane, which appears to be only in the possession of
United States military intelligence and used mainly to
collect intelligence for spying purposes, should have
crossed into Iranian airspace in violation of established
international law?
It goes without saying, that violating Iranian
territorial air space contravenes the basic purpose of
the United Nations, that is, to maintain international
peace and security and develop friendly relations
among nations. Of course, it is not the first time that
such a malicious incident has occurred, but I hope it
will be the last time. I have already expressed our
strong objection by sending a letter to Their
Excellencies the Secretary-General, the President of
the General Assembly and the President and members
of the Security Council (S/2011/764). The various
aspects of that issue remain under consideration by the
Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
In relation to another drone-like operation,
organized and led by United States military bases in
Afghanistan, I would like to refer to a recent case
where a well-trained and equipped American national
spy agent and a member of the United States military

11-64359

S/PV.6690

intelligence forces was identified while leaving the
United States base in Bagram, Afghanistan, and
entering Iran. This person was on a covert operation.
His malicious mission was, fortunately, disrupted by
our intelligence. Those are clear examples that the
United States uses its bases in Afghanistan for spying
purposes as well.
In analysing the situation on the ground and the
discussion on longer-term international engagement in
Afghanistan, the concerns of the neighbouring
countries should be seriously taken into account. That
same concern has been expressed by an official of
neighbouring Pakistan in relation to the high number of
civilian casualties owing to drone operations in
Pakistan’s northern areas.
It is because of those concerns that we maintain
the strong belief that long-term international
engagement should not lead to long-term presence and
the establishment of permanent military bases or
military presence in Afghanistan. We all know that
foreign forces entered Afghanistan in the name of
countering terrorism and establishing peace and
security. A decade has passed. According to many
official reports, there has been an increase in the
degree of insecurity as compared to the situation last
year. The prolonged presence of foreign military forces
in whatever form and under whatever justifications
therefore will not bring about peace and stability in
Afghanistan, but rather it will provide a breeding
ground for terrorists and extremist groups to continue
their operations.
The other issue is the continuation and increase in
the cultivation of narcotic drugs, which is still the most
serious challenge not only for Afghanistan but also for
those along the drug trafficking routes and the
countries of destination. That menace has hindered the
country’s advance towards development and has put at
risk the social cohesion of Afghanistan, along with that
of its neighbours. Moreover, narcotic drugs, as the
financial source of terrorism in Afghanistan, have
served as another breeding ground for terrorists,
extremists and illegal groups who attempt to
destabilize the Afghan Government.
On 28 November, Iran’s Minister of the Interior
took part in the ministerial meeting of the counternarcotic Triangular Initiative held in Kabul. Since its
launch in 2007, that Initiative has promoted
information exchange and intelligence-led operations

11-64359

targeting the major transnational networks, while
building confidence. The drug control operations
coordinated by the joint planning within that
framework have resulted in the seizure of several tons
of illicit drugs and the arrest of many drug traffickers.
Yet another issue is the long-standing problem of
Afghan refugees. We look forward to the international
conference planned for the spring of 2012, which is to
be held with the participation of Iran and Afghanistan
and aimed at exploring a comprehensive long-term
strategy for resolving the issue of refuges. We hope
that that conference will lead to concrete and
substantive outcomes that can offer real solutions. We
have hosted an average of about 3 million Afghan
nationals over the past three decades. At present, more
than 1 million Afghan refugees are registered in Iran,
while a greater number of unregistered Afghans are
also living in our country. For all these years, Afghan
nationals have continued to enjoy Iran’s educational
and welfare facilities, among other things, as well as to
benefit from the same subsidies that Iranian nationals
receive. We again urge the international community to
continue to strengthen and expedite its efforts to create
the conditions conducive to the sustainable repatriation
of refugees and their full rehabilitation and
reintegration in their homeland.
On regional cooperation, we have continued our
talks with Afghan authorities on a bilateral, trilateral
and regional basis to further strengthen our
cooperation, particularly in relation to increasing our
coordination on security matters, counter-narcotic
efforts, illegal immigration and the completion of
developmental projects, including the construction of
roads and railways. Fortunately, we have been able to
establish a good record. For example, with respect to
railroads, we will soon witness the completion of a
railway network in the region that will connect the
landlocked Central Asian countries and Afghanistan to
the Persian Gulf. By integrating Afghanistan to the
railway system in Central Asia, Afghan economic
integration in the region will be eased to a great
degree.
In the trilateral summit meeting held in Tehran in
June, the Presidents of Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan
agreed to join forces in combating militancy. All sides
stressed their commitment to efforts aimed at
eliminating extremism, militancy and terrorism. In that
respect, a number of projects have already been
finished and some new agreements reached. We look

39

S/PV.6690

forward to more agreements on bilateral, trilateral and
multilateral bases.
We are now in the preparatory phase for an
upcoming trilateral summit in Islamabad between the
heads of State of Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan. The
Deputy Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the three
countries met in Tehran on 16 October. We hope that
the improved political atmosphere will permit the
continuation of that initiative.
Earlier this month we held the Bonn Conference.
The Conference was an opportunity for neighbouring
countries and international partners to exchange views
on how to move ahead in creating a stable and
prosperous Afghan-led process. We hope that the
outcome of the Bonn Conference will help to develop
measures aimed at addressing common challenges on
political and security issues, lead to concrete steps to
eliminate extremism, militancy and terrorism, and pave
the way for increased economic prosperity for
Afghanistan with the active participation of all the
neighbouring and regional countries in the
infrastructural and developmental projects in line with
the wishes of Afghan people and Government. Any
initiatives elaborated in the Bonn Conference should
strengthen the trust between Afghanistan and its
neighbours through active engagement, interaction and
partnerships.
The neighbouring countries of Afghanistan share
critical interests in Afghanistan’s security and longterm stability and have a role to play in promoting
Afghanistan’s
socio-economic
development.
Obviously, the prospect of a stable and flourishing
Afghanistan would be an ideal situation for its
neighbours and the wider region, and in particular for
the Islamic Republic of Iran. The continuing
engagement between Afghanistan and its neighbours
and regional partners in the areas of trade, economic
development and infrastructure development must
therefore be supported. In that connection, we should
also emphasize the central role of the United Nations in
coordinating international efforts in Afghanistan,
which is of paramount importance and enjoys our full
support.
The President (spoke in Russian): The Deputy
Foreign Minister of Afghanistan has requested the floor
to make a further statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Ludin (Afghanistan): It has been a true
honour to be part of today’s discussion and to listen to

40

the friends and partners of Afghanistan. I am grateful
to the Security Council for keeping Afghanistan on its
radar and for including it on the agenda for this very
substantive discussion. I hope that this will continue. I
am also grateful to the individual countries whose
representatives have spoken today, both members of
the Council and those from outside, for their support,
friendship and cooperation with Afghanistan. We
appreciate their partnership.
I am also very pleased that the Council issued a
statement regarding the Bonn conference, which, as I
said earlier, was an extremely important event on
Afghanistan’s calendar this year. For it to have the
blessing and support of the Security Council is further
progress in that direction. I also welcome the reference
to the Istanbul Conference. Regional cooperation, as
we heard in some of the statements made earlier today,
is becoming central to the dialogue surrounding
Afghanistan, and the Istanbul process is very
promising. We in Afghanistan look forward to
furthering it in the next meeting in Kabul.
I would like to raise a few points with regard to
the interventions made today. First, I am very grateful
to those who expressed condolences and made
reference to the loss of life and civilian casualties in
connection with some of the terrorist attacks that have
taken place in the recent past, in particular the terrorist
attack on 6 December, on the day of Ashura. I very
much appreciate those sentiments.
Those attacks illustrate the type of challenge that
still remains. International terrorism is the most
important security obstacle facing Afghanistan today.
We have seen new forms of this in the recent past.
Today, suicide bombings are responsible for the
majority of killings among the Afghan people. That is
not something that is unique to Afghanistan, although it
is a recent phenomenon in many ways. The only way
by which we can tackle this challenge is through
intelligence and sincere results-oriented regional
cooperation. We cannot do it with armies and military
means. I think that the sanctuaries that some terrorist
networks enjoy outside Afghanistan represent an
extremely important problem that we have to address.
Secondly, concerns were expressed in some
statements about the human rights situation, in
particular with regard to detention facilities in
Afghanistan. I must say that, as soon as the report
(S/2011/772*) of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) was published, our
security institutions and other relevant institutions
11-64359

S/PV.6690

began a very extensive inter-agency investigation. With
all due respect, I dispute the assertion that the problem
is systemic. The occurrence of such things is definitely
not systemic. We will investigate and determine the
true extent of the situation. We are genuinely
committed to improving our prison system. Just to put
it in context, those are institutions that we have
together in cooperation with most of the countries here.
We have established those institutions, and it will take
time for them to really improve. Nevertheless,
obviously, torture and abuse of the nature mentioned
are absolutely intolerable. They are as intolerable for
any Afghan as they are to any other person in the
international community.

With regard to Iran in particular, we have been
blessed by the understanding that Iran and the United
States have shown in the past 10 years with regard to
Afghanistan’s need to maintain a balance in this
relationship. That understanding on both sides — the
United States and Iran — has been very helpful to us
and enabled us to bring together countries from across
the world to cooperate on our soil. We hope that this
understanding will continue, for the sake of
Afghanistan. Our commitment to our neighbours
remains unchanged and is as strong as ever. On this
particular issue, we are holding discussions with both
countries and following up.

On the UNAMA mandate review, we are really
pleased that the United Nations has taken that very
seriously and that there is an ongoing review. We
welcome that review. Consistent with the transition
process, we think that UNAMA’s role should be more
responsive to Afghanistan’s desire to take leadership
and responsibility. We are grateful for the positive
response and the way in which our desire has been
received here in the Security Council. But that is in
absolutely no way intended to diminish the role of the
United Nations. We Afghans take that role very
seriously. We are absolutely sure that this role will
evolve into something as important, except different.

In conclusion, the concept of the Transformation
Decade is a heartwarming development for the people
of Afghanistan. It illustrates the sort of commitment
that the Afghan people want for when the transition
period comes to an end. I am glad that significant
reference has been made to the Transformation Decade
in the various statements made here today. I think that
the conferences that will take place next year — the
Chicago conference on the security side and the Tokyo
conference on the economic development side — will
take this discussion forward and establish a framework
for the idea of the Transformation Decade.

Lastly, with regard to the concern raised by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran, we take
the concerns of our regional partners extremely
seriously. For a country like Afghanistan in the past
10 years, I think that the amount of attention and the
focus we have placed on the concerns of our friends,
brothers and partners in our neighbourhood, in
particular those of our close neighbours, have been
very extensive. We have often and always reassured our
partners that Afghans would never allow our territory to be
used against any country, including our neighbours.

11-64359

It has been a true honour to be here today. I am
very grateful.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Deputy Foreign Minister Ludin for his statement.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.50 p.m.

41
