VlVl-TED NATIONS

P

AL

TWENTY-SIXTH

ORDS

YEAR
th
MEETING: 18 AUGUST 1971

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l575)

, . . . . . . . . , . . .. . . . . . - . . . . . . . . . . .

Page

Adoption of the agenda . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New Members concerning the
applications of Oman and Bahrain for membership in the United Nations

(S/10294).............................................

SfPV.1575

1
1

I

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
fwres. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/, . .) are normally published in quarterly
Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.

Supplements of the Official Records of the &miv

The resolutions of the Security Council, nurnbcred in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Secntity Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

c’

FIFTEEN HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-FIFTH MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 18 August 1971, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. Pier0 VINCI (Italy).
preseraf:
The representatives of the following States:
rQrgentina,
Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
hicaragua,
Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syria, Union of
S,,,+t
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain
and Northern Ireland and United States of America,

3. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Syria has
proposed an amendment to the operative paragraph of the
draft resolution that I have just read out. With that
amendment the text would read as follows:
Y?re Security Cbuncil,

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 575)
of the agenda.

“Welcomes the application of Bahrain and recommends
to the General Assembly that Bahrain be admitted to
membership in the United Nations.”

1.

Adoption

2.

Admission
of new Members:
Report
of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members
concerning the applications of Oman and
Bahrain
for membership in the United Nations
(S/ 10294).

4. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): My delegation wishes to support the amendment proposed by the representative of
Syria.

Adoption of the agenda

5. The PRESIDENT: Are there any objections to that
amendment? As there are none, I take it that the
amendment is adopted by the Council.

T3z e agenda

was adopted.

6. We shall now proceed to the vote on’ the diaft
resolution as amended.

Admission of new Members
Report
of
Members
Bahrain

the Committee on the Admission of New
concerning the applications of Oman and
for membership in the United Nations (S/10294)

1. The
PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken
at our last meeting, the Committee on the Admission
of New Members has met and has submitted a report to the
Council
/S/10294/.
It is my understanding that the Council
is prepared
to act on the draft resolution which is contained
h paragraph
4 of the Committee’s report and which reads
a foliows:
“The
“Having

admission

Security

Council,

’

examined the application of Bahrain for
to the United Nations /S/10291],

sdflitted

to the General Assembly that Bahrain be
to membership in the United Nations.”

If 110 one
mpSglcltion

wishes to speak at this stage, I shall put the draft
to the vote.

“Recomrnerzds

The draft resolution, ai amended, wvr$ adoptid

tinani-

mously. ’

7. The PRESIDENT: I shall now call on thbse representatives who have expresseda desire to speak after the vote.
8. Mr. TOMEH {Syria): The Security Council has just
voted unanimously to welcome the application of Bahrain
and to recommend to the General ‘Assenibly that it be
admitted to membership of the United Natioris; We
consider this to be a very auspicious occasion and, we
therefore whole-heartedly welcome Bahrain, a sister Arab
State, and congratulate it on having attained full independence, which qualifies it for tnembership in our Otganization.
9. However, before proceeding further in our hearty
welcome to Bahrain, my delegation wishes to set the record
straight on one point. The Security Council today based its
decision on the report of its Committee on the Admission
of New Members. Paragraph 2 of that report speaks of
another application: the application of Oman for admission
to membership in the United Nations. The Committee on
the Admission of New Members, while deferring examina.
tion of this application, “recommended without objec-

TOMEN
(Syria): I wish to propose that the
2. $5
paragraph of the draft resolution be amended to
op& fltlve
@ad as folIows :
“~e~COnzes
the application of Bahrain and recommends
the
Generai
Assembly that Bahrain be admitted to
to
we@bership
in the United Nations.”

1 Seeresolution 296 (1971).
1

tion . . . to have recourse later to the last paragraph of rule
60 of the provisional rules of procedure.” The last
paragraph of rule 60, as we all know, states that:
“In special circumstances, the Security Council may
decide to make a recommendation to the General
Assembly concerning an application for membership
subsequent to the expiration of the time-limits, , .“.
IQ, It is our understanding that when the Security
Council-perhaps in the near future-takes up again the
application of Oman, the condition on the time-limits will
be waived. Precedents already exist in the Council for
admissions to membership that are not within the timelimits envisaged by rules 59 and 60 of the provisional rules
of procedure.
11. TO revert to Bahrain, it is pertinent to recall here
today that the Security Council adopted 0n 11 May last
year resolution 278 (1970), endorsing the findings of the
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General in Bahrain. His report was then circulated to the members of the
Council by the Secretary-General in document S/9772 of
30 April 1970. Operative paragraph 2 of resolution
278 (1970), to which I have already referred, reads as
follows:
“WelcOrneS the conclusions and findings of the report,
in particular that ‘the overwhelming majority of the
people of Bahrain wish to gain recognition of their
identity in a fully independent and sovereign State free to
decide for itself its relations with other States’.”

immortality visited by the heroic Gilgamesh in his search
for fie plant of everlasting life. Thereafter, Bahrain gained
its final pewmdity which characterizes it today, namely,
the Arabic one, and became, as it always was, part and
parcel of the Arabian Peninsula.
14. Now Bahrain is endeavouring with vigour to advan’ce
&e caw of progress for its people in all Walks of !ife. Its
dedication to the cause of education and the spreading
bermf, he development of its resources and the modernhtion 0f its institutions command respect and admiration.
ne energies of its sons, looking forward to a prosperous
tegion, enhanced by the dedication of its Government, are
&e bea guarantees for a bright and rich future-rich in
knowledge, rich in moral values and rich in human
contributions.
15. We welcome Bahrain’s full independence and we
support its accession to our Organization. We are certain
that Bahrain will live up to its obUgations under the
Charter, its obligations to its brothers and sisters and its
obligations to humanity.
16. I feel pdvileged, on behalf of the Government and the
people of Syria, to voice support for Bahrain’s membership
in the United Nations. I also feel deeply gratified to utter
words of welcome to Bahrain, and at the same time to
express our best wishes for a strong, harmonious and
prosperous Bahrain.
17. Mr. NAKAGAWA

(Japan): The Japanese delegation

warmly congratulates the Government and people of the

12. The Security Council reached that momentous conclusion on 11 May 1970 and has crowned it today by a
unanimously adopted resolution welcoming Bahrain and
recommending
it for full membership in the United
Nations. We commend the wisdom and tact used by
Bahrain, its people and& ruler, as well as all the parties
concerned, in achieving full political sovereignty and
independence and in re&ing the aspirations of the people
of Bahrain. Rarely indeed has an international question
which at times seemed to be very complicated been
resolved so amicably. All that augurs well for the future of
Bahrain. We also hope that Bahrain will be a reminder to
obstinate colonial Powers that try in vain to reverse the
courti of history and continue to deny peoples their right
to self-determination.
13. Although Bahrain will be the newest and among the
youngest Member States, its history can be traced through
most of the civilizations of the Arabian Peninsula and the
Arab East. The Government and people of Bahrain are
themselves keen on emphasizing their deep roots in the
history of mankind. Bahrain fast emerges into history
between 3000 and 2000 B.C., when it was the home of a
distinctive civilization and its merchants and tips don&
nated the trade routes between the civilizations 0f the
Indus Valley, in what is today Pakistan, and Mesopotamia,
in what is today Iraq, dealing in goods as varied as pearls,
cloth, ivory, precious metals and rare stones. To the ancient
Sumerians Bahrain was known as Dilmun, an actual city,
with which they traded and which has been unearthed by
archaeological
finds, and also a mythological land of

State of Bahrain, an Asian country, on the achievement of
heir independence, and, with equal warmth, would like to
congratulate them on the unanimous adoption by this
Council of the resolution recommending to the General
Assembly that Bahrain be admitted to membership in the
United Nations.
18. We were very glad to support Bahrain’s application for
membership, We are confident that Bahrain, a peace-loving
State, is able and willing to carry out the obligations of
Member States under the Charter, as clearly indicated in the
declaration signed by His Excellency Isa bin Sulman
AlXhalifah,Amir
of the State of Bahrain /S/10291]. We
warmly appreciate Bahrain’s manifest desire to participate
in the efforts of the United Nations to create a more
peacefuI, just and prosperous world, and we look forward
to welcoming it as a Member of the United Nations.
19. Although Japan has not had any formal relations with
Bahrain, we have maintained friendly contacts with it
through our Embassy in Kuwait. In January 1968 we had
the honour and pleasure of welcoming, on an informal visit
to Japan, His Excellency Sheik Khalifah bin fUnan
Al-Khalifah, the new Prike Minister of the State of
Bahrain.
20, There have also been many contacts on the nongovernmental level, and in January of this year an economic
mission visited Bahrain for the purpose of promoting
friendly relations and mutual understanding between the
peoples of our two countries. The necessary steps have been
initiated and these will lead to the formal recognition of
Bahrain by Japan.

2

:

;

21. The Government and people of Japan anticipate
increasingly close and friendly relations with the Government and people of Bahrain, and the Japanese delegation
looks forward to working in close and friendly co-operation
with the delegation of Bahrain in the United Nations.
22, Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): It is with
particufar pleasure that my delegation voted for the
resolution which has just been unanimously adopted. The
ties between my country and Bahrain are close, friendly,
and of long standing. It was as long ago as 1613 that
Thomas Aldworth, an official of the English East India
Company engaged in a search for new markets, reported on
Bahrain as a prosperous port and a good market for the
exchange of English cloth and Persian silks.

23. Bahrain then was, as it still is today, an important
trading centre, and contacts gradually developed between
my country and the rulers and people of Bahrain. In the
course of the nineteenth century a number of treaties and
agreements were signed by the British Government and the
Ruler. Though Bahrain remained an independent sovereign
State, as a result of these treaties and agreements the British
Government assumed responsibility for the defence of
Bahrain and for the conduct of its foreign relations. This
responsibility was terminated last Sunday in the exchange
of notes between the British Political Resident in the
Persian Gulf and the Ruler of Bahrain.
24. It is with great pleasure that my Government witnesses
the emergence of Bahrain as a fully-fledged member of the
family of nations, Members of the Co.lncil will recall our
meeting in May last year (1536th meeting], when, by
adopting resolution 278 (1970) approving the report of the
Secretary-General’s Personal Representative, Mr. Wbspeare
Guicciardi, we were able to pave the way for the action
which we have taken today.
25. My predecessor at that time paid a tribute to the
statesmanship which the Shah of Iran had shown in
agreeing to Mr. Winspeare’s appointment and mandate and I
should like to do so again today. Indeed, I should like to go
further and express my conviction that other seemingly
Insoluble problems could be solved if the example which
was set by the Iranian Government and my own at that
time was more generally followed.

28. Mr, ISSRAELYAN (Union of Soviet Socialist Repub(ttoffsiated from Russian): The Soviet delegation
would fust of all like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the people of Bahrain warmly on the achievement of their independence and to wish them good fortune
and success at this new and important stage of their
development.
lics)

29. From the earliest days of its existence, the Soviet
Union has resolutely and consistently advocated the universal implementation of the principles of selfdetermination, freedom and national independence of countries and
peoples under colonial domination or in a position of
semicolonial dependence on imperialism. This position of
principle was reaffirmed at the XXIVth Congress of the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union which was recently
held in our country. In view of this position, tht Soviet
Union has always maintained that the people of Bahrain
have an inalienable and legitimate right, in accordance with
the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter,
to be guaranteed full independence and national sovereignty, in order to enable them to free themselves for ever
from the treaties limiting the sovereign rights of Bahrain
which were imposed on them by the British Empire early in
the nineteenth century.
30. The peoples of the Soviet Union, brought up on the
Leninist ideals of equality and brotherhood among all
peoples irrespective of race, language or creed, have fully
understood and sympathized with the aspirations and
yearnings of the people of Bahrain to affirm their national
identity and to achieve full independence and sovereignty.
31, We take pleasure today in noting that the long struggle
of the people of Bahrain has been successful;a few days ago
Bahrain wasproclaimed an independent, sovereign State.
32. The proclamation of the independence of Bahrain is
yet another clear manifestation of the success of the just
and courageous struggle of the peoples of the Arab East for
their national freedom and human dignity and for the
consolidation of their independence, despite the policies
and designsof imperialism and its agents in the Middle East.
33. The history of the relations between the Soviet Union
and the countries of the East is a striking illustration of the
practical realization of the lofty principles of Leninist
foreign policy, which provides for the defence of the
national interests, not only of the Soviet Peoples, but also
of the peoples of other countries, These principles serve the
cause of universal peace and progress in the world. The
Soviet Union has always advocated, still advocates and wilI
continue to advocate, as a matter of principle, that the
peoples and countries of Asia and Africa as well as the
peoples of all other countries which, for reasons beyond
their control, have been deprived of the opportunity dbuld
3e drawn into active participation in world politics and
international life.

26. At that meeting of the Council to which I have
referred, my predecessor paid tribute to the people of
Bahrain for their dignity and courtesy and for the steadiness and confidence which they had shown. Now their
reward is in sight. I have every confidence that they wiu
clispIay on the international stage those same qualities
which have enabled them to create the properous and
well-run State which Bahrain is today.
27. Pinally, I should like to take this opportunity to wish
the Amir and people of Bahrain well in the future and to
assure them of the continuing goodwill and friendship of
my Government and people. I should also like to extend
our greetings and congratulations to the representative of
Bahrain, Mr. AI-Arayed, who has come to New York to be
present on this auspicious occasion.

34. At this time, when we are welcoming the proclamation
If the independence of yet another Arab State and its
iberation from colonial dependence, the Soviet delegation
vould like to express its conviction that the day is not far
,ff when all the Arab territories under foreign occupation
3

will be liberated and when the consequences of Israel’s
aggression against the Arab peoples will be fully and
entirely eliminated.
35. The Security Council is now considering the applica.
lion of independent Bahrain for admission to tile United
Nations. The Soviet delegation supported Bahrain’s application when it ivas considered in the Committee on the
Admission of New Members.
36. At this meeting of the Security Council, we should
like once again to advocate the admission of Bahrain as a
fully-fledged Member of the United Nations and to wish the
people of Bahrain success in building a new life and in the
rapid elimination of the consequences of colonialism. We
wish the people of Bahrain progress and prosperity, good
fortune and success on the path of independent existence.
We wish them successful collaboration with all the freedom-loving forces of the worl$ in the struggle against the
evils of imperialism and colonialism, from which the people
of Bahrain have suffered so much and for so long.

41. My Government expressesthe hope that independence
acquiredunder suchfavourable auspiceswill augurwell for
a peaceful and prosperousfuture. In this connexion the
natural resourcesof Bahrain, its geographicalsituation, its
high cultural level andthe innate courtesy of its inhabitants
warrant its having the most legitimate of ambitions.
Furthermore, my delegation is convinced that new prospectsfor developmentare opening up to Bahrainwithin the
framework of the spccializedinstitutions of our Organization. We wish to assureits Government of our full
understandingand our effective assistance
when questions
of particular interest to it are consideredin the numerous
organizationsdependenton the United Nations.
42. Mr. KUl,LAGA (Poland) (interpretation from French):
The delegation of Polandhas consideredwith the greatest
interestand sympathy the application for the admissionof
a new State, Bahrain, to the United Nations, after its
accession
to independence-andon this we wish sincerelyto
congratulatethe State of Bahrain.

43. We have taken note of the fact that the special
37. Mr. LONGERSTAEY (Belgium) (interpretation from
relationsexisting betweenBahrain and the United Kingdom
h~ttch): My deIegation has considered with interest the
since1820 cameto an endon 15 August 1971asa result of
inherent merits of the candidacy of the State of Bahrain as
an agreementconcludedbetween the United Kingdom and
a Member of our Organization. We have also taken note of
the State of Bahrain.
resolution 278 (1970),whereby the Security Council unanimously approved on 11 May 1970 the report of 4 May
44. We have alsotaken note of the statementmadeby the
preparedby the Good Offices Mission under Mr. Vittorio
Headof State of Bahrain[S/10291] that asa peace-loving
WinspeareGuicciardi, the Personal Represcntativcof the
State Bahrain believesin the great value of the United
Secretary-General.That Mission went to Bahrain to ascer- Nations to small and developing nations and therefore
tain the wishesof the population, asa result of a request attachesgreat importanceto the acceptanceof its applicamadeby the Governmentsof Iran and the United Kingdom. tion for membershipof the United Nations.
Mr. WinspcareGuicciardi completed his study, the objectivity of which waspraisedby eachmemberof the Council, 45. We are happy with the decision of Bahrain to request
by stating:
admissionto the United Nations, a decisionwhich hasthe
support of all the Arab countries. Therefore we were
“My consultationshave convinced me that the over- pleasedto support the amendment submitted by the
whelmingmajority of the people of Bahrain wishto gain delegationof Syria to the draft resolution submittedby the
recognition of their idestity in a fully independentand Committee on the Admission of New Members. We also
noted with satisfactionthe unanimity of that Committee in
sovereign.State free to decide for itself its relationswith
recommendingthe admissionof Bahrain to the United
other States.” /SeeS/9772, pwa. 57.1
Nations.
38. My delegationbelievesthat Bahrain fulfils the conditions laid down in Article 4, paragraph1, of the Charter, 46. We are convinced that Bahrain is able to accept the
and that is why we votedin favour of the recommendation obligationsof the United Nations Charter and that it is able
for admissionby Security Council to the GeneralAssembly. to fulfil them so asto strengthenand develop international
relations of co-operation and thus to contribute to the
attainmentof the purposesof the United Nations.
39. My Government is pleasedwith the decision of the
Government of Bahrainto request admissionof its country
to the United Nations. In fact the State of Bahrainhas 47. We wish to congratulate the people and the Government of Bahrain on the unanimousdecisionof the Security
already affirmed its international personality since for
severalyears it has taken an active part in certain activities Council to recommendits admissionto the United Nations.
of the community of nations, in particular by its associa48. We wish Bahrain a sovereignand independentdeveloption with UNESCO, FA0 and WHO.
ment and progressin every field, political, economic and
40. My Government is particularly gratified that Bahrain social,so important for a State rich in raw materialsand
with sucha geographicallocation.
has acceded to independenceand joins the community of
nations as a result of a peaceful and democratic process
which does honour to all sides.My delegationwishesto
49. We alsowish to expressthe certainty that Bahrain will
mention the role of the Bahrain authorities and the
occupy the place befitting it within the United Nations and
Governments of Iran andthe United Kingdomaswell asthe
that it will join in the efforts of the Members of the
good influence that was undoubtedly exercisedby our
Organization in the struggle for the full and complete
Organization in the evolution of the latest events.
liberation of all peoples that are still under colonial
4

domination, in the strunrrle for progress and the strengthening of international peace and ‘se&rity, particularly & the
region of the Middle East.
50. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): My delegation
concurred whole-heartedly in the recommendation of the
Security Council’s Committee on the Admission of New
Members and consequently supports the application of the
Government of Bahrain for membership in the United
Nations. The United States looks forward to welcoming the
Bahraini delegation to the twenty-sixth session of the
General Assembly this autumn and to working with it
thereafter.
51. We welcome the decision by the United Kingdom and
Bahrain to terminate their long-standing treaty relationship
in order for Bahrain to assume full responsibility for its
relations with the international community. 1 know that all
Members of the United Nations are gratified by the
amicable and orderly manner in which this decision has
been reached and implemented by mutual consent. On I?
August the United States announced its recognition of
Bahrain. Of course, this meeting of the Council is not the
first that has considered the case of Bahrain. At its 1536th
meeting, on 11 May 1970, the Council unanimously
adopted resolution 278 (1970). This endorsed the report of
the Secretary-General’s Personal Representative and welcomed the conclusion that “the overwhelming majority of
the people of Bahrain wish to gain recognition of their
identity in a fully independent and sovereign State free to
decide for itself its relations with other States”.
52. Our action today marks the felicitous culmination of a
process which has involved co-operation between the
Governments of two Member States, the contribution of
the good offices of the Secretary-General and of his
Personal Representative, Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi, to
whom Ambassador Crowe referred, and the participation of
the representatives of the vast majority of the people of
Bahrain. To each and all of those who played an important
role in this process we extend our congratulations.

independence. the Ruler reaffrmed Bahrain’s adherence to
all its international pledges and commitments and its
dedication to peace, co-operation and progress. I am
confident that Bahrain will be a constructive and valued
Member of the United Nations.
56. Mr. NICOL (Sierra Leone): My delegation joins in
welcoming the new nation of Bahrain to full membership of
the United Nations.
57. The President of our Republic, Mr. Siaka Stevens, and
the Government of Sierra Leone send their warmest
congratulations and good wishes to the Sultan, Government
and people of Bahrain. Its independence and the fact that it
has been recommended for admission to the United Nations
within the past week are both, to us, very auspicious events.
58. The high level of education and culture of Bahrain and
its obvious economic sufficiency wili ensure that its
contribution to the work of the United Nations will be
varied, significant and adequate. The influence of Bahrain
in its region has been historically great and continues to
be so.
59. It is our earnest hope that when the other Gulf States
are ready they will And it.possible to join Bahrain in some
way at the General Assembly as members. The example of
Zanzibar joining with Tanganylka to form the United
Republic of Tanzania is an example which some of us
always bear in mind when we consider effective representation of units. We hope that Bahrain and its neighbours will
consider this at the appropriate time, without any loss of
sovereignty.
60. Whatever form Bahrain may choose to take in future,
we are delighted that it should have decided to apply for
membership in the United Nations, and my delegation has
given fulI support to its application. We now join today in
both welcoming it and extending to it our best wishes for
the future. We look forward to fruitful co-operation with
Bahrain in the United Nations.
61. Mr. MAGENGE
(Burundi) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, while your predecessor and you

53. Bahrain is a nation that is rich in ancient cultural
tradition and has a long-standing sense of national identity.
In recent years it has entered a period of remarkable
industrial and commercial development. This effort has
been assisted by Bahrain’s wealth of natural resources, but
it is mainly a tribute to the talent and energy of the people
of that country. The State of Bahrain has long been noted
in the Gulf area for its dedication to educational and social
progress and for the skiII and learning of its citizens. The
leadership of Bahrain has given clear evidence of successin
managing the affairs of a rapidly progressing society.
54. For many years citizens of my country have been
active in the economic development of Bahrain. The
relationship between our two countries has been consistently friendly.

have not always been able to convene the Security Council
in an atmosphere such as the one which prevails today, I am
sure you are pleased to preside over a meeting which is
characterized by an atmosphere of happiness, a meeting at
which the colonizers and the colonized all share the same
joy. Indeed you will recall that on two occasions, last
month as well as at the beginning of this month, we were
not able to hold as serene and joyful meetmgs as this one of
the Security Council because of the conduct of one
colonizing country. Members wilI realize that I am referring
to Portugal, which does not wish to follow the only true
path, which has been followed by many countries, in giving
an eminent example of improving relations between countries and peoples.

55. Therefore, my Government warmly welcomes Bahrain’s application for membership in the United Nations.
Bahrain has by its conduct and attitude over the yearsgiven
evidence of its support for the principles of the United
Nations Charter. On 14 August, in announcing Bahrain’s

62. Today the most sincere feelings of my delegation are
extended to the Government and people of Bahrain, which
have just taken the historical step of emerging from a
r&lrne which although it may have historical justification
was, nevertheless, an imposed rdgime. Whatever the rela5

-.

tions the metropolitan country may have with the colonies,
at the time of independence a new leaf is turned. It is a
moment of joy and co-operation. 1 wish to make it clear
that decolonization has, with some very rare exceptions and
despite what some way think, always been, the beginning of
a new era of friendship in equality, solidarity and confidence.
63. I am unable to find sufficiently eloquent words to
describe the changes which take place and the improvement
which occurs after decolomzation. Today, British citizens
and the citizens of Bahrain are fortunately closer to one
another,and this fact eloquently demonstrates, teaches, and
confirms that decolonization brings advantages to all sides.
Our friends from Portugal and South Africa have not yet
learned this lesson of history. They even go against the
current of history, despite repeated appeals and friendly
invitations to heed the voice of reason.
64. In conclusion,I should like once againto saythat my
delegationtransmitsthe sincerewishesof my Government
to the peopleand Government of Bahrainfor the cons&
dation of friendly relations with the former metropolisin
equality and mutual esteem.
65. Mr. LJU (China): The Security Council hasjust voted
unanimouslyfor the admissionof Bahrain to the United
Nations.In fact, the Council, in resolution278 (1970) of 1I
May 1970, had already come to the conclusionthat the
overwhelmingmajority of the peopleof Bahrain wishedto
gain recognitionof their identity in a fully independentand
sovereignstate. Now the peopleof Bahrainhave decidedto
translatetheir aspirationsinto reality. With the termination
of the special treaty between Bahrain and the United
Kingdom a few days ago, the obstacle in the way of
independentstatehood has been removed. The emergence
of Bahrainasa sovereignState representsthe fulfilment of
one of the basic purposes of the Charter, namely, the
self-determinationof peoples. The Amir of the State of
Bahrain, in his letter to the Secretary-Generaldated 15
August 1971 [S/10291/.+ expressedhis belief in the great
value of the United Nations to small and developing
nations. We, on our part, are confident that Bahrainwill be
able to play a constructive role in the United Nations.
66. On behalf of my delegation, I take this opportunity to
extend to the Government and peopleof Bahrain our best
wishesfor a prosperousand peacefut future.
67. Mr. DE LA GORCE (France) (interpretation from
&errchj: I amparticularly happy to have the opportunity on
behalf of the French Government, to express,our great
satisfactionin recommendingto the GeneralAssemblythe
admissionof Bahrain. If the United Nations is to reflect
--and it doesin fact and in ever more accurate fashionreflect the rich diversity of the international community,
then it is equally true that each of the familiesof States
composing it should be represented as completely as
possible.Wetherefore are very glad to seethe family of the
Arab countries, to which we are joined by the most
Preciousbondsof friendship, increasedby another member,
and we are certain that the new State will contribute most
usefully to the United Nations in the pursuit of our
objectivesof peace,justice and progress.

6

68. The new State fully deserves to be admjtted to our
midst. It represents one of the oldest centres of civilization
in the world and has, in the course of the centuries,
developed a prosperous and varied economy. Its history
goes back to the most remote antiquity, asthe representative of Syria recalled, and the vestigesof art and industry
discovered there come from the most ancient civilizations
of the Orient. Europeis not unmindful of aE it owesto this
great cultural heritage.
69. Bahrain is today a prosperouscountry by reasonof its
oil resources,its commerciatactivities and its agricultural
wealth, and its economy makespossiblea rapid growth for
a population which is one of the youngest in the world, at
the sametime without jeopardizing the improvement of its
standardof living and its cultural level.
70. Justifiably proud of its historic heritage, its traditions
and its development, Bahrain requestedindependence.The
inquiry conductedlast year by the presentDirector-General
of the United NationsOffice at Genevamade manifestthe
unanimousdesireof the population. Weare happy today to
congratulate the Government and the people of Bahrain,
and the Government of the United Kingdom aswell, for the
manner in which the necessaryevobrtion has beenbrought
about and for its fortunate conclusion, and we offer the
new State our most sincereand friendly wishes.
71. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) [interpretation
from Spanish): The Government and people of Argentina,
through me, wish to expresstheir warmestcongratulations
to Bahrain on its accessionto independence,and at the
same time, in view of the resolution just unanimously
adopted by the Security Council, to welcomeit in advance
to the United Nations.
72. The traditjonal and very closeties that bind the Arab
statesto the Argentine nation are indeed well known, We
enjoy the privilegein my country of having one of the most
numerousArab communitiesthat have settled abroad.The
membersof that community long ago associatedthemselves
with and integrated themselvesinto the Argentine people,
making a substantialcontribution to our progressin general
through their productive labours, tht,r ingenuity and their
high level of culture.
1
73. For all thesereasons,and becausewe know the talents
of the Arab peoplesand arecertain that Bahrain will play a
constructive role in helping the international community
achieve the Purposesand Principles of the United Nations
Charter, we rejoice at the presenceof this new independent
State among us. My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to assureBahrain of its fraternal feelings and to
expressits conviction that between Bahrain and Argentina
the sameties that unite us with the other Arab stateswill
be developed.
74. Mr. SEVILLA SCASA (Nicaragua) (interpretation
Fom Spanish): I wish to say a few words to expressthe
satisfactionafforded me by the adoption this morning by
he Security Council of the unanimousresolution which, to
he pleasureof all, recommendsthe admissionof the State
)f Bahrainasa new Memberof our Organization.

-

--

c-

75. Our behalf of Nicaragua, I warmly congratulate the
State of Bahrain. I offer the sincere friendship of our
Government and people and the best wishes of the
Nicaraguan nation for the ever-increasing prosperity of the
noble people of Bahrain.
76. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): In supporting the application
of Bahrain to join the United Nations and to take its place
among the sovereign independent States of the world, my
delegation considered that application in the light of two
dear and cherished principles of this Organization: the
inalienable right of peoples to self-determination and the
right of a State to a sovereign and independent existence.
77. The wishes of the people of Bahrain with regard to
their future were expressed and conveyed to this Council as
far back as April 1970, when the Secretary-General’s
Personal Representative found that the overwhelming majority of the people of Bahrain wished to gain recognition
of their identity in a fully independent and sovereign State
free to decide for itself its relations with other States.
78. The Head of State of Bahrain, His Highness Isa bin
SuJman Al-Khalifah, has declared on behalf of the people
and Government of Bahrain that Bahrain accepts the
obligations contained in the Charter of the United Nations.
That Bahrain will honour those obligations and discharge
them to the satisfaction of everyone there is no doubt,
79. The people of Bahrain have a history that goes back
into deep antiquity. Their rich cultural heritage, the
tolerance that they have manifested throughout the ages
towards other peoples, their historic struggle to maintain
their own dignity and freedom. are attributes which will
serve them well as a Member of this Organization.
80. The Somali people has had close and friendly links
with Bahrain which span the centuries, and we look
forward to extending the friendly co-operation that has
characterized
our past relationship in the pursuit of
common objectives at the United Nations, The Government
and people of the Somali Democratic Republic extend to
the Government and people of the Republic of Bahrain
warmest wishes for the success of their endeavours both at
the jmpot-tant level of nation-building and at the international level in their relations with other States.
81. We trust that the time will soon come when my
delegation wiI1 be in a position also to welcome the
presence here of other Gulf States as Members of this
Organization.
82. The PRESIDENT:
Now that alJ members of the
Council except one have spoken, in accordance’ with
tradition J shall make a statement as representative of
ITALY *

matist and high official of this Organization, Ambassador
Vittorio Winspeare Guicciardi, was entrusted with the
important mission of ascertaining the will of the people of
Bahrain. While my delegation draws sincere satisfaction
from this happy circumstance, I, personally, feel most
fortunate to be in the Chair when this historic event in the
life of Bahrain is taking place.’
84. The admission to our Organization of a newly independent country represents, in our view, a further step
towards the fulfilment of the objective of universality, an
objective which, we believe, is consistent with the spirit of
the Charter and, at the same time, meets the expectations
and the needs of mankind at this stage in its history. A
more open discourse between peoples of different races,
religions and cultures, the efforts by peoples to understand
each other and to look at what they have in common rather
than at what separates them, the acknowledgement by
mankind that only by working together can we face the
global challenges of our times-these seem to be the main
features, the imperative of our shrinking world.
85. In that light, the decision that we have just taken
becomes all the more significant. As we are the product of
our own history, of past generations, Jet me say that
long-lasting ties have connected the Jtalian people and the
people of Bahrain. Pliny and Strabo have described the
customs, the virtues, the history, of the people now ready
to join us, and through centuries this relationship started by
the Romans and continued through the Renaissance wilI no
doubt develop to the mutual advantage of our two
countries.
86. For cultural, economic and geographical reasons, the
Republic of Italy feels very close to the countries of the
Near East. The Italian Government has therefore consistently contributed, to the extent of its capacities, to the
development and progress of the friendly neighbouring
countries situated in that most important area of the world.
Italy has supported and will continue to support their
well-founded aspiration to shape their future of their own
free will, to play again a role in international affairs on an
equal footing, and to make their own, original contribution
to the advance of mankind.
87. III the light of those considerations the Italian Govemment is confident that the work and the performance of
this Organization will benefit by the membership of
Bahrain.
88. For alJ those reasons the Italian delegation voted in
favour of the resolution which has just been adopted
unanimously and wiJJ be most happy to co-operate with the
Bahrain delegation for the achievement of the purposes
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
89. Before concluding I should like to state that the report
of the Committee on the Admission of New Members
mentions two applications and that my delegation looks
forward to the speedy completion of the consideration of
Oman’s application for membership of the United Nations
so that Oman may be admitted in the course of the
twenty-sixth session of the General Assembly.

83. ay a happy coincidence-a rare thing in man’s life-it
has fallen to me to convene the Council and preside over its
meetings at which we have considered the ‘application for
admission to the world Organization of the State of
Bahrain. It is a happy coincidence since, if I may say SO,
Italy in a sense has been instrumental in bringing about the
final process towards the independence of Bahrain. In fact,
as is well known to aLImembers of the Council-indeed it
has been mentioned by previous speakers-an Italian diplo-

The meering rose at noon.
7

HOW

T O OBTAIN

United

Notions

UNITED

NATIONS

publications

the world.
or Geneva.

Conrull

your

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

mey

be obtoinrd

lrom

bookstore

or

IO: United

wile

LES PUBLlCATlONS

11s publications
dcs Nc&ons
Unier
ronl
d&poritoirer
du mends antier.
Informer-vow
Notions Uniar, Section dsr vrnles,
New York

COMO

CONSEDUIR

PUBLICACIONES

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$lJ.S.

0.50

and

Nations,

DES NATIONS

distributorr
Soler

throughout

Section,

New

York

UNIEJ

en vents
dons
lar libroiriar
sl Ies ogencw
oupc&r
de votre
libroirie
ou adresser-vow
61
ou Genivs.

DE LAS NACIONES

Las publicocionar
do 1.1 Nocioncr
Unidor
est6n
en lodor parler dot mundo. Conrulle
o IV librero
Ventas, Nuevo York o Cinebro.

Litho

bookstores

(or equivalent

en venta

UNIDAS

en librerlar

o dirljore

in other

o: Nacioner

currencies)

y come
Unidor,

dirtribwidoror
Secci6n

de

82OsO-July

197340s~

:
