A/62/PV.78

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-second session

78

th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 19 December 2007, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kerim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia)

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Agenda item 44
Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment
on HIV/AIDS and the Political Declaration
on HIV/AIDS
Draft resolution (A/62/L.40)
The President: In connection with draft
resolution A/62/L.40, I now give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Ms. Kelley (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with draft
resolution A/62/L.40, entitled “Organization of the
2008 comprehensive review of the progress achieved in
realizing the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS and the Political Declaration on
HIV/AIDS”, I wish to put on record the following
statement of financial implications on behalf of the
Secretary-General in accordance rule 153 of the rules
of procedure.
Under the terms of operative paragraphs 1 and 2
of the draft resolution, the General Assembly would
decide
“to convene a high-level meeting on 10 and
11 June 2008, which will undertake a
comprehensive review of the progress achieved in
realizing the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS and the Political Declaration on
HIV/AIDS, as well as promote continued

engagement of leaders in a comprehensive global
response to AIDS;”
and would decide that the organizational arrangements
for the high-level meeting would comprise plenary
meetings, five thematic panel discussions and an
informal interactive hearing with civil society
“organized with the active participation of people
living with HIV/AIDS and broader civil society,
and will be attended by representatives of
Member States, the Observer State and observers,
non-governmental organizations in consultative
status with the Economic and Social Council,
invited civil society organizations and the private
sector;”.
Pursuant to operative paragraphs 1 and 2 of the
draft resolution, it is envisaged that a total of
10 meetings with interpretation services in the
6 official languages would be held, comprising four
plenary meetings, one interactive civil society hearing
and five thematic panel discussions. Documentation
requirements include verbatim records for the four
plenary meetings and 17 pages pre-session and
17 pages post-session documentation to be translated
into the six official languages.
Should the General Assembly adopt operative
paragraphs 1 and 2 of draft resolution A/62/L.40, it is
estimated that their implementation would involve
additional conference servicing resources for three of
the envisaged five thematic panel discussions
estimated in the total amount of $36,200 as follows:
Section 2, General Assembly and Economic and Social

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

07-65299 (E)

*0765299*

A/62/PV.78

Council affairs and conference management, $34,300;
and Section 28D; Office of Central Support Services,
$1,900. No additional resources would be required for
the interactive civil society hearing and the plenary
meetings, since these could be serviced from within
existing resources already allocated to meetings of the
General Assembly.
Although provisions have not been included
under the aforementioned respective sections of the
proposed programme budget for the biennium
2008-2009, in order to implement the activities as
envisaged under operative paragraphs 1 and 2 of the
draft resolution, it is anticipated the requirements could
be met from within the resources proposed under the
sections for the biennium 2008-2009. Accordingly, no
additional appropriations will be required.
The President: The Assembly will now take
action on draft resolution A/62/L.40, entitled
“Organization of the 2008 comprehensive review of the
progress achieved in realizing the Declaration of
Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the Political
Declaration on HIV/AIDS”. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to adopt draft resolution A/62/L.40?
Draft resolution A/62/L.40
(resolution 62/178).

was

adopted

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 44.

Development Fund for Women for a three-year term
beginning on 1 January 2008 and ending on
31 December 2010. May I consider that the General
Assembly takes note of those appointments?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (j) of agenda item 114?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 64 (continued)
New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and
international support
(a) New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and
international support
Draft resolutions (A/62/L.10/Rev.1
and A/62/L.29)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly held its debate on agenda item 64
and its sub-items (a) and (b) jointly with agenda
item 47 at the 27th to 29th plenary meetings, held on
18 and 19 October 2007.

Agenda item 114 (continued)

Before proceeding further, I wish to inform
members that action on draft resolution A/62/L.29 has
been postponed to a later date to allow time for
consultations.

Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments

I now give the floor to the representative of
Pakistan to introduce draft resolution A/62/L.10/Rev.1.

(j) Appointment of the members of the
Consultative Committee of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women

Mr. Amil (Pakistan): On behalf of the Group of
77 and China, as well as other sponsors, I have the
honour to introduce the draft resolution under sub-item
(a) of agenda item 64, entitled “New Partnership for
Africa’s Development: progress in implementation and
international support”, contained in document
A/62/L.10/Rev.1.

The President: Members will recall that, at its
62nd plenary meeting, on 6 December 2007, the
Assembly, on the recommendation of the Third
Committee, decided that the two new members of the
Consultative Committee of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women shall be granted a full
term of three years, commencing on 1 January 2008
and ending on 31 December 2010.
Following consultations, I have appointed Chile
and the Republic of Korea as members of the
Consultative Committee of the United Nations

2

There is much that has been achieved in Africa
since the launch of the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development (NEPAD). It represents the collective
determination and commitment of Africa to place its
countries on the road to sustainable economic and
social development by taking control of its own
development and by fighting poverty.

07-65299

A/62/PV.78

Today, as we stand at the halfway mark towards
2015, the target date for achieving the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), Africa, unfortunately,
remains the only continent not on track to achieve the
MDGs by 2015. If we are to succeed in eradicating
poverty and hunger in Africa, then urgent and
concerted action by developed countries and the
international community is needed. That obviously
entails further strengthening and enhancement of the
global partnership for development and vigorous
implementation of all development commitments — in
particular the promises that have been made in support
of Africa — without any further delay. Today, the
inadequacy of resources is widely seen as the main
constraint on African development. While we welcome
the support provided by the international community,
and the United Nations in particular, much more needs
to be done.
It is against that backdrop that the Group of 77
and China submitted the present draft resolution, which
requires the attention of the international community.
While recognizing the progress made in the
implementation of the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development as well as regional and international
support for NEPAD, the draft resolution acknowledges
that much needs to be done in its implementation. It
recognizes the need for African countries to continue to
coordinate, in accordance with their respective national
strategies and priorities, all types of external assistance
in order to effectively integrate such assistance into
their development processes.
The draft resolution calls for comprehensive and
sustainable solutions to the challenges faced by African
countries, including external debt, the need for
coherence in the trade policies towards African
countries, the full integration of African countries into
the international trading system through initiatives
such as building Africa’s capacity to compete, and the
provision of assistance to address the adjustment
challenges of trade liberalization.
While recognizing the need for the international
community to make continued efforts to increase the
flow of new and additional resources for development
financing from all sources — public and private,
domestic and foreign — to support the development of
African countries, the draft resolution calls for the
fulfilment of commitments by the developed countries
to ensure that the increase in official development

07-65299

assistance translates into an actual flow of financial
resources to developing countries.
The draft resolution reaffirms the General
Assembly’s decision to hold a high-level meeting on
“Africa’s development needs: state of implementation
of various commitments, challenges and the way
forward” during its sixty-third session and stresses the
need for close consultation between the United Nations
and the African Union in preparing for the high-level
meeting.
Mr. Kariyawasam (Sri Lanka), Vice-President,
took the Chair.
On behalf of the Group of 77 and China, I wish to
thank all those Member States that sponsored this
important draft resolution to express their commitment
to strengthening international cooperation to achieve
the goal of development in Africa. We hope that, as in
the past, the General Assembly will adopt the draft
resolution under this item by consensus.
Finally, I would like to announce that Denmark,
Finland, Germany, Israel, the Netherlands, Spain and
the United Kingdom have joined the list of sponsors.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/62/L.10/Rev.1. In
connection with the draft resolution, I give the floor to
the representative of the Secretariat.
Ms. Kelley (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with draft
resolution A/62/L.10/Rev.1, entitled “New Partnership
for Africa’s Development: progress in implementation
and international support”, I wish to place on record
the following statement of financial implications on
behalf of the Secretary-General, in accordance with
rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly.
By operative paragraphs 30 and 34 of draft
resolution A/62/L.10/Rev.1, the General Assembly
would reaffirm its decision
“to hold within existing resources a high-level
meeting on ‘Africa’s development needs: state of
implementation
of
various
commitments,
challenges and the way forward’ during its sixtythird session”
and request the Secretary-General

3

A/62/PV.78

“to take measures to strengthen the Office of the
Special Adviser on Africa in order to enable it to
effectively fulfil its mandate, including
monitoring and reporting on progress related to
meeting the special needs of Africa”.
Pursuant to the operative paragraph 30 of the
draft resolution, it is understood that the high-level
meeting would be held in the context of the regular
plenary meetings of the General Assembly. Provision
for conference servicing costs for the Assembly’s sixtythird session has been included in the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2008-2009. Any
additional conference servicing requirements for
related activities, such as parallel meetings of the
General Assembly, round tables, hearings and/or
panels, will be reviewed and evaluated later, when the
format and modalities of this high-level meeting are
determined.
Pursuant to operative paragraph 34 of the draft
resolution, resources amounting to $7,360,100 before
recosting have been provided under subprogramme 1
of section 11, United Nations support for the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD), of the
proposed programme budget for the biennium
2008-2009, for the Office of the Special Adviser on
Africa. Accordingly, adoption of draft resolution
A/62/L.10/Rev.1 would not give rise to any financial
implications under the proposed programme budget for
the biennium 2008-2009.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/62/L.10/Rev.1.
There are two additional sponsors, namely France and
Belgium. May I take it that the Assembly decides to
adopt draft resolution A/62/L.10/Rev.1?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/179).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 64.
Agenda item 47 (continued)
2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa
Draft resolution A/62/L.39
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly held the debate on agenda item

4

47, jointly with agenda item 64 and its sub-items (a)
and (b), at the 27th to 29th plenary meetings, on 18 and
19 October 2007.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Botswana to introduce draft resolution A/62/L.39.
Mr. Outlule (Botswana): On behalf of the Group
of African States and all sponsors, I have the honour to
introduce draft resolution A/62/L.39, entitled
“2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa”.
At the outset, let me make a correction to the text.
In operative paragraph 3, in the phrase “through
targeted funding from multilateral and bilateral
sources”, the word “targeted” should be deleted. The
paragraph thus reads:
“Also welcomes the increased funding for
malaria interventions and for research and
development of preventive and control tools from
the international community, through funding
from multilateral and bilateral sources and from
the private sector …”.
The Group of African States wishes to thank all
Member States that participated in the negotiations on
the draft resolution. Their contributions enriched the
draft, the implementation of which will facilitate the
eradication of that deadly disease. We also wish to
express our appreciation and gratitude to Mrs. Joyce
Kafanabo of the United Republic of Tanzania for
skilfully and diligently facilitating the negotiations on
this draft resolution.
In introducing the draft resolution, it is our hope
that, as in previous years, it will be adopted by
consensus, thus reflecting our unity of purpose to
eradicate this disease, the vector of which, the
anopheles mosquito, is one of the most infamous and
insidious insects in the history of human health.
Africa bears an overwhelming proportion of the
malaria burden. It costs Africa $12 billion per annum
in lost gross domestic product. It consumes up to
34 per cent of household incomes and 40 per cent of
Government health spending. But we all know that,
with advances in science and technology, malaria is a
disease that is preventable, treatable and curable.
Our concerted efforts to roll back malaria are thus
imperative because it can be done in a simple,
measurable, achievable, realistic way, and within a

07-65299

A/62/PV.78

time-bound period. That is why we speak of the period
2001-2010 for rolling back malaria. We wish to
continue to count on the ongoing support and assured
assistance of the international community in order to
achieve the objective of rolling back malaria by 2010.
The Group of African States is presenting this
annual draft resolution as part of our effort to combat
malaria and to achieve Millennium Development
Goals. In the fight against malaria, we must recognize
that defeat is not an option, because with the huge
advances in science and technology, it would be a
shame to the international community if human
civilization were to surrender to the mosquito.
This draft resolution updates a similar resolution
adopted last year to take into account new
developments and measures to combat malaria. The
draft further welcomes the decision by the World
Health Assembly to commemorate Malaria Day
annually, the increase in funding to combat malaria and
the improved predictability of such funding.
We appeal to Member States and the international
community as a whole to work in a spirit of
cooperation towards effective, increased, harmonized
and sustained bilateral and multilateral support to
combat malaria.
Once again, it is our wish that this draft
resolution be adopted by consensus.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/62/L.39, as orally
corrected. Additional sponsors of the draft are Canada,
Croatia, Finland, Israel, Lebanon, Myanmar and
Portugal.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
A/62/L.39, as orally corrected?
Draft resolution A/62/L.39, as orally corrected,
was adopted (resolution 62/180).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See for a
general statement after adoption of the resolution.
Father Meyer (Holy See): The Holy See
welcomes the adoption of resolution 62/180, entitled
“2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa”, and
expresses its gratitude to the United Republic of
Tanzania, the resolution’s main sponsor, along with the

07-65299

African Group and the many delegations that worked
cooperatively to advance this valuable text.
The Holy See commends the adoption of this
consensus resolution, particularly because it recognizes
that malaria can be substantially eliminated by
educating and sensitizing the public and by committing
resources towards this issue.
Further, there is an ongoing need to ensure
greater distribution of resources for research and
treatment. As a world community, we know that
malaria is a threat to health security; this threat will be
addressed if the global family commits itself to
affordable, action-oriented programmes involving
research, vaccination, treatment and preventative
education. This resolution is a step in that direction.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 47?
It was so decided.
Reports of the Second Committee
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will consider the reports of the Second Committee on
agenda items 41, 51, 52 and its sub-items (a) to (c), 53,
54 and its sub-items (a) to (i), 55, 56 and its sub-items
(a) to (c), 57 and its sub-items (a) and (b), 58 and its
sub-items (a) to (c), 59 and its sub-items (a) to (c), 60,
61, 121 and 129.
I request the rapporteur of the Second Committee,
Ms. Tamar Tchitanava of Georgia, to introduce in one
intervention the reports of the Second Committee.
Ms. Tchitanava (Georgia) (Rapporteur of the
Second Committee) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to present for the Assembly’s consideration the
following reports of the Second Committee on the
agenda items allocated to it by the General Assembly at
its sixty-second session.
(spoke in English)
Under agenda item 41, entitled “Permanent
sovereignty of the Palestinian people in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and of
the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan over
their natural resources”, the Second Committee
recommends in paragraph 14 of document A/62/415
the adoption of one draft resolution.

5

A/62/PV.78

Under agenda item 51, entitled “Information and
communication technologies for development”, the
Second Committee recommends in paragraph 10 of
document A/62/416 the adoption of one draft
resolution.
Under agenda item 52, entitled “Macroeconomic
policy questions”, the report of the Second Committee
is issued in four parts. The report under the chapeau
“Macroeconomic policy questions” is contained in
document A/62/417, and the recommendations are
contained in the following addenda: Under sub-item 52
(a), entitled “International trade and development”, the
Second Committee recommends in paragraph 12 of
document A/62/417/Add.1 the adoption of two draft
resolutions; Under sub-item 52 (b), entitled
“International financial system and development”, the
Second Committee recommends in paragraph 8 of
document A/62/417/Add.2 the adoption of one draft
resolution; Under sub-item 52 (c), entitled “External
debt crisis and development”, the Second Committee
recommends
in
paragraph
9
of
document
A/62/417/Add.3 the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 53, entitled “Follow-up to and
implementation of the outcome of the International
Conference on Financing for Development”, the
Second Committee recommends, in paragraph 12 of
document A/62/418 the adoption of one draft
resolution.

document A/62/419/Add.1 the adoption of two draft
resolutions.
Under sub-item 54 (b), entitled “Follow-up to and
implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for the
Further Implementation of the Programme of Action
for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing
States”,
the
Second
Committee
recommends
in
paragraph
7
of
document
A/62/419/Add.2 the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 54 (c), entitled “International
Strategy for Disaster Reduction”, the Second
Committee recommends in paragraph 8 of document
A/62/419/Add.3 the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 54 (d), entitled “Protection of
global climate for present and future generations of
mankind”,
in
paragraph
10
of
document
A/62/419/Add.4, the draft resolution entitled
“Protection of global climate for present and future
generations of mankind” was adopted by the General
Assembly at its 65th plenary meeting on 10 December.
Under sub-item 54 (e), entitled “Implementation
of the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing
Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in
Africa”, the Second Committee recommends in
paragraph 9 of document A/62/419/Add.5 the adoption
of one draft resolution.

Under agenda item 54, entitled “Sustainable
development”, the report of the Second Committee is
issued in eleven parts. The following recommendations
are contained in Part I and Part II of the report under
the chapeau “Sustainable development”, as well as in
the various addenda. Under the chapeau of item 54, in
paragraph 14 of document A/62/419 (Part I), the draft
resolution entitled “Non-legally binding instrument on
all types of forests” was adopted by the General
Assembly at its 74th plenary meeting on 17 December.
Also under the chapeau of item 54, the Second
Committee recommends in paragraph 10 of document
A/62/419 Part II the adoption of one draft resolution
entitled “Oil slick on Lebanese shores”.

Under sub-item 54 (f), entitled “Convention on
Biological Diversity”, the Second Committee
recommends
in
paragraph
7
of
document
A/62/419/Add.6 the adoption of one draft resolution.

Under sub-item 54 (a), entitled “Implementation
of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further
Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the
World Summit on Sustainable Development”, the
Second Committee recommends in paragraph 13 of

Under sub-item 54 (i), entitled “Promotion of
new and renewable sources of energy”, the Second
Committee recommends in paragraph 9 of document
A/62/419/Add.9 the adoption of one draft resolution.

6

Under sub-item 54 (g), entitled “Report of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme on its twenty-fourth session”, the Second
Committee recommends in paragraph 8 of document
A/62/419/Add.7 the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 54 (h), entitled “Sustainable
mountain development”, the Second Committee
recommends
in
paragraph
7
of
document
A/62/419/Add.8 the adoption of one draft resolution.

Under agenda item 55, entitled “Implementation
of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on

07-65299

A/62/PV.78

Human Settlements (Habitat II) and strengthening of
the United Nations Human Settlements Programme
(UN-Habitat)”, the Second Committee recommends in
paragraph 12 of document A/62/420 the adoption of
one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 56, entitled “Globalization
and interdependence”, the report of the Committee has
been issued in four parts. The report under the chapeau
is contained in document A/62/421, and the
recommendations are contained in the following
addenda.
Under sub-item 56 (a), entitled “Globalization
and interdependence”, the Second Committee
recommends
in
paragraph
8
of
document
A/62/421/Add.1 the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 56 (b), entitled “Science and
technology for development”, the Second Committee
recommends in paragraph 14 of document
A/62/421/Add.2 the adoption of two draft resolutions.
In connection with that report, I wish to make the
following corrections to draft resolution II, entitled
“Science and technology for development”. In
operative paragraph 8, the word “affordable” and the
words “including on concessional and preferential
terms” should be deleted. The latter part of that
paragraph should thus read as follows: “technology for
developing countries, under fair, transparent and
mutually agreed terms, in a manner conducive to social
and economic welfare for the benefit of society”.
Under sub-item 56 (c), entitled “Preventing and
combating corrupt practices and transfer of assets of
illicit origin and returning such assets, in particular to
the countries of origin, consistent with the United
Nations Convention against Corruption”, the Second
Committee recommends in paragraph 8 of document
A/62/421/Add.3 the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 57, entitled “Groups of
countries in special situations”, the report of the
Committee has been issued in three parts. The report
under the chapeau is contained in document A/62/422,
and the recommendations are contained in the
following addenda.
Under sub-item 57 (a), entitled “Third United
Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries”, the Second Committee recommends in
paragraph 8 of document A/62/422/Add.1 the adoption
of one draft resolution.

07-65299

Under sub-item 57 (b), entitled “Specific actions
related to the particular needs and problems of
landlocked developing countries: outcome of the
International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked
and Transit Developing Countries and Donor Countries
and International Financial and Development
Institutions on Transit Transport Cooperation”, the
Second Committee recommends in paragraph 8 of
document A/62/422/Add.2 the adoption of one draft
resolution.
Under agenda item 58, entitled “Eradication of
poverty and other development issues”, the report of
the Committee has been issued in four parts. The report
under the chapeau is contained in document A/62/423,
and the recommendations are contained in the
following addenda.
Under sub-item 58 (a), entitled “Implementation
of the First United Nations Decade for the Eradication
of Poverty (1997-2006)”, the Second Committee
recommends
in
paragraph
8
of
document
A/62/423/Add.1 the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 58 (b), entitled “Women in
development”, the Second Committee recommends in
paragraph 8 of document A/62/423/Add.2 the adoption
of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 58 (c), entitled “Human resources
development”, the Second Committee recommends in
paragraph 8 of document A/62/423/Add.3 the adoption
of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 59, entitled “Operational
activities for development”, the report of the
Committee has been issued in four parts. The following
recommendations are contained in the report under the
chapeau as well as in the various addenda.
Under the chapeau of item 59, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 7 of document
A/62/424, the adoption of one draft decision, entitled
“Amendments to the General Regulations of the World
Food Programme”.
Under sub-item 59 (a), entitled “Operational
activities for development of the United Nations
system”, the Second Committee recommends, in
paragraph 3 of document A/62/424/Add.1, the adoption
of one draft decision, entitled “Note by the
Secretary-General transmitting the report on the
activities of the United Nations Development Fund for
Women”.

7

A/62/PV.78

Under sub-item 59 (b), entitled “Triennial
comprehensive policy review of operational activities
for development of the United Nations system”, the
Second Committee recommends in paragraph 9 of
document A/62/424/Add.2 the adoption of one draft
resolution.

wish to express my gratitude to all the facilitators for
their excellent help during our difficult discussions, in
particular Mr. Thomas Gass of Switzerland, who
spared no effort to achieve consensus on the most
difficult text, namely, the draft resolution on the
triennial comprehensive policy review.

Under sub-item 59 (c), entitled “South-South
cooperation for development”, the Second Committee
recommends
in
paragraph
8
of
document
A/62/424/Add.3 the adoption of one draft resolution.

Finally, on a more personal note, I would like to
take this opportunity to convey my best wishes to those
colleagues who are celebrating an important holiday
today, as well as to those who just finished celebrating
the beautiful Festival of Lights and those who are
looking forward to the Christmas holiday. I wish all
delegations a wonderful end-of-year celebration and a
well-deserved break. Last but not least, I wish all
members peace and prosperity in the new year.

Under agenda item 60, entitled “Training and
research: United Nations Institute for Training and
Research”, the Second Committee recommends in
paragraph 12 of document A/62/425 the adoption of
one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 61, entitled “Towards global
partnerships”, the Second Committee recommends, in
document A/62/426, paragraph 10, the adoption of one
draft resolution.
Under agenda item 121, entitled “Revitalization
of the work of the General Assembly”, the Second
Committee recommends in paragraph 5 of document
A/62/427 the adoption of one draft decision.
Under agenda item 129, entitled “Programme
planning”, as indicated in paragraph 3 of document
A/62/428, no action was taken by the Second
Committee.
(spoke in French)
I thank members for their patience in listening to
my rather lengthy notes. I request delegations with
technical corrections to the texts of draft resolutions
adopted by the Second Committee to communicate as
soon as possible with the Committee secretariat so that
those corrections can be made prior to the issuance of
the final texts as resolutions of the General Assembly.
I take this opportunity, to thank the President of
the General Assembly most sincerely. I wish also to
thank the Chairperson of the Second Committee,
Ms. Kirsti Lintonen of Finland, as well as the
Vice-Chairpersons, Ms. Melanie Santizo-Sandoval of
Guatemala, Mr. Hassan Ali Saleh of Lebanon and
Mr. Peter Le Roux of South Africa, for their
extraordinary collaboration and partnership.
I would like sincerely to thank the Secretariat for
the outstanding assistance it has provided me and the
other members of the Bureau during this session. I also

8

The Acting President: I thank Ms. Tamar
Tchitanava of Georgia, Rapporteur of the Second
Committee, for her introduction of the Committee’s
reports.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the reports of the Second
Committee which are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the
Second Committee have been made clear in the
Committee and are reflected in the relevant official
records. May I remind Members that, under paragraph
7 of decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, i.e., either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee”.
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the
Second Committee, I should like to advise
representatives that we are going to proceed to take

07-65299

A/62/PV.78

decisions in the same manner as was done in the
Second Committee, unless the Secretariat is notified
otherwise in advance. That means that where recorded
votes or separate votes were taken, we will do the
same. I also hope that we may proceed to adopt
without a vote those recommendations that were
adopted without a vote in the Second Committee.
The Assembly is reminded that shortly we will be
taking action on draft resolutions recommended for
adoption by the Second Committee and, thus, those
draft resolutions can no longer be additionally
sponsored in plenary meeting by Member States. Any
corrections delegations may have concerning the
reports of the Second Committee, including the listing
of sponsors of a draft resolution contained in the
reports of the Committee, should be submitted to the
secretariat of the Second Committee for the issuance of
corrigenda.
Before proceeding further, I would like to draw
the attention of members to a note by the Secretariat
distributed desk-to-desk. The note will serve as a
reference guide for action on draft resolutions and draft
decisions recommended by the Second Committee in
its reports.
The President returned to the Chair.
Agenda item 41
Permanent sovereignty of the Palestinian people in
the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, and of the Arab population in the
occupied Syrian Golan over their natural resources
Report of the Second Committee (A/62/415)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 14 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cape Verde,

07-65299

Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland,
France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Moldova,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United
States of America.
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Fiji, Nauru, Tonga,
Vanuatu.
The draft resolution was adopted by 166 votes to
7, with 6 abstentions (resolution 62/181).

9

A/62/PV.78

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 41?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 51
Information and communication technologies
for development
Report of the Second Committee (A/62/416)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 10 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/182).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 51?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 52
Macroeconomic policy questions
Report of the Second Committee (A/62/417)
The President: May I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to take note of the report of the
Second Committee?
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 52.
(a) International trade and development
Report of the Second Committee
(A/62/417/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it two
draft resolutions recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 12 of its report. We will now
take a decision on draft resolutions I and II.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Unilateral economic
measures as a means of political and economic
coercion against developing countries”. A recorded
vote has been requested.

10

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Moldova,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Romania, San

07-65299

A/62/PV.78

Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Draft resolution I was adopted by 128 votes to 2,
with 51 abstentions (resolution 62/183).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“International trade and development”. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s
Democratic
Republic,
Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,

07-65299

Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malta,
Moldova,
Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Marshall Islands, Mexico, Norway, Palau,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Serbia
Draft resolution II was adopted by 126 votes to
48, with 7 abstentions (resolution 62/184).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United States, who wishes to
speak in explanation of vote on one of the resolutions
just adopted.
Mr. Rees (United States of America): The United
States would like to explain its vote with respect to
resolution 62/183, which is entitled “Unilateral
economic measures as a means of political and
economic coercion against developing countries” and
was submitted under sub-item (a) of agenda item 52.
The United States opposes this resolution. Every
State has the sovereign power to restrict or cut off trade
or other commerce with particular nations when the
State believes it is in its national economic or security
interest to do so or when it serves values about which
the nation feels strongly. The suggestion that there is
any international legal prohibition against such a right
is at best fatuous. That is why so many countries have
abstained from supporting the resolution today.
Sanctions are specifically provided for under the
United Nations Charter, because the framers saw them
as effective, and generally interim, measures —
targeted measures — that, as part of a broader
diplomatic and political strategy, can help the
international community to restore peace and security
without resort to the use of force. Sanctions should not
be used in all cases and must be carefully calibrated to
achieve their objectives. In some instances, sanctions
are designed to pressure a State to return to generally
accepted international norms such as democracy and
the rule of law. In other cases, sanctions such as arms

11

A/62/PV.78

embargoes, prohibition on access to nuclear materials
and others play a critical role in denying States the
tools they need to engage in harmful acts that threaten
international peace and security.
Member States must admit, if only to themselves,
that the resolution is actually aimed at undermining the
international
community’s
ability
to
respond
effectively to acts that, by their very nature and
enormity, are offensive to genuine international norms
such as human rights, democracy and the rule of law.
There must be consequences for such actions, lest the
offending States have no incentive or reason to
abandon them.
Economic sanctions, whether multilateral or
unilateral, can be, and in fact have been, effective
means to achieve legitimate foreign policy objectives.
For example, they have cut financial flows to corrupt
Powers involved in human rights violations and have
also led to a regime’s choice to give up nuclearweapons ambitions. My Government is not prepared to
concede that sanctions are not a legitimate and
effective tool of statecraft. This resolution will do
nothing to change that view.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 52?
It was so decided.
(b) International financial system and development
Report of the Second Committee
(A/62/417/Add.2)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/185).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 52?
It was so decided.

12

(c) External debt crisis and development
Report of the Second Committee
(A/62/417/Add.3)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution, entitled
“External debt and development: towards a durable
solution to the debt problems of developing countries”.
The Second Committee adopted the draft resolution.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/186).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item
(c) of agenda item 52 and of agenda item 52 as a
whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 53 (continued)
Follow-up to and implementation of the outcome of
the International Conference on Financing for
Development
Report of the Second Committee (A/62/418)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 12 of its report.
Before the Assembly takes action on this draft
resolution, I would like to extend my appreciation to
the two facilitators — His Excellency Ambassador
Maged Abdelaziz, Permanent Representative of Egypt,
and His Excellency Ambassador Johan Løvald,
Permanent Representative of Norway — for their
tireless efforts to broker a balanced agreement. I would
also like to thank the negotiators representing key
groups and individual Member States for the spirit of
compromise, professionalism and flexibility that
prevailed
throughout
the
extensive
informal
consultations on this draft resolution.
As I noted at the opening of this session,
financing for development is one of the key priorities
for the Assembly. I wish to assure all Member States
that it will remain a priority next year as we begin the
comprehensive preparatory process, including several
multi-stakeholder review sessions on the six thematic

07-65299

A/62/PV.78

areas of the Monterrey Consensus. To ensure an
optimal outcome from the Doha Conference, those
substantive interactive review sessions should allow
participation from experts from capitals and all key
stakeholders involved in the Monterrey process. I
would also like to see Member States taking a leading
role organizing and participating in the sessions. The
review session will therefore be given maximum
priority, within existing resources and taking into
account other informal consultation processes of the
General Assembly next year.
I am confident that, by continuing to work
cooperatively and with flexibility, we can produce the
first draft of an outcome document by the end of July
2008, which can then serve as the initial basis for a
successful outcome of Doha.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution,
entitled
“Follow-up
International
Conference on Financing for Development to Review
the Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus”. The
Second Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/187).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 53.
Agenda item 54 (continued)
Sustainable development
Report of the Second Committee (document
A/62/419 (Part II))
The President: Members will recall that, at its
74th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2007, the
Assembly considered the report of the Second
Committee on this item contained in document
A/62/419 (Part I) and adopted the draft resolution
contained therein as resolution 62/98. The Assembly
now has before it a draft resolution recommended by
the Second Committee in paragraph 10 of Part II of its
report. We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution, entitled “Oil slick on Lebanese shores”. A
recorded vote has been requested.

In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Moldova,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe

A recorded vote was taken.

07-65299

13

A/62/PV.78

Against:
Australia, Canada, Czech Republic, Israel,
Marshall Islands, Nauru, Palau, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire
The draft resolution was adopted by 169 votes to
8, with 3 abstentions (resolution 62/188).
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Czech
Republic advised the Secretariat that it had
intended to vote in favour.]
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 54.
(a) Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme
for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21
and the outcomes of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development
Report of the Second Committee
(A/62/419/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it two
draft resolutions recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 13 of its report. We will now
take a decision on draft resolutions I and II.
The Second Committee adopted draft resolution
I, entitled “Implementation of Agenda 21, the
Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda
21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development”. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
62/189).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Agricultural technology for development”. A recorded
vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African

14

Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Lao People’s
Democratic
Republic,
Latvia,
Liberia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Marshall
Islands,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Micronesia
(Federated States of), Moldova, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal,
Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bahrain, Brunei Darussalam, Comoros,
Djibouti, Egypt, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Malaysia,
Mali,
Mauritania,
Morocco, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South
Africa, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Draft resolution II was adopted by 147 votes to
none, with 30 abstentions (resolution 62/190).

07-65299

A/62/PV.78

[Subsequently, the delegation of the Czech
Republic advised the Secretariat that it had
intended to vote in favour.]
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel, who wishes to speak in
explanation of vote on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Carmon (Israel): My delegation wishes to
take this opportunity to express its appreciation to all
the original sponsors, to those Member States that
joined along the way and to those that voted in support
of resolution 62/190. We wish also to thank the
representative of Finland, Chairperson of the Second
Committee, and the facilitator for this resolution,
whose leadership was instrumental to this successful
outcome. Many thanks also go to you, Mr. President,
for the continued interest that you and your Office have
demonstrated on this important resolution.
As this resolution was solely of socio-economic
concern, it is regrettable that some delegations felt the
need to inject politicization and partisanship into the
deliberations and the lengthy process surrounding its
adoption. This is a non-political resolution that we feel
benefits humankind and the international community as
a whole and also bolsters development. My delegation
would have preferred for the resolution to be free from
all political elements and we were disappointed that it
could not be adopted by the Assembly by consensus.
At the end of this lengthy process, some Member
States felt that they could not support the resolution.
We respect the decision of some Arab delegations to
vote as they did. However, such a decision was the
outcome of political circumstances, and not substantive
and professional disagreement.
Nevertheless, my delegation is pleased that this
initiative brought together a wide spectrum of sponsors
and earned the support of the Assembly. There can be
no greater sign of the undeniable importance of this
resolution for sustainable development, achieving the
Millennium Development Goals and alleviating and
improving poor agricultural conditions in developing
countries for all of humankind and for the betterment
of our shared world. The next step is to implement the
resolution. We are determined to set it in motion for the
benefit of all Member States.

07-65299

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 54?
It was so decided.
(b) Follow-up to and implementation of the
Mauritius Strategy for the Further
Implementation of the Programme of Action for
the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States
Report of the Second Committee
(A/62/419/Add.2)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/191).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Venezuela, who wishes to speak in
explanation of position on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Rangel (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): My delegation is taking the floor to
explain its position with regard to the resolution
entitled “Follow-up to and implementation of the
Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of
the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States”, as
contained in document A/62/419/Add.2.
In that connection, my country participated
actively and with the best of intentions in order to
usefully cooperate on behalf of the sustainable
development of small island developing States, which
is a main goal of the policy of solidarity and
cooperation of the people of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela vis-à-vis its brothers in small island
developing States.
Nevertheless, allow me to reiterate the
reservations of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
with regard to paragraphs 27 (a) and (b) of the
Mauritius Strategy, given that our country is not party
to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea. As a result, unless they have been incorporated
into our national legislation, the Convention’s norms

15

A/62/PV.78

are not applicable to us, either as conventional or
customary law.
I am grateful for this opportunity to point out
those explicit reservations.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 54?
It was so decided.
(c) International Strategy for Disaster Reduction
Report of the Second Committee
(A/62/419/Add.3)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/192).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (c) of agenda item 54?
It was so decided.
(e) Implementation of the United Nations
Convention to Combat Desertification in Those
Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, Particularly in Africa
Report of the Second Committee
(A/62/419/Add.5)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. We shall now
take a decision on the draft resolution.
A separate vote has been requested on operative
paragraph 17 of the draft resolution. Is there any
objection to that request? I see that there is none. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,

16

Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana,
Haiti,
Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Moldova,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Japan, United States of America
Abstaining:
Israel
Operative paragraph 17 was retained by 172
votes to 2, with 1 abstention.

07-65299

A/62/PV.78

[Subsequently, the delegation of Israel advised
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution as a whole. The Second
Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution as a whole was adopted
(resolution 62/193).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (e) of agenda item 54?
It was so decided.
(f) Convention on Biological Diversity
Report of the Second Committee
(A/62/419/Add.6)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/194).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (f) of agenda item 54?
It was so decided.
(g) Report of the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme on its
twenty-fourth session
Report of the Second Committee
(A/62/419/Add.7)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (g) of agenda item 54?
It was so decided.
(h) Sustainable mountain development
Report of the Second Committee
(A/62/419/Add.8)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/196).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (h) of agenda item 54?
It was so decided.
(i) Promotion of new and renewable sources of
energy
Report of the Second Committee
(A/62/419/Add.9)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/197).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (i) of agenda item 54?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 54.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/195).

07-65299

17

A/62/PV.78

Agenda item 55
Implementation of the outcome of the United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) and
strengthening of the United Nations Human
Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat)
Report of the Second Committee (A/62/420)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 12 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/198).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 55?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 56
Globalization and interdependence
Report of the Second Committee (A/62/421)
The President: May I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to take note of the report of the
Second Committee?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 56.
(a) Globalization and interdependence
Report of the Second Committee
(A/62/421/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution, entitled “Role
of the United Nations in promoting development in the
context of globalization and interdependence”. The
Second Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/199).

18

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 56?
It was so decided.
(b) Science and technology for development
Report of the Second Committee
(A/62/421/Add.2)
The President: The Assembly has before it two
draft resolutions recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 14 of its report. We will now
take a decision on draft resolutions I and II.
The Second Committee adopted draft resolution
I, entitled “International Year of Astronomy, 2009”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
62/200).
The President: The Second Committee adopted
draft resolution II, which is entitled “Science and
technology for development” and which was orally
corrected by the Rapporteur earlier this afternoon. May
I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt draft
resolution II, as orally corrected?
Draft resolution II, as orally corrected, was
adopted (resolution 62/201).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 56?
It was so decided.
(c) Preventing and combating corrupt practices
and transfer of assets of illicit origin and
returning such assets, in particular to the
countries of origin, consistent with the United
Nations Convention against Corruption
Report of the Second Committee
(A/62/421/Add.3)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the General Assembly wishes to do the same?

07-65299

A/62/PV.78

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/202).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (c) of agenda item 56, and of agenda item 56
as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 57
Groups of countries in special situations
Report of the Second Committee (A/62/422)
The President: May I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to take note of the report of the
Second Committee?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 57.
(a) Third United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries
Report of the Second Committee
(A/62/422/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/203).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 57?
It was so decided.

(b) Specific actions related to the particular
needs and problems of landlocked developing
countries: outcome of the International
Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and
Transit Developing Countries and Donor
Countries and International Financial and
Development Institutions on Transit
Transport Cooperation
Report of the Second Committee
(A/62/422/Add.2)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. The Assembly
will now take a decision on the draft resolution,
entitled “Groups of countries in special situations:
specific actions related to the particular needs and
problems of landlocked developing countries: outcome
of the International Ministerial Conference of
Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and
Donor Countries and International Financial and
Development Institutions on Transit Transport
Cooperation”. The Second Committee adopted the
draft resolution. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/204).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 57.
Agenda item 58
Eradication of poverty and other development issues
Report of the Second Committee (A/62/423)
The President: May I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to take note of the report of the
Second Committee?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 58.

07-65299

19

A/62/PV.78

(a) Implementation of the first United Nations
Decade for the Eradication of Poverty
(1997-2006)
Report of the Second Committee
(A/62/423/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution, entitled “Second
United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty
(2008-2017)”. The Second Committee adopted the
draft resolution. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/205).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 58?
It was so decided.
(b) Women in development
Report of the Second Committee
(A/62/423/Add.2)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/206).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 58?
It was so decided.
(c) Human resources development
Report of the Second Committee
(A/62/423/Add.3)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second

20

Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/207).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (c) of agenda item 58 and of agenda item 58
as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 59
Operational activities for development
Report of the Second Committee (A/62/424)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft decision recommended by the Second Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take action on
the draft decision, entitled “Amendments to the
General Regulations of the World Food Programme”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the
draft decision, as recommended by the Second
Committee?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 59.
(a) Operational activities for development of the
United Nations system
Report of the Second Committee
(A/62/424/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft decision recommended by the Second Committee
in paragraph 3 of its report. We will now take action on
the draft decision, entitled “Note by the SecretaryGeneral transmitting the report on the activities of the
United Nations Development Fund for Women”. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the draft
decision, as recommended by the Second Committee?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 59?
It was so decided.

07-65299

A/62/PV.78

(b) Triennial comprehensive policy review of
operational activities for development of the
United Nations system
Report of the Second Committee
(A/62/424/Add.2)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/208).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 59?
It was so decided.
(c) South-South cooperation for development
Report of the Second Committee
(A/62/424/Add.3)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution, entitled “SouthSouth cooperation”. The Second Committee adopted
the draft resolution. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/209).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (c) of agenda item 59 and of agenda item 59
as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 60
Training and research: United Nations Institute for
Training and Research
Report of the Second Committee (A/62/425)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 12 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution, entitled “United

07-65299

Nations Institute for Training and Research”. The
Second Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/210).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 60?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 61
Towards global partnerships
Report of the Second Committee (A/62/426)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 10 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/211).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
agenda item 61?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 121 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Second Committee (A/62/427)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft decision recommended by the Second Committee
in paragraph 5 of its report. We will now take action on
the draft decision. The Second Committee adopted the
draft decision, entitled “Programme of work of the
Second Committee for the sixty-third session of the
General Assembly”. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 121.

21

A/62/PV.78

Agenda item 129 (continued)

Programme of work

Programme planning

The President: Before adjourning the meeting, I
would like to inform Members that the next plenary
meeting — the last before the recess of the main part of
the sixty-second session of the General Assembly —
has been scheduled for the afternoon of Friday,
21 December 2007. At that meeting, the General
Assembly will take action on pending draft resolutions,
including the draft resolutions contained in the reports
of the Main Committees that have programme budget
implications. Thereafter, the Assembly will take up the
reports of the Fifth Committee.

Report of the Second Committee (A/62/428)
The President: May I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to take note of the report of the
Second Committee?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 129.
The Assembly has thus concluded its consideration
of all the reports of the Second Committee.

22

The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

07-65299
