S/2023/108

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 February 2023
Original: English

Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 2659 (2022), the Security Council extended the mandate of the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINUSCA) until 15 November 2023 and request ed the SecretaryGeneral to report on its implementation every four months. The present report
provides an update on major developments in the Central African Republic since the
previous report of 13 October 2022 (S/2022/762).

II. Political situation
2.
The political context continued to be marred by increasing political
contestations over constitutional changes. The peace process advanced incrementally
amid persisting tensions, which significantly intensified with the dismissal of two
judges from the Constitutional Court, including its President. The Court ruled that the
decree of 3 October 2022 retiring its President, Danièle Darlan, and another Court
justice was unconstitutional. Ms. Darlan later announced publicly that she would not
return to the Court. The political opposition continued to contest the legitimacy of the
Court after the removal of two of its justices.
Political developments
3.
On 10 October, the Minister of Public Service and Administrative Reform issued
an administrative decision on the retirement of 28 civil servants in the higher
education sector, including the President of the Constitutional Court and the President
of the National Assembly, Simplice Mathieu Sarandji. On 19 October, in a letter
addressed to the Minister in charge of the General Secretariat of the Government,
Ms. Darlan stated that Constitutional Court judges could not be removed before the
end of their seven-year term, in accordance with the Constitution, and reaffirmed the
exclusive competency of the Court to interpret the Constitution.
4.
On 24 October, the President, Faustin Archange Touadera, signed two related
decrees resulting in the dismissal of Ms. Darlan from the Constitutional Court. On
26 October, the political opposition, including such prominent figures as Martin
Ziguélé of the Mouvement de libération du peuple centrafricain and Crépin Mboli Goumba of the Parti africain pour une transformation radicale et intégrale des États

23-02145 (E)

210223

*2302145*

S/2023/108

and the Bloc républicain pour la défense de la Constitution (BRDC), strongly
condemned those decisions and appealed to the Court to annul the presidential decrees
of 24 October. On 3 January, the Court deemed unconstitutional the decree of
3 October, by which the retirement age in the higher education sector had been
lowered. The Court, however, rejected the petition to declare unconstitutional the
decree of 24 October by which the composition of the Court’s Bureau had been
modified.
5.
On 1 November, the opposition platform, Conseil de Resistance et de Transition
(CRT), was created to organize political and civic opposition to the Government’s
initiatives to change the Constitution. On 8 November, the Public Prosecutor of the
Central African Republic issued a communiqué in which he accused the CRT
leadership of calling upon Central Africans to mobilize against the legitimate national
authority. He indicated that judicial measures had been initiated against the leader of
CRT and others in the movement opposing the constitutional referendum for acts
including threat to public security and incitement to grave political instability. CRT
adopted its manifesto on 1 November, while exchanging letters with BRDC on the
creation of a larger alliance against the constitutional ch ange.
6.
During the sixty-fourth anniversary of the proclamation of the independence of
the Central African Republic, on 1 December, the President stressed his commitment
to the consolidation of the country’s national sovereignty. In his speech, he referre d
to BRDC and CRT as a threat to public security and order, linking them to ex -Séléka,
anti-balaka and the Coalition des patriotes pour le changement, an accusation later
denied by the political opposition. MINUSCA encouraged the Government,
opposition leaders and the religious platform to advocate the resumption of dialogue
among key political actors, who all renewed their commitment to initiating
discussions on vital issues of national interest.
7.
From 1 October to 30 December, the National Assembly held its second regular
session, at which it adopted the national budget for 2023. The budget amounts to
$397 million, of which $216 million is expected to be generated from domestic
resources and $181 million from external resources. Overall spending is estim ated at
$480 million, resulting in a deficit of $83 million. The Assembly also passed a law
establishing a procedure for holding referendums, including on constitutional
reforms. On 20 January, the Constitutional Court validated the law, a decision
welcomed by pro-government figures, who argued that it paved the way for the
holding of a referendum on constitutional changes.
Peace process
8.
The Prime Minister continued to coordinate efforts to implement the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic and the joint
road map for peace in the Central African Republic of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region. On 2 November, he convened the fifth coordination
meeting to review progress, which was attended by the relevant ministries and
international and regional partners. The meeting resulted in the reactivation of
monitoring mechanisms for the deployment of public servants and the establishment
of an institutional and operational framework for border manag ement.
9.
On 6 December, the President chaired a ceremony marking the dissolution of
four armed groups signatory to the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
and current members of the Government, namely, the Rassemblement patriotique
pour le renouveau de la Centrafrique (RPRC), the Mouvement des libérateurs
centrafricains pour la justice, the Union des forces républicaines and the Union des
forces républicaines fondamentales.

2/20

23-02145

S/2023/108

Electoral process
10. On 18 November, the leaders of 16 political parties from the opposition, 13 of
which are members of BRDC, signed a joint declaration in reaction to the
Government’s announced financial support for the local elections. The signatories
claimed that the National Electoral Authority had lost its imparti ality and set some
conditions for their participation in the elections, namely, a complete overhaul of the
electoral authority, the reappointment of the dismissed members of the Constitutional
Court, assurances that local elections would be separate from a ny potential
constitutional referendum and the guaranteed safety of voters and candidates.
11. On 21 November, the Prime Minister chaired a meeting of the strategic
committee for elections, during which the National Electoral Authority presented a
new electoral calendar for local elections, with a first round of elections scheduled
for 16 July 2023 and a second round for 15 October 2023. The Prime Minister
reaffirmed the Government’s intention to separate local elections from a potential
constitutional referendum.
12. On 30 November, the Government and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) signed an agreement for the Government’s contribution of
$4.5 million to the UNDP basket fund for voter registration and the reopening of local
branches of the National Electoral Authority. As at 1 February, the Government had
disbursed $0.2 million, and approximately $6.5 million of the total electoral budget
remained to be mobilized.
13. On 5 December, electoral preparations resumed in accordance with the new
electoral calendar and with technical, logistical, operational and security support from
MINUSCA and UNDP. On 9 January, the National Electoral Authority completed the
countrywide establishment of its 134 local branches.
14. On 23 December, the National Assembly adopted a law on the delimitation of
administrative districts, resulting in the establishment of more than 200 constituencies
for the local elections.
15. During the reporting period, MINUSCA held 2,076 outreach and civic education
sessions, including on gender equality, which brought together 165,104 people,
including 79,099 women, in support of the National Electoral Authority, to promote
the full, equal and meaningful participation of Central Africans in the elections.
Local dialogue and reconciliation
16. In October, MINUSCA held nine awareness-raising sessions on the culture of
peace for 536 participants, including 246 women, to strengthen social ties among
communities affected by the resurgence of armed groups in Bambari, Bangassou,
Birao,, Bocaranga, Bossangoa, Bria, Kaga Bandoro, Kouango, Obo, Paoua, Sam
Ouandja and Zemio. On 21 October, in Obo, Haut-Mbomou Prefecture, MINUSCA
facilitated a peace forum attended by government ministers and 230 participants,
including 65 women. After those sessions, some 500 internally displaced persons
from the Muslim community returned to Mboki and Zemio, in the same Prefecture;
the movement of goods and persons between Mboki and Obo was also restored.

III. Security situation
17. The security situation across the country remained volatile. The robust and
proactive posture of MINUSCA, including through ongoing joint missions to achieve
area domination in coordination with national defence forces in Basse -Kotto, HauteKotto, Ouham and Vakaga Prefectures, contributed to hampering the movements of
23-02145

3/20

S/2023/108

armed groups. Those operations resulted in the establishment of protective
environments for civilians in those hotspots, followed by a gradual return of State
agents and social services, as well as humanitarian and development actors. With the
beginning of the dry season, armed groups markedly shifted their tactics. They
targeted isolated positions and patrols of the national defence and security forces,
while also committing acts of illegal taxation, extortion and kidnapping against
civilians. Fuel shortages and higher prices resulted in increased social tensions and
restricted the movement of national defence and security forces to conduct security
operations.
18. Between 4 October 2022 and 1 February 2023, 21 explosive ordnance-related
incidents were reported, including the first confirmed use of an improvised explosive
device, on 26 October, in Carnot, Mambéré-Kadéï Prefecture, killing the alleged
perpetrator and injuring one civilian. On 28 November, three s uch devices detonated
in and around a camp of national armed forces and other security personnel near
Bossangoa, Ouham Prefecture. On 21 January, in Ndélé, the position of other security
personnel was reported to have been attacked by a suspected unmanned aircraft,
damaging a helicopter. Perpetrators remain unidentified. Referring to the evolving
security situation, the Minister of National Defence and Reconstruction of the Army
issued a communiqué on 3 February suspending all unmanned aerial system flights in
the country until further notice, except for those owned by the national defence and
security forces, which resulted in the restriction of the MINUSCA unmanned aerial
system operations.
19. As at 9 January 2023, 314 security violations of the Political Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation had been recorded, a decrease from 431 during the previous
reporting period. Most of the violations targeted civilians (225), followed by illegal
military activities (61), restrictions of movement (20) and obstructio n of State
institutions, humanitarian organizations or the United Nations (8). The Unité pour la
paix en Centrafrique perpetrated the highest number of violations (92), followed by
the national defence and internal security forces and other security person nel (71),
Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation (55), anti-balaka (43), the Front populaire pour
la renaissance de la Centrafrique (41), and the Mouvement patriotique pour la
Centrafrique (12).
20. In the west, Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation operate d mostly in Lim-Pendé
and Ouham-Pendé Prefectures, while anti-balaka remained active in Ouham, OuhamFafa and Nana-Mambéré Prefectures. These Coalition des patriotes pour le
changement-affiliated armed groups continued their attempt to gain access to minin g
sites, committing exactions, including the kidnapping of civilians and members of
non-governmental organizations, while attacking national defence forces. On
13 October, in Ndiba Moelle, Nana-Mambéré Prefecture, anti-balaka attacked the
mining sites in Gbembo, killing two civilians and injuring four others. On 19 October,
Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation attacked a position of the national defence force
in Mann, Ouham-Pendé Prefecture, injuring two soldiers and one civilian. The
national defence and security forces subsequently conducted an operation in the
village of Garo, Ouham-Fafa Prefecture, killing four armed combatants.
21. From 12 to 19 December, other security personnel conducted operations at five
mining sites around Kouki, Ouham Prefecture, reportedly killing 12 suspected armed
combatants and one civilian. On 7 January, unidentified armed combatants attacked a
detachment of the national defence forces in Yenga, Nana-Mambéré Prefecture,
killing two soldiers and injuring two civilians.
22. On 23 December, Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation attacked a convoy of the
national defence forces in Zougbe Nassala, Nana-Mambéré Prefecture, near the main
supply route, killing two soldiers and injuring three others. On 21 January, Retour,
4/20

23-02145

S/2023/108

réclamation et réhabilitation combatants attacked the Beloko customs office, killing
two soldiers and one other security personnel and injuring one civilian. Seven
vehicles and 23 trucks containing goods parked in the customs compound were
burned during the incident. On 24 January, in Besson, Nana-Mambéré Prefecture,
Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation combatants attacked a position of the national
defence and security forces, killing one soldier and one internal security force.
23. The presence of Chadian individuals claiming to be members of the so-called
Révolutionnaires tchadiens sudistes has been reported since October in Benerme,
Lim-Pendé Prefecture. This development adds to the challenge of border control
between the Central African Republic and Chad, including incidents between Chadian
and Central African security forces over the past two years.
24. In the centre of the Central African Republic, the Unité pour la paix en
Centrafrique increased movements and operations in Ouaka and Basse -Kotto
Prefectures. The beginning of the dry season was marked by robberies, including of
humanitarian convoys, acts of intimidation and attacks against national defence
forces. Despite operations by national defence forces and other security personnel,
the Unité pour la paix en Centrafrique maintained control, establishing checkpoints
and collecting taxes, in Zangba Sub-Prefecture, which is in a strategic area for trade
in weapons and ammunition with the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Following
the launch of joint missions by national defence and security forces and MINUSCA
to achieve area domination and the establishment of a MINUSCA temporary
operating base on 22 October in Gbada, Basse-Kotto Prefecture, the Unité pour la
paix en Centrafrique partially withdrew from Zangba, ad opting evasive tactics to
avoid direct confrontation and dispersing its combatants along the Bambari -Alindao
axis. Between 10 and 17 December, the Unité pour la paix en Centrafrique attacked
national defence forces positions in Boyo, Bokolobo, Lioto and Ng akobo, Ouaka
Prefecture. MINUSCA established a temporary operating base in Bokolobo on
13 December and conducted robust patrolling in the area to protect civilians.
25. At the end of December, the national defence forces and other security personnel
extended their presence around Ndélé, Bamingui-Bangoran Prefecture, dispersing
armed combatants affiliated with the Front populaire pour la renaissance de la
Centrafrique towards Vakaga Prefecture and the border with Chad.
26. In the east, there were growing tensions related to the presence of Arab
Misseriya combatants in Am Dafok Sub-Prefecture. Unité pour la paix en
Centrafrique combatants from Haute-Kotto Prefecture moved north to Vakaga
Prefecture and were also reported in Ndiffa and Gordil.
27. Unité pour la paix en Centrafrique combatants were also observed moving from
Haute-Kotto Prefecture to Vakaga Prefecture, seemingly reorganizing around mining
sites and along the border areas for resupply. The town of Tissi-Fongoro, located at
the intersection of the borders with Chad and the Sudan, was identified as one of their
main assembly points. A concentration of armed combatants from the Unité pour la
paix en Centrafrique, the Front populaire pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique,
RPRC, the Parti pour le rassemblement centrafricain and Arab Misseriya was
observed in the Vakaga Prefecture. On 28 December, there was a meeting between
Central African and Sudanese military representatives of the tripartite force,
following which the border between the two countries was closed on 2 January.
28. In Bangui, the security situation remained relatively calm, while recorded
criminal incidents increased to 2,615, compared with 2,583 in the previous reporting
period. Since the end of November, national defence and security forces with other
security personnel have conducted patrols and search operations in several
neighbourhoods. On 16 December, the Head of the Russian House Cultural Centre
was injured in the detonation of a parcel bomb. The number of fire incidents in Bangui
23-02145

5/20

S/2023/108

increased as a result of the emergence, owing to fuel shortages, of parallel markets
and illegal or unauthorized fuel depots. The national curfew from 12 to 5 a.m.
remained in effect.

IV. Regional engagement
29. From 30 November to 1 December, in Luanda, the Special Representativ e of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic took part in a high -level meeting
with special representatives and special envoys working on the Central African region
to develop a common strategic vision to enhance the United Nations engagemen t in
the subregion. The meeting resulted in the identification of key priority areas for
concerted actions, including on the effective management of natural resources and the
continued mobilization of regional and international support to advance the peace
process in the Central African Republic.

V. Humanitarian situation
30. The humanitarian situation continued to deteriorate, as a result of the cumulative
impact of conflict, displacement, rising commodity prices and limited access to basic
services. In 2023, 3.4 million Central Africans, or 56 per cent of the population, are
projected to need humanitarian assistance, while three out of five do not have access
to safe drinking water and sanitation. A high level of acute food insecurity persisted,
with 2.7 million people in an emergency or crisis situation from September 2022 to
March 2023, according to the Integrated Food Security Phase Classification, and a
risk of their number increasing to 3 million during the lean season, from April to
August 2023, if the necessary assistance is not provided. A total 641,500 Central
Africans are at risk of starvation, in a country where 40 per cent of children suffer
from chronic malnutrition.
31. Violence continued to trigger displacement: one out of five Central Af ricans is
either internally displaced or a refugee. As at 1 February, 515,665 Central Africans
were internally displaced, while 740,833 had taken refuge in neighbouring countries.
The crisis has had a devastating human cost, with 23,644 cases of gender-based
violence recorded in 2022, a more than 100 per cent increase compared with 2021.
32. Humanitarian personnel continue to be targeted. In 2022, at least one security
incident affected humanitarian workers or property every two days, including one aid
worker killed and 24 injured. While the reported security incidents decreased by half,
from 396 in 2021 to 179 in 2022, the decline can be partially attributed to the
restricted mobility of humanitarian actors caused by periods of fuel shortages. Thefts,
robberies, lootings and threats accounted for 68 per cent of the incidents, while 31 per
cent were cases of obstruction of humanitarian access.
33. As at 1 February, 15 per cent of the $466 million required to provide live -saving
assistance to 2.4 million people, in accordance with the 2023 humanitarian response
plan, had been mobilized, leaving a funding gap of $396 million. In 2022, the
humanitarian community provided multisectoral assistance to 1.9 million people.

VI. Protection of civilians
34. Armed groups shifted their tactics after many had been dislodged from their
strongholds. They increasingly targeted national defence and security forces, while
continuing to attack civilians, including herders, and to target villages, mining sites
and commercial and humanitarian convoys. At the start of the transhumance period,
6/20

23-02145

S/2023/108

in October, national defence forces and other security personnel conducted operations
against Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation in Ouham and Ouham -Pendé Prefectures
and the Unité pour la paix en Centrafrique in Basse-Kotto and Ouaka Prefectures,
which resulted in the displacement of civilians and obstacles to freedom of movement
and humanitarian access. The Mission took steps to decrease threats to civilians in
identified hotspots by deploying joint missions to achieve area domination. Those
operations forced armed combatants to withdraw and contributed to enhancing the
population’s safety and freedom of movement, including by repairing broken bridges.
35. The presence of MINUSCA in Ouanda Djallé, Vakaga Prefecture, and Sam
Ouandja, Haute-Kotto Prefecture, facilitated the return of displaced persons. The
Mission, including through the implementation of community violence reduction
projects, fostered a conducive environment for the restorati on of social cohesion.
Notably, MINUSCA, in coordination with the Government, launched a community
violence reduction project in Sam Ouandja, which included the construction of two
primary schools and one secondary school and the digging of watering holes.
36. The Mission continued to strengthen the effectiveness of its early warning and
response mechanisms, including through collaboration between uniformed and
civilian mission personnel. In November, MINUSCA held workshops for national
defence and security forces and its own uniformed personnel in Bambari, Birao and
Kaga Bandoro, to enhance collaboration in the protection of civilians.
37. During the reporting period, MINUSCA trained 628 peacekeepers in practical
explosive ordnance threat mitigation operations and conducted awareness-raising
sessions on explosive ordnance risk for 57 MINUSCA personnel and humanitarian
actors and 7,501 civilians, including 3,913 women, in local communities.

VII. Extension of State authority and the rule of law
Extension of State authority
38. The presence and capacity of local officials in the regions and prefectures
continued to improve with support from MINUSCA and other partners. As at
1 February, 141 (or 81 per cent) of 174 local officials (prefects, sub -prefects and
secretaries-general of prefectures and sub-prefectures) were deployed to their duty
stations outside Bangui. Furthermore, 128 civil servants and State agents were
deployed across the country during the reporting period, reaching 4,549 in 2022, a n
increase from 3,418 in 2021. MINUSCA supported the training and deployment of
central inspectors from the Ministry of Territorial Administration, Decentralization
and Local Development to improve the quality control of State services. MINUSCA
also supported the nationwide dissemination of the two decentralization laws, in
collaboration with the Government, the World Bank and UNDP. In December 2022,
for the first time since its adoption in 2017, the Government allocated $820,000 from
the national budget to the National Strategy for the Restoration of State Authority.
Security sector reform
39. On 15 November, the national authorities, with support from MINUSCA,
launched the process to develop a national defence policy, updating the national
defence plan of 2017. The new policy is aimed at reaffirming the national strategic
priorities to establish a garrison army.
40. In line with the priority areas of the joint road map of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, MINUSCA facilitated and advised an
interministerial consultative process on the development of a national policy on the
management of border areas. On 30 January, the Minister of Territorial
23-02145

7/20

S/2023/108

Administration, Decentralization and Local Development endorsed the technical
provisions of the document, which delineate the responsibilities of the various
national security forces in border management.
41. MINUSCA provided technical and logistical support to inspections of the
national defence forces in Bangassou and Ndélé conducted by the Army Inspectorate
General to document their deployment conditions. On 21, 22 and 24 November, the
National Assembly, with support from MINUSCA, held a follow -up workshop on
budgetary control of the security sector for parliamentarians, to raise a wareness of
their role in the democratic control of that sector.
National defence and internal security forces
42. As at 1 February, 6,941 internal security forces personnel, comprising 3,602
police officers, including 902 women, and 3,339 gendarmes, i ncluding 541 women,
were deployed across the country, including 5,175 who remained in Bangui.
MINUSCA is supporting the ongoing process to recruit 500 police officers and 500
gendarmes. MINUSCA and UNDP supported the training of 76 police officers,
including 10 women, and 67 gendarmes, including 13 women, on such issues as
community policing, judicial police, conduct and discipline, and gender-based and
conflict-related sexual violence.
43. MINUSCA continued to support the implementation of the national str ategy and
action plan of the National Commission for the Fight against the Proliferation of
Small Arms and Light Weapons. As at 1 February, national authorities and MINUSCA
had conducted 54 quality assurance assessment visits to weapons and ammunition
storage facilities of the national defence and internal security forces in Bambari,
Bangui, Damara, Grimari and Sibut. In addition, MINUSCA trained 11 members of
the national defence and security forces in Bambari on weapons and ammunition
management and undertook 11 technical assistance initiatives in Bambari, Damara,
Grimari and Sibut.
Disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation
44. From 11 to 15 October, in Bria and Sam Ouandja, 27 combatants from armed
groups affiliated with the Coalition des patriotes pour le changement were disarmed
and demobilized by the Government’s mobile team. During the operations, 20 war
weapons, 2,703 rounds of ammunition, two rockets and two propellers were collected.
In mid-December, in Markounda, during a similar operation, six combatants,
comprising four anti-balaka/Mokom individuals and two individuals from the
Révolution et justice/Sayo Branch, were disarmed and demobilized, and six weapons
of war were collected.
45. On 15 November, the Minister of State in charge of Disarmament,
Demobilization, Reintegration and Repatriation and the Follow -up to the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic convened a
meeting with international partners to discuss the gaps in th e funding of
socioeconomic reintegration for demobilized combatants, including livelihood
opportunities. A socioeconomic reintegration project is ongoing for the residual and
the most recent caseloads of demobilized ex-combatants. As at 1 February, a total of
764 ex-combatants had been profiled and were participating in training activities in
Bangui (82), Birao (86), Bossembele and Bouar (72), Bria (295), Markounda (102)
and Ouanda Djallé (127).
46. Community violence reduction activities for 2022–2023, targeted at 4,300
beneficiaries, were launched in Bangui and in Bamingui-Bangoran, Haut-Kotto,
Kémo, Mbomou, Nana-Gébrizi, Nana-Mambéré, Ouham and Vakaga Prefectures. As
at 1 February, 3,880 beneficiaries, including 1,885 women, were registered for access
8/20

23-02145

S/2023/108

to livelihood and other activities, including vocational trainings, cash -for-work
activities in community projects and start-up income-generating activities.
Justice and the rule of law
47. On 7 December, the Bangui Court of Appeals closed its second crim inal session
of 2022. Of the 25 cases on the docket, 21 were heard, including 11 cases of sexual
violence, leading to a total of 17 convictions. The Court tried one case of violence
against peacekeepers and acquitted the defendant as he was a minor at the time of the
incident. As at 1 February, 25 investigations by national judicial authorities into
attacks against peacekeepers were ongoing. On 28 November, a presidential decree
granted pardons to minors in detention as a protective measure and to alleviate prison
overcrowding.
48. Between 2 October and 1 February, MINUSCA transferred to national
authorities six individuals who had been arrested in Bangassou and Birao locations,
including through urgent temporary measures.
49. The functioning of courts and tribunals outside Bangui was temporarily
disrupted in early October until personnel were deployed to their new assigned
locations. As at 1 February, 47 per cent of judicial personnel were in their posts
outside Bangui. Magistrates resisted their deployment to their assigned jurisdictions,
citing insecurity and a lack of sufficient housing.
50. On 31 October, the Special Criminal Court delivered its first verdict and found
three Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation combatants guilty of war crimes (murder
and humiliating and degrading treatment) and crimes against humanity (murder and
other inhumane acts) for their role in the massacre of at least 46 civilians in May 2019
in Koundjouli and Limouna, Ouham-Pendé Prefecture. The Court also convicted one
of them for rapes perpetrated by his subordinates, both as a war crime and as a crime
against humanity, on the basis of his command responsibility. The verdict has been
appealed.
51. On 9 January, the President promulgated the law renewing the mandate of the
Special Criminal Court until October 2028. MINUSCA assisted in drafting the law
and strongly advocated its adoption. At least six individuals indicted for international
crimes by the Court were arrested during the reporting period. As at 1 February, a
total of 22 individuals had been indicted by the Court since October 2018.
52. Several prisons outside Bangui lack sufficient security as a result of the
continued strike of 145 civilian prison officers who have not yet been incorporated in
the government payroll.

VIII. Human rights and the fight against impunity
53. Between 2 October and 1 February, MINUSCA documented and verified 380
incidents, representing 608 human rights violations and abuses and violations of
international humanitarian law that had affected 1,619 victims comprising 1,317 men,
96 women, 125 children (84 boys, 39 girls and two unidentified children), 26
unidentified civilians and 55 groups of collective victims, and caused 140 conflict related civilian deaths. This represents a 5 per cent decrease in the number of
incidents, a 3 per cent decrease in the number of violations and a 4 per cent increase
in the number of victims compared with the previous reporting period (402 incidents,
625 violations and 1,552 victims). During the reporting perio d, MINUSCA
documented a resurgence of cases of arbitrary arrests and detentions linked to search
and military operations by national defence and security forces conducted in areas
primarily populated by Fulani and Muslim communities.
23-02145

9/20

S/2023/108

54. Armed groups signatory to the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
were allegedly responsible for 35 per cent of the total number of violations and abuses
during the reporting period. MINUSCA documented 214 human rights abuses
allegedly perpetrated by armed groups signatory to the Political Agreement, which
affected 425 victims, including 323 men, 41 women, 27 children (15 boys and 12
girls) and three adults of unknown sex. This represents a 42 per cent decrease in the
number of victims compared with the previous reporting period (730 victims). During
the reporting period, the Unité pour la paix en Centrafrique, the Front populaire pour
la renaissance de la Centrafrique and Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation appeared
to be the main perpetrators of human rights abuses, in particular in the western sector.
55. State agents were allegedly responsible for 58 per cent of the documented
violations during the reporting period. MINUSCA documented 351 violations
allegedly perpetrated by State agents, 61 of which were allegedly perpetrated by other
security personnel. They affected 1,109 victims, including 947 men, 43 women, 60
boys, 14 girls and one child and 23 adults of unknown sex. This represents a 25 per
cent increase in the number of violations and a 41 per cent inc rease in the number of
victims compared with the previous reporting period (281 violations and 788 victims).
MINUSCA documented 145 cases of arbitrary arrest and detention affecting 763
victims, the Fulani community being the most affected, especially in t he centre and
in the east of the country. Detention conditions remained extremely poor in most
facilities, with limited access to courts, ablutions, health care and food.
56. During the reporting period, MINUSCA continued to monitor hate speech and
incitement to violence linked to the political and security situation. Individuals,
political parties and associations opposed to or critical of the Government were
victims of threats, intimidation, house searches and police harassment; their personal
details were also published online, prompting acts of violence against them. Women
faced threats, including of sexual violence, or saw their personal details and
photographs of their children published on social media. During the reporting period,
MINUSCA, together with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, continued to engage with major social media companies and
established a procedure to report on those who spread hate speech and incitement to
violence on their platforms.
Transitional justice
57. As at 1 February, the Truth, Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation Commission
held 10 workshops, five in Bangui and one each in Baoro, Bouar, Carnot, Kaga
Bandoro and Mongoumba, to raise awareness of its mandate. The workshops we re
attended by 400 participants, including 161 women, comprising religious leaders,
students, representatives of civil society, including women organizations, and
community leaders, who were invited to assist the Commission with, inter alia, the
referral of cases and victims.
Conflict-related sexual violence
58. Between 2 October and 1 February, MINUSCA documented 29 cases of conflictrelated sexual violence, representing 30 violations, mostly rape, against 44 survivors
(14 women, two men, 27 girls and one group of collective victims). In addition to
those verified violations, MINUSCA was investigating 10 allegations of conflict related sexual violence affecting 16 victims.
59. Armed groups signatory to the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliatio n
were allegedly responsible for 11 cases of conflict-related sexual violence,
representing 12 violations and 16 victims. Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation was
the main perpetrator, with seven cases affecting 10 victims, including four girls.
10/20

23-02145

S/2023/108

Another armed group that is not a signatory to the Political Agreement, the Lord’s
Resistance Army, was responsible for two cases, affecting 11 girls. During the period
under review, 13 girls were subjected to sexual slavery by the Retour, réclamation et
réhabilitation and Lord’s Resistance Army armed groups, while the former committed
multiple gang rapes, often against vulnerable girls. National defence and security
forces were allegedly responsible for 15 cases affecting 17 victims. Among them,
national defence forces, whether alone or with other security personnel, were
responsible for most cases, with 11 cases affecting five women, one man and seven
girls. Ouham-Pendé Prefecture had the highest number of reported conflict-related
sexual violence incidents, with eight cases representing nine violations, while HautMbomou documented the highest number of victims (two women and 11 girls).
60. On 22 December, 77 cases were submitted to the Special Criminal Court
following investigations conducted by the national joint rapid response unit to prevent
sexual violence against women and children, supported by MINUSCA, UNDP and
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict. The
investigations focused on conflict-related sexual violence perpetrated by the Front
populaire pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique and the Unité pour la paix en
Centrafrique in Haute-Kotto and Mbomou Prefectures.
Children and armed conflict
61. Between 2 October and 31 January, the country task force on monitoring and
reporting verified 97 grave violations against children committed by armed groups
(78), national defence and security forces (10) and unidentified armed actors (9).
Grave violations included the recruitment and use of children (31), killing (3),
maiming (5), rape (19), abduction (31) and the denial of humanitarian access (8). In
2022, children accounted for 50 per cent of civilian victims of explosive remnants of
war, compared with 6 per cent in 2021.
62. The Lord’s Resistance Army factions were responsible for 53 per cent of the
violations (51). They abducted, recruited and used 20 children (12 girls and eight
boys). All 12 girls were victims of sexual violence. Two of the girls escaped during
the reporting period. On 14 November, local authorities and peace c ommittee
members from Zemio, Haut-Mbomou Prefecture, met “Doctor” Achaye, commander
of a Lord’s Resistance Army splinter group, to advocate the release of children. On
23 November, the task force visited his camp and registered 18 children (10 girls and
eight boys). Advocacy for their release is ongoing. MINUSCA continues to engage
with the Government for the group’s rapid disarmament.

IX. Economic situation
63. The combined impact of global supply chain disruptions and rising oil and fuel
prices on the international market placed further pressure on the already fragile
Central African economy, leading to fuel shortages and inflation. As a result, the
Government significantly increased the fuel prices in the country at the beginning of
January, including for gasoline (by 50.3 per cent) and diesel (by 70 per cent), which
may exacerbate the already difficult living conditions of the population. Meanwhile,
international financial support for the Central African Republic continued to decline,
putting pressure on the country’s public finances.
64. The new United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework
(2023–2027) was signed on 12 December by the United Nations and the Government,
in the presence of representatives of technical and financial partners, the private
sector, civil society and faith-based organizations, among others. The stakeholders
approved the Framework as the basis for their cooperation and expressed commitment
23-02145

11/20

S/2023/108

to the implementation of the agreed priority areas, including the promotion of peace,
prosperity and partnership, the preservation of natural heritage and the advancement
of the Agenda 2063 of the African Union.

X. United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic
Military and police component and civilian personnel
65. As at 1 February, the military component of MINUSCA had deployed 13,930
troops, of which 7 per cent are women, of an authorized strength of 14,400 personnel,
including 406 staff officers (101 women) and 145 military observers (47 women),
including one explosive ordnance disposal reserve platoon. The MINUSCA police
component had deployed 2,987 personnel (13.72 per cent women) of an authorized
strength of 3,020 personnel, comprised of 571 individual police officers, including
139 women, and 2,416 personnel, including 271 women, in 14 formed police units
and one protection support unit. Of a total of 3,690 troops and police authorized under
Security Council resolution 2566 (2021), 3,179 had been deployed, including the full
deployment of the police reinforcement in January. A total of 1,498 civilian personnel
(28 per cent women), comprising 632 international staff, 580 national staff and 286
United Nations Volunteers, and 103 government-provided correctional personnel
were serving with MINUSCA, representing 90 per cent of the 1,671 approved
positions.
Status-of-forces agreement
66. Between 2 October and 1 February, MINUSCA recorded 17 violations of the
status-of-forces agreement, compared with five incidents recorded during the
previous reporting period. Most violations were restrictions of freedom of movement,
unauthorized searches of properties and arrest and detentions of United Nations
personnel.
67. During the period under review, several United Nations personnel were arrested
or detained. On 6 December, in Bangui, one staff member was detained by the
gendarmerie; on 15 December, in Bangui, Mine Action Service contractors were
arrested and held in detention for eight days with no charge s brought against them;
on 22 December, in Birao, two MINUSCA staff members were briefly arrested by
national defence forces and other security personnel.
68. The increase in violations of the status-of-forces agreement was partly due to
obstructions of MINUSCA patrols by national defence forces, especially in December
2022. The violations decreased in January, following discussions between the
Mission’s senior leadership and the Government, including with the President and the
Prime Minister. MINUSCA and the Government continued to work together towards
full compliance with the status-of-forces agreement.
69. I welcome the Government’s lift of the ban on night flights for medical and
casualty evacuations and to support MINUSCA or national security and defen ce
forces engaged in operations. The requirement to notify the appropriate authority
48 hours in advance of flights related to training for pilots is maintained.
Safety and security of United Nations personnel
70. Between 2 October and 1 February, 206 security incidents involving United
Nations personnel were recorded, including direct attacks, threats, criminal acts,
robberies, detentions and traffic accidents, representing a decrease from 272 security
incidents reported in the previous report. Six personnel died during the reporting
12/20

23-02145

S/2023/108

period, one during a fight, one shot dead by armed individuals and four of illness.
Eight personnel were injured, including one in a shooting incident, two in an assault
and five in traffic accidents. Three personnel were m edically evacuated. Two armed
attacks, one armed robbery, 12 cases of theft, 68 road traffic accidents and 11 fire
incidents were reported.
71. On 24 November, in Obo, Haut-Mbomou Prefecture, a MINUSCA contingent
detachment in charge of securing MINUSCA air operations at the airfield discovered
the body of one of its soldiers at that location. The personal weapon and ammunition
of the deceased were missing. The investigation is in progress; three suspects have
been identified. This incident brought the total number of cases of crimes against
peacekeepers under investigation to 25, including two cases currently ready for trial,
one of which is on the docket of the ongoing criminal session of the Bangui Court of
Appeal.
Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
72. Between 1 September and 31 December, MINUSCA recorded 12 new
allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse. Five cases related to events that had
taken place in 2022, while the remaining concerned incidents that had taken place
between 2015 and 2021. The allegations involved military personnel from five
different troop-contributing countries and five civilian personnel. The Mission
referred 32 victims, including four children, to humanitarian partners for appropri ate
medical, psychological and protection assistance. Six allegations of other serious
misconduct, including prohibited conduct, fraud and theft that took place in 2022,
were also reported and referred for investigation.
73. In coordination with the United Nations country team, MINUSCA reinforced
assistance to victims of sexual exploitation and abuse, including by strengthening the
role of the Senior Victims’ Rights Officer. The Humanitarian Prevention of Sexual
Exploitation and Abuse Working Group put in place 48 victim referral pathways,
disseminated across 88 organizations, and developed a mapping of complaints and
feedback mechanisms. The use of the Mission’s local sexual exploitation and abuse
prevention and response networks and the humanitarian community feedback
mechanisms allowed for greater geographical coverage and increased the number of
entry points for reporting alleged cases of sexual exploitation and abuse, helping to
optimize outreach and improving the channelling of new complaints through th e
appropriate reporting lines.
Support considerations
74. MINUSCA increased its renewable energy consumption by completing the
installation of two solar photovoltaic systems in two of its bases in Bangui, on 7 July
and 11 September 2022, respectively. MINUSCA continued to improve the conditions
of temporary operating bases and intensified the monitoring of wastewater risks and
the implementation of actions to address them.
Performance optimization
75. In keeping with Action for Peacekeeping Plus priorities, MINUSCA, with
support from the United Headquarters, continued efforts to optimize its performance,
including by enhancing the accountability of the uniformed component. In the context
of rapidly evolving security dynamics in the country, MINUSCA continued to adjust
its footprint and posture, including by enhancing its mobility with the aim to better
respond to the shifting tactics of the armed groups, combined with the optimization
of its bridging capacity. Subsequently, MINUSCA closed nine tempora ry operating
bases in the centre and the west of the country during the reporting period to
23-02145

13/20

S/2023/108

accommodate its robust, decisive, pre-emptive and mobile posture, in close
consultations with national stakeholders and without prejudice to the provision of
humanitarian assistance, building on community-driven early warning arrangements.
From October to February, MINUSCA carried out of a total of 31,016 patrols to
protect civilians, an increase from 7,471 compared with the previous reporting period.
The Mission will continue its protection of civilians work in the centre and the west
through long-range patrols and other preventive measures.
76. MINUSCA also sought to improve its strategic communication as an enabler to
facilitate its mandate implementation and to enhance understanding of the its role and
mandate by the host Government and local populations across the country. To
proactively address misinformation and disinformation targeted at MINUSCA, the
Mission sponsored a training session on the peace process and fight against
misinformation and disinformation, held by the High Council for Communication for
25 representatives of media organizations, while also regularly organizing joint press
conferences in which the heads of field offices and local authorities pa rticipate. From
October to February, Guira FM launched a campaign in Bangui and across the country
against disinformation, hosting interactive programmes with the population and local
leaders.
77. MINUSCA continued to monitor traditional and social media p latforms on a
daily basis to assess popular perception. Positive perception of MINUSCA increased
from 68 per cent of positive perception in the previous reporting period to 86 per cent.
Of the 145 posts sampled in December, 122 showed a positive perception of
MINUSCA, against 23 negative or hostile postings. The continuous engagement of
MINUSCA with media professionals, combined with its outreach initiatives on its
new mandate involving civil society organizations and community -based groups
across the country, contributed to this positive trend. Other regular avenues for raising
awareness on the mandate and countering disinformation included dedicated radio
programmes explaining the MINUSCA interventions and rebutting falsehoods about
the Mission.
78. To enhance the safety and mobility of United Nations personnel and facilitate
the deployment of patrols in areas of potential explosive threats, MINUSCA delivered
explosive ordnance risk awareness-raising sessions to its personnel and conducted
explosive ordnance threat mitigation training for force units. The Mission prioritized
improving information-gathering and data exploitation mechanisms to better monitor
trends in and the evolution of the explosive threat and proactively address it.
79. From 15 to 29 October, MINUSCA completed operational readiness
assessments for five contingents (three infantry and two engineering units),
concluding that four exceeded and one met the established standards. The contingents
displayed high standards in all aspects of administration, civilian-military
coordination, communications, intelligence, logistic, operations and training, and
recommendations were made to improve specific aspects. MINUSCA also conducted
17 performance assessments of 13 formed police units. All units were deemed
satisfactory, including in terms of command and control, health, mandate, protection
of civilians, training and welfare.

XI. Financial considerations
80. The General Assembly, by its resolution 76/282 of 29 June 2022, appropriated
the amount of $1,074.4 million for the maintenance of the Mission for the period from
1 July 2022 to 30 June 2023. As at 2 February 2023, unpaid assessed contributions to
the special account for MINUSCA amounted to $459.6 million. The total outstanding
assessed contributions for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to
14/20

23-02145

S/2023/108

$2,973.6 million. Reimbursement of the costs of troop and formed police personnel,
as well as for contingent-owned equipment, has been made for the period up to
30 September 2022, in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

XII. Observations
81. An inclusive and open political dialogue remains critical to advance the peace
process in a manner that has a positive impact on the lives of the Central African
people. I welcome the leadership of the Government to implement the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation through the joint road map of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region. The dissolution of four armed
groups, which remain committed to the Political Agreement, is commendable. I call
upon the Government and remaining armed groups to engage in good faith to
accelerate the implementation of the peace process.
82. As the initiatives to change the Constitution continue to dominate the political
scene, I am concerned about the deepening political polarization, which may risk to
undermine the country’s fragile political gains. I therefore reiterate the urgent ne ed to
create an environment conducive to an open and meaningful dialogue and an inclusive
political process. Such dialogue should further the aspiration of the Central African
population for a durable peace. I call upon the Government to demonstrate leader ship
in maintaining such space and finding solutions to move forward with the political
and peace processes. The support of the guarantors and facilitators of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation, as well as that of international, regional and
subregional partners, remains critical. MINUSCA will continue to use its convening
authority to nurture regional dynamics to facilitate the Government’s efforts to
mobilize its partners for peace in the Central African Republic.
83. I welcome the new electoral calendar for local elections and the resumption of
electoral preparations enabled through national funding. I call upon the national
authorities to ensure that ongoing electoral operations are rooted in an inclusive and
credible political dialogue involving all electoral stakeholders to create an
environment conducive to peaceful elections that can contribute to widening the
democratic space with a stronger participation of women. I reiterate my request to all
the country’s international and development partners to provide financial and
technical support to ensure the continuation of electoral operations beyond voter
registration.
84. While the security situation remains concerning, the efforts of MINUSCA and
the national security forces continue to make a difference. It is important that the State
quickly establish a protective environment in areas where the joint efforts of the
Government and MINUSCA have forced armed groups to leave. Stabilizing conflict affected areas in a sustainable manner requires the restoration of State presence,
allowing the resumption of service delivery and the restoration of livelihoods. These
gains, however, remain fragile, as armed groups continue to target the population and
use explosive ordnance indiscriminately. It is essential that the Government act soon
on its commitment to engaging with all active armed groups to bring them back into
the peace process. I call upon all the remaining armed groups to stop all violence and
recommit to the peace process.
85. The security of the Central African Republic and that of the region are mutually
dependent. Concerted regional efforts are required to address the deterioration of the
security situation in the border areas. I urge the Government to redouble its effort to
revitalize the tripartite force, comprised of troops from the Central African Republic,
Chad and the Sudan, to address the persistent insecurity in the areas bordering Chad
and the Sudan, while also taking steps to re-activate the bilateral commissions with
23-02145

15/20

S/2023/108

both countries. I also call upon the region to maintain and increase its support for the
Central African peace process.
86. Progress on the dialogue with the remaining armed groups within the framework
of the peace process remains critical to advance the disarmam ent, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation programme. I welcome advances made by the
Government with MINUSCA support in strengthening the democratic oversight of
security sector institutions, which remains essential for the sustainable redeploymen t
of the national defence and internal security forces. I call upon the Government, with
the support of development and financial partners, to consolidate the gains in
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation through the provision of
long-term socioeconomic opportunities to ex-combatants and local communities.
87. The worsening economic situation and its impact on the population is
concerning. I welcome the signing of the Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework and call upon all stakeholders, under the leadership of the Central African
Government, to accelerate their unified support for recovery and development
programmes to support the restoration of State authority. Government leadership is
essential to foster coherent long-term socioeconomic programmes in priority
geographical areas. I call upon the Government to continue its efforts to create a
climate of trust to enhance the support of all its partners.
88. I welcome the renewal of the mandate of the Special Criminal Court and th e
holding of the second criminal session of the Bangui Court of Appeals, demonstrating
progress in the fight against impunity. It is critical to build on those commendable
achievements and improve the functioning of the courts outside Bangui to guarantee
equal access to justice for all.
89. I remain deeply concerned about continued violations and abuses of human
rights and international humanitarian law perpetrated by all parties to the conflict. I
condemn acts of violence that affect or are targeted at the civilian population and
undermine humanitarian access. I call upon all parties to take immediate action to
stop the violence and urge the Government to investigate and, where appropriate,
prosecute any such incidents.
90. I condemn any act of sexual exploitation and abuse by United Nations personnel
and reaffirm my commitment to zero tolerance for any such incidents. MINUSCA and
the United Nations country team continue to enhance prevention and response
measures. I encourage strong system-wide efforts to address such wrongs.
91. I am deeply disturbed by the continued threats to the safety and security of
United Nations personnel and humanitarian workers. I commend humanitarian actors
for their continued efforts to deliver life-saving assistance to those in need, despite
the risks. I strongly condemn the continued targeting of humanitarian personnel
performing their duties and urge all parties to the conflict to strictly abide by
international humanitarian law. I equally stress that all attacks against peacek eepers
may constitute war crimes, while threats and attacks against humanitarian personnel
and assets are violations of international humanitarian law.
92. I welcome the Government’s lifting of the ban on night flights for medical and
casualty evacuations and its support to MINUSCA and national defence and security
forces engaged in operations. However, the flight restrictions imposed on the
unmanned aerial system by the Government of the Central African Republic are
concerning, as they may undermine the operational capability of MINUSCA, as well
as the safety and security of the United Nations personnel. I am equally concerned
about hostile incidents involving national defence and internal security forces
targeted at MINUSCA. I urge the Government to take concrete steps to end actions

16/20

23-02145

S/2023/108

that pose grave risks to the safety and security of peacekeepers or impede their ability
to implement their mandate.
93. Lastly, I wish to express my support and deep appreciation to my Special
Representative for the Central African Republic, Valentine Rugwabiza, for her
continued dedication to the peace process in the Central African Republic. I call upon
all stakeholders to provide her with their full support in furtherance of lasting peace,
stability and sustainable development. I also thank all MINUSCA personnel; troopand police-contributing countries and donor countries; regional, multilateral and
non-governmental organizations; and all other partners for their invaluable
contributions.

23-02145

17/20

S/2023/108

Annex I
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the
Central African Republic: military and police strength as at 1 February 2023
Military component

Police component

Experts
on mission

Staff officers

Troops

Total

Formed police
units

Individual
police officers

Argentina

–

1

–

1

–

–

Bangladesh

12

33

1 410

1 455

–

3

Benin

4

3

–

7

–

40

Bhutan

2

5

180

187

–

–

Bolivia (Plurinational State of)

3

2

–

5

–

–

Brazil

3

7

–

10

–

2

Burkina Faso

–

5

–

5

–

66

Burundi

7

12

745

764

–

–

Cambodia

4

6

219

229

–

–

Cameroon

3

7

750

760

320

13

Colombia

2

–

–

2

–

–

Congo

3

8

–

11

180

1

Côte d’Ivoire

–

2

–

2

–

48

Czechia

3

–

–

3

–

–

Djibouti

–

–

–

–

180

15

Ecuador

–

2

–

2

–

–

Egypt

7

26

989

1 022

140

20

France

–

7

–

7

–

2

Gabon

–

1

–

1

–

–

Gambia

3

5

–

8

–

13

Ghana

4

9

–

13

–

1

Guatemala

2

2

–

4

–

Guinea

–

–

–

–

–

India

–

2

–

2

–

Indonesia

2

9

215

226

140

19

Jordan

3

7

–

10

–

68

Kazakhstan

–

2

–

2

–

–

Kenya

7

10

–

17

–

–

Madagascar

–

–

–

–

–

–

Mali

–

–

–

–

–

28

Mauritania

8

8

450

466

319

–

Mexico

1

1

–

2

–

–

Morocco

5

25

751

781

–

–

Nepal

4

16

1 219

1 239

–

–

Niger

–

6

–

6

–

32

Nigeria

–

5

–

5

–

3

Pakistan

8

31

1 274

1 313

–

–

Paraguay

2

2

–

4

–

–

Country

18/20

18

23-02145

S/2023/108
Military component

Police component

Experts
on mission

Staff officers

Troops

Total

Formed police
units

Individual
police officers

Peru

6

9

219

234

–

–

Philippines

2

1

–

3

–

–

Portugal

–

11

215

226

–

5

Republic of Moldova

3

1

–

4

–

Romania

–

–

–

–

–

Russian Federation

3

11

–

14

–

–

Rwanda

8

29

2 110

2 147

638

52

Senegal

–

12

179

191

499

14

Serbia

2

3

71

76

–

–

Sierra Leone

4

4

–

8

–

–

Spain

–

–

–

–

–

3

Sri Lanka

–

1

145

146

–

–

Sweden

–

–

–

–

–

5

Togo

3

8

–

11

–

30

Tunisia

3

11

760

774

–

51

Türkiye

–

–

–

–

–

11

United Republic of Tanzania

–

6

570

576

–

–

United States of America

–

10

–

10

–

–

Uruguay

–

3

–

3

–

–

Viet Nam

1

7

–

8

–

–

Zambia

6

10

908

924

–

–

Zimbabwe

2

2

–

4

–

–

Total

145

406

13 379

13 930

2 416

571

Country

23-02145

8

19/20

S/2023/108

Map
20/20

Annex II

23-02145
