ness of the services provided to the United
Nations missions by the Secretary-General, and
shall prepare a report embodying its observations
and recommendations for consideration during
the fourth regular session of the General
Assembly.

a

methodes analogues destinees
ameliorer l'cfficacite des services mis par le Secretaire general
a la disposition des missions des Nations Unies,
et presentera, aux fins d'examen, a l'Assemblee
generale lors de sa quatrieme session ordinaire un
rapport contenant ses observations et recommandations.

Deur centieme seance pleniere,
le 29 avril 1949.

Two hundredth plenary meeting,
29 April 1949.

271 (III). Appointment of a Special

271 (III). Nomination d'une Commis-

Committee on Method11 and Procedures of the General Assembly

sion speciale des methodes et
des procedures de I'Assemhlee
generale
L' Assemblee genfrale,

The General Assembly,
Mindful of the increasing length of General
Assembly sessions, and of tl.e growing tendency
towards protracted debates in its plenary meetings
and committees,

Preo(c11pee de la longueur croissante des sessions de I' Assemblee generale et de la tendance
de plus en plus marquee a prolonger les debats
en seance pleniere et en commission,

1. Decides to create a Special Committee consisting of Belgium, Brazil, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, Egypt, France, India, Iran, Mexico,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom, United States of America and
Uruguay in order to:

1. Decide de creer une Commission speciale
composee des pays suivants : Belgique, Bresil,
Canada, Chine, Tchecoslovaquie, Egypte, France,
Incle, Iran, Me;x.ique, Suede, Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques, Royaume-Uni,
Etats-Unis d'Amerique et Uruguay, et chargee:

(a) Consider methods and procedures which
would enable the General Assembly and its Committees to discharge their functions more effectively and expeditiously;

a) D'etudier les methodes et Jes procedures
propres a permettre a I' Assemblee generale et a
ses Commissions de remplir leurs fonctions avec
plus d'efficacite et de diligence;

( b) Submit, if possible, a preliminary report
to the General Assembly during the second part
of its third session;

b) De presenter si possible un rapport preliminaire a l'Assemblee generale au cours de la
deuxieme partie de sa troisieme session ;

( c) Transmit a report to the SecretaryGeneral, not later than 15 August 1949, for circulation to Members and for consideration at the
fourth regular session of the General Assembly;

c) D'adresser un rapport au Secretaire general, le 15 aout 1949 au plus tard, pour communication aux Membres aux fins d'examen a la
quatrieme session ordinaire de I' Assemblee gen er ale;

2. Invites the Secretary-General to collaborate
closely with the Special Committee in its work.

2. Invite le Secretaire general a collaborer
etroitement avec la Commission speciale.

Two, hundred and first plenary meeting,
29 April 1949.

272 (III). Observance

in Bulgaria
and Hungary of human rights and
fundamental freedoms

Deux cent unieme seance pleniere,
le 29 avril 1949.

2 72 (III) . Respect des droits de l'homme et des lihertes f ondamentales en
Bulgarie et en Hongrie
"L' Assemblee generate,

The General Assembly,
Considering that one of the purposes of the
United Nations is to achieve international cooperation in promoting and encouraging respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms for
all, without distinction as to race, sex, language
or religion,

Considerant que l'un des buts des Nations Unies
est de realiser la cooperation internationale en
developpant et en encourageant le respect des
droits de l'homme et des libertes fondamentales
pour tous, sans distinction de race, de sexe, de
langue ou de religion,

Considering that the Governments of Bulgaria
and Hungary have been accused, before the General Assembly, of acts contrary to the purposes
of the United Nations and to their obligations
under the Peace Treaties to ensure to all persons
within their respective jurisdictions the enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms,

Conside. ;.,It que le Gouvernement de la Bulgarie et celui de la Hongrie ont ete accuses devant
1' Assemblee generale d'actes contraires aux buts
des Nations Unies et a !'obligation qui leur incombe en vertt1 des Traites de paix d'assurer a
tous, clans leur juridiction respective, la jouissance
des droits de I'homme et des libertes fondamentales,

I. Expresses its deep concern at the grave
accusations made against the Governments of

1. Exprime le profond souci que Jui inspirent
Jes graves accusations portees contre le Gouver-

17
