S/PV.9303

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9303rd meeting

Thursday, 13 April 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia/Mr. Polyanskiy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Shino
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Fernandes
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Colombia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2023/222)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-10319 (E)
*2310319*

Colombia

S/PV.9303

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council
(S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2023/222)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Colombia to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Álvaro Leyva Durán, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Carlos Ruiz
Massieu, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia; His Excellency Mr. Ivan
Šimonović, Permanent Representative of Croatia to
the United Nations, in his capacity as Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission; and Mr. Rodrigo Londoño
Echeverri, President of the Comunes party.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/222, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ruiz Massieu.
Mr. Ruiz Massieu (spoke in Spanish): I thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to present the most
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/222) on
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
and to inform the Security Council about important
developments related to the consolidation of peace in
the country.
2/20

13/04/2023

As always, it is a pleasure to be in the company
of Foreign Minister Álvaro Leyva Durán. I take
this opportunity to thank him and, through him,
the Government of Colombia for the continued
collaboration with the Mission and with the United
Nations in general.
I am also honoured to be in the presence of
Rodrigo Londoño Echeverri, former Commander of
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo (FARC-EP), a signatory party to the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace and now President of the
Comunes political party. Mr. Londoño’s leadership in
the transition from war to peace has been, and will
continue to be, fundamental. His participation today is
certainly testimony of the commitment of thousands of
former combatants to the Final Agreement. I am pleased
that today’s meeting provides a first opportunity for
the Council to hear directly from both signatory parties
about the current status of implementation.
The recent meeting between President Gustavo
Petro Urrego and Mr. Londoño Echeverri in Bogotá,
as well as their joint visit to the former territorial area
for training and reintegration in Mesetas, in the Meta
department, in the wake of a serious threat by an illegal
armed group against dozens of former combatants
and their families, are an example of how the parties
can work together to address the multiple challenges
facing the process and to advance implementation. I
had the opportunity to be part of that visit and to hear
at first-hand the concerns of men and women in the
reintegration process and witness their constructive
dialogue with the authorities.
I am glad to report that, during the visit — the
first one by President Petro Urrego to one of those
areas — the President announced several measures to
strengthen the reintegration process and security, as
well as to expedite the implementation of the agreement
more broadly.
While I regret that that group of former combatants
had to leave the area where they invested so much effort
and work into their reintegration into civilian life, it is
positive that an orderly relocation plan to a new location
with greater security and access to productive land was
agreed upon for them and their families. Members can
rest assured that the Mission will continue to support
former combatants and their families and to monitor
progress on the announced measures. The security of
23-10319

13/04/2023

Colombia

former FARC-EP combatants and the protection of
social leaders is, and will continue to be, our top priority.
(spoke in English)
The situations I described to begin this briefing are
an illustration of one of the key themes of the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report — that is, the critical importance
of both aspects of the “total peace” policy put forth by
the current Government — on the one hand, the core
task of fully implementing the Final Agreement and,
on the other, its efforts through dialogue, however
challenging that may be, to reduce the levels of violence
by other illegal armed groups so as to expand the scope
of peace in the country.
The two aims have become inextricably linked.
It is hard to envision either fully succeeding without
the other, given the realities on the ground in many
of the conflict-affected areas where violence by
remaining armed groups is a major obstacle to the
implementation of the Final Agreement, and where
insufficient implementation also fuels the conditions
for that violence.
In recent days, the Government has made clear,
through additional actions, its commitment to the
Final Agreement. An important example of that is its
decision establish an office headed by a high-level
official, within the presidency, tasked solely with
looking after the comprehensive implementation of the
Final Agreement. The President also announced plans
to cut through legal and bureaucratic impediments
to implementation and to involve a whole-of-cabinet
approach to complying with the agreement.
This is the first time the report of the SecretaryGeneral includes matters related to the comprehensive
rural reform and the ethnic chapter of the Final
Agreement as part of the mandate entrusted to the
Mission by the Council. Those provisions of the
agreement are of enormous magnitude — from bringing
much-needed infrastructure and investments to remote
rural areas, to ensuring equitable access to land and
redressing the specific impacts suffered by ethnic
communities during the conflict.
I am therefore glad that the Mission is already
cooperating with the Government and State entities, as
well as mechanisms created by the peace agreement,
as they work to deliver on the expectations of
Colombian peasants, Indigenous and Afro-Colombian
communities. It is precisely in those rural areas and for

S/PV.9303

those vulnerable populations that we can see again the
way in which fuller implementation of the agreement
and dialogue processes with armed groups can be
mutually reinforcing.
In acutely conflict-affected areas, such as the
Pacific coast, progress on provisions of the agreement
aimed at increasing the State’s presence and at providing
development opportunities to historically neglected
communities can help address the root causes of the
conflict, while steps towards de-escalation through
dialogue can contribute to reducing violence, thereby
enabling better conditions for implementation.
(spoke in Spanish)
The Special Jurisdiction for Peace (SJP) continues
to move forward in its essential mandate of investigating
and sanctioning crimes committed by all parties during
the conflict. As State entities prepare to implement the
first sentences themselves, the trial phase has begun
in cases involving former FARC-EP commanders,
members of the public security forces and civilian
third parties.
Recently, the fundamental role of the truth about
what happened during the conflict was highlighted
in a powerful act of reconciliation between Rodrigo
Londoño Echeverri and retired Army Colonel Luis
Fernando Borja, who is appearing before the SJP within
Case 03 so-called “false positives”. During a gathering
with students at a university in Bogotá, both described
the stories that led them from being part of the armed
conflict to the path of peace on which they walk today;
expressed their desire that the acknowledgement of
their responsibilities contribute to the reparation of
victims, reconciliation and non-repetition; and invited
youth present to understand the value of peace built on
truth and justice.
Also with regard the transitional justice process,
civil society organizations, particularly those of women,
LGBTQI persons and victims, continue to insist on
the prompt opening by the SJP of Case 11, on sexual
and gender-based violence. Undoubtedly, the decision
announced last year by the Jurisdiction to investigate
those serious crimes, which the Council took note of
in its 22 October 2022 press statement (SC/15063), is
a step in the right direction. I hope that, as it already
does in other cases, the SJP will soon be able to open
this case and work to honour the rights of the victims.

23-103193/20

S/PV.9303

Colombia

Advocacy by women’s organizations has also
been palpable in the process of designing the national
action plan on resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security. I am pleased to report that, under
the leadership of the Government, a series of regional
forums have begun for the development of the action
plan, with the participation of women leaders from all
over the country, including women former combatants.
I would like to conclude by referring to the
ongoing peace dialogue processes. As highlighted
by the Secretary-General in his report, negotiations
between the Government and the Ejército de Liberación
Nacional (ELN) continue to advance. Just as I welcome
the constructive spirit that characterized the first two
cycles of dialogue, held in Venezuela and Mexico, I hope
that the talks during the next round, which will take
place in Cuba next month, will yield additional results
in terms of violence reduction and the participation
of society in peacebuilding. The tragic loss of human
lives in recent events serves to highlight the urgent
need for the parties to make progress in negotiating a
bilateral ceasefire.
Also noteworthy is the dialogue and ceasefire
process under way between the Government and the
group self-identified as Central High Command-FARC.
After six decades of armed conflict, an environment
conducive to peace will not be created through more
bloodshed among Colombians, quite the contrary. In
that regard, I urge all illegal armed actors not to waste
the opportunity presented by the bold pursuit of peace
through dialogue. The United Nations will continue to
support every effort aimed at alleviating the impact of
violence and at consolidating peace.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Mr. Ruiz
Massieu for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Šimonović.
Mr. Šimonović: On behalf of the Peacebuilding
Commission, I thank you, Mr. President, for inviting
me to brief the Security Council. Building on the
Peacebuilding
Commission’s
engagement
with
Colombia since 2020, the Commission encourages the
Security Council to consider the following.
Continuing to show unified support to the
Government of Colombia in its efforts to implement the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace.
4/20

13/04/2023

Calling for broad international support, including
via the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia, the United Nations country team, the
multi-partner trust fund and the Peacebuilding Fund,
for the Government’s commitment to implement all
chapters of the Final Agreement.
Welcoming the revitalized cooperation between
the signatory parties in overcoming challenges
in the implementation of the Final Agreement,
including through the renewed use of the
implementation architecture.
Encouraging the full and timely implementation
of the ethnic provisions across the peace agreement
including as it relates to Indigenous and AfroColombian populations.
Showing particular support for the Government’s
efforts to implement the development programmes
with a territorial focus and the comprehensive rural
reform of the Final Agreement, which are key to
reinforcing State presence in conflict affected areas
and to enable more equal access to land for rural and
conflict-affected populations, including rural women
and former combatants.
Supporting the Government with the socioeconomic
reintegration of former combatants as a key element for
sustainable peace in Colombia.
Commending the Government of Colombia for
the progress made towards the national development
plan which includes peace as one of its cross-cutting
elements and highlights the centrality of the Final
Agreement to achieve the plan.
Stressing the continued urgency of ensuring
the security and protection of former combatants,
social leaders and communities, including the AfroColombian and Indigenous communities, who continue
to be the victims of violence in areas still affected
by conflict, the presence of illegal armed groups and
limited state presence.
Closely following up with the Government on
measures taken to provide protection for young
community members and leaders to ensure their
full and effective participation in relevant political
processes and to support their peacebuilding efforts, as
well as to prevent the recruitment of young people to
illegal groupings.
23-10319

13/04/2023

Colombia

Reiterating the importance of the role of
Colombian women and the centrality of their full,
equal and meaningful participation in peacebuilding,
as highlighted in the Secretary-General’s latest report
(S/2023/222).
Expressing full support for the efforts of the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace to advance the goal of
the agreement to uphold victims’ rights in Colombia
and for the work under way to follow up on the
recommendations of the Truth Commission.
The Peacebuilding Commission reiterates its
commitment to supporting the Government of Colombia
and its peoples in their efforts to build peace and share
their unique experiences in peacebuilding with the
Commission.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Šimonović for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Londoño Echeverri.
Mr. Londoño Echeverri (spoke in Spanish): I am
grateful for this opportunity to address the Council
today. I am Rodrigo Londoño Echeverri. In 1976,
when I was 17 years old, I voluntarily joined the
ranks of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia (FARC). At 57 years old, as Commander of
that guerrilla group, I signed the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace with the Colombian State.
At the beginning of the Havana talks, the two high
contracting parties proceeded from the idea that the
social and armed conflict, which had been going on for
more than 50 years, was due to objective causes that
needed to be resolved. They included the inequitable
distribution of landownership, the exclusion of the
farming population and the underdevelopment of rural
communities.
The first point of the peace agreement, aimed at
finding a civilized solution to the country’s scandalous
concentration of rural property, provided for the creation
of a Land Fund in the hands of the State, initially
consisting of 3 million hectares, to be distributed over
a period of 12 years to those most in need of land and
willing to work it. Today, more than six years after
the signing of the agreement, the official figures show
that only 251,122 hectares have been allocated since
the creation of the Fund — barely 8.37 per cent. The
only coherent explanation is the lack of political will
demonstrated by the previous Government, which was

S/PV.9303

characterized by its opposition to the implementation
of the agreement. For the same reason, barely 32 per
cent of the 7 million hectares that were promised have
been formalized, while the subsidies and credits
promised for access to land were merely sketched out
in regulations without any genuine design or planning
that would make them feasible.
Regarding the other two major components of
the first point of the agreement — national plans for
comprehensive rural reform and development based on
a territorial approach, which were aimed at reducing
rural poverty by 50 per cent in 15 years — it must
be said that their effective implementation has been
inadequate. We once again saw a lack of political will on
the part of the Duque Márquez Administration, as well
as insufficient monitoring and evaluation mechanisms,
limited implementation and a high risk of corruption.
We have also seen reports recently that State officials
misappropriated more than COL$500 billion that the
Órganos colegiados de administración y decisión-Paz
mechanism approved for such plans.
As for the second point of the agreement, on political
participation, the most significant progress made was the
final approval of the statute guaranteeing the exercise of
opposition and the special transitory circumscriptions
of peace. However, there have been major delays in
the implementation of the Comprehensive Security
System for the Exercise of Politics as a result of the
insufficient resources allocated to it. While it was part
of the regulations, along with its respective bodies, it
was never put into operation. The previous Government
did nothing to create a closed-circuit television channel
for parties and social organizations, nor did it bother to
make the regulatory adjustments that would make that
possible.
The former FARC fully complied with the
agreement’s third point on ending the conflict. We laid
down our arms and became a political party, in addition
to appearing without delay before the justice and truth
mechanisms contemplated in the fifth point. We have
delivered the truth in innumerable cases; we have
begged for forgiveness time and again from victims;
and we have contributed to providing reparations and
the principle of non-repetition in a decisive manner. We
await the first convictions by the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace, which should take place within the framework of
what was agreed in the fifth point of the agreement, just
as we recognize the merits of the Final Report of the

23-103195/20

S/PV.9303

Colombia

Commission for the Clarification of Truth, Coexistence
and Non-Repetition.
The dissident groups that took up arms again
represent a minuscule percentage of those of us who
signed the agreement. They were reconstituted as a
result of renewed recruitment efforts in rural areas,
and their activities leave much to be desired both
morally and politically. The State never fulfilled its
commitment to occupy the regions abandoned by
the former FARC after its members laid down their
arms, thereby facilitating the strengthening of various
criminal groups in those areas.
There is a blatant lack of protection for social leaders
in our country, who are constantly being assassinated
by those groups, just as we peace signatories are also
falling victim — and that constitutes a flagrant violation
of the guarantees for life and security envisioned in the
third point of the agreement. The same is true of the
forced displacements and constant threats that have
led to the destruction of various spaces approved for
reintegration efforts. More than 350 signatories to the
peace agreement have been murdered with impunity
since its signing. Putting an end to the paramilitary
successor organizations remains merely an aspiration,
despite what was agreed in Havana. Work is only just
beginning on the development of the strategic security
and protection plan approved in the agreement, as well
as on the comprehensive programme of protection for
individuals participating in the reintegration process
referred to in its third point.
The situation of signatories is also critical in terms
of land to work on and productive projects that guarantee
their full reintegration into society, while basic needs
such as housing and education are not being met even
in the long term. These circumstances have resulted
in the creation of a diaspora of signatories in various
regions of the country, making it difficult for them to
mobilize in favour of the agreement’s implementation
and reinforcing a sense of discouragement and
undermining the credibility of the agreement itself and
related mechanisms.
The previous Government earmarked a pitiful
amount of resources for the National Comprehensive
Programme for the Substitution of Illicit Crops
provided for in the fourth point, as well as to the pillars
of the solution to the issue of narcotics production and
commercialization and the prevention of narcotics
consumption and public health. That meant that the
6/20

13/04/2023

agreed policy on eradicating illicit crops from the
Colombian countryside — a cross-cutting aspect of
the comprehensive rural reform in the first point of the
peace agreement — was left unimplemented.
Fortunately for us and for the country, the pentup discontent with the economic and social situation
in Colombia — in addition to the clamour for the full
implementation of the 2016 peace agreement — was
expressed en masse and with great force during the
social uprisings in 2019 and 2021. That finally led to
an electoral victory for progressive and peace-loving
forces in the 2022 elections, in which Gustavo Petro
Urrego was elected President. Mr. Petro Urrego came
with a clear position in favour of political and social
transformation, including a promise to fully implement
the Final Agreement, as well as his policy of “total
peace”, which is aimed at creating conditions conducive
to full democracy and social justice in Colombia.
The first step in that direction is the dialogue with
the former guerrillas of the Ejército de Liberación
Nacional, the dissident groups of the Havana agreement
and other armed groups. We support such an effort,
although we believe that it must take into account the
dialogue and the agreement with us more meaningfully.
In our modest view, we would like to reaffirm that the
agreement must form the foundation of all negotiations.
The armed groups must acknowledge that the current
Government is democratic and progressive and that
their struggle against it is senseless. The ceasefire
should therefore be initiated by them.
We are aware that the set of reforms required in
our country, of which those included in the Final Peace
Agreement constitute only one chapter, represent an
enormous challenge, especially in view of the declared
opposition of the interests and parties that supported
the previous Government and are determined to prevent
the minimum level of transition for the benefit of the
majority. To a great extent, that explains the pace that
President Petro Urrego is trying to set in implementing
the Havana agreement. We have faith in his word, and
we look forward to decisive and comprehensive action
to that end. We have met on several occasions, and
things are starting to happen.
We have acknowledged time and again that, if it had
not been for the support of the international community,
in particular the United Nations, the Security Council
and United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
which tirelessly pushed the Government of Iván Duque
Márquez to take the peace agreement seriously and to
23-10319

13/04/2023

S/PV.9303

Colombia

implement several of its provisions, the effort to reach
a political solution to the confrontation with us might
have failed. That is why we have come full of hope to
this Security Council meeting today. We know that the
Council’s support for the current Government in its
efforts to fully comply with the agreement will have
multiplier effects far greater than in the recent past.
Petro Urrego has established the Commission
for the Follow-Up, Promotion and Verification of the
Implementation of the Final Peace Agreement and has
defined the role of its bodies dedicated to ethnic and
gender issues and committed to financing them. He
has delivered more than 681,000 hectares of land and
formalized many other such agreements. He meets
with the President and the leadership of the Comunes
party, and he visited the Mariana Páez territorial
area for training and reintegration with a view to
guaranteeing the security of its population. We hope
that the National Commission on Security Guarantees
will be effectively operationalized and that the 187
signatories who remain in prison — some of them
abroad — will be released. He has also made resources
available to ensure the implementation of the national
development plan, which had been entirely neglected
by the previous Government.
The fact that he had to withdraw his plan for political
reform as a subject of debate in Congress, owing to
opposition parties’ distortion of its democratic intent,
demonstrates the resistance that the implementation
of the political participation foreseen in the agreement
still encounters. With the support of the Council, the
situation will be more bearable. President Petro Urrego
has proposed the purchase of 3 million hectares from
cattle ranchers for the Land Fund, which represents an
astronomical sum of money. Perhaps the international
community can do its part in bringing that to fruition.
Reintegrated persons are in urgent need of land for
sustainable and productive work and housing, in both
rural and urban areas. But that is predicated on a basic
condition, namely, that their lives, security and stability
be guaranteed as promised by the State in chapters 2 and
3 of the agreement. For us, it is of the utmost importance
that the Security Council exercise its influence to
ensure the fulfilment of that condition through the
mechanisms adopted at the negotiation table.
Today we are aware more than ever of the enormous
difficulties involved in building peace. However, we
are also convinced more than ever that the path of
weapons and confrontation only leads to disaster. We

firmly believe — and that is why we support President
Petro Urrego’s policy of total peace — that the path of
dialogue must never be abandoned. It is the only one
that can lead us to becoming a civilized society. Of all
the humankind’s choices, the worst is war. Only peace
and the path of dialogue will improve our lives.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Londoño Echeverri for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
would like start by thanking Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Ruiz Massieu, Mr. Šimonović
and Mr. Londoño Echeverri, and I welcome Foreign
Minister Leyva Durán to this meeting.
I would like to make three points.
First, I would like to recognize President
Petro Urrego’s restated commitment to putting the
comprehensive implementation of the peace agreement
at the heart of his Government’s approach to building
sustainable peace. We welcome the strengthened
peace architecture in Colombia, including the recent
mandate extension of the Commission for the FollowUp, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation
of the Final Peace Agreement.
Secondly, violence and weak State presence in
many areas of the country continue to have a serious
impact on the daily lives of too many Colombians,
particularly in rural, Afro-Colombian and Indigenous
communities. It also frustrates the implementation of
many aspects of the peace agreement, including the
safety of former combatants. The Government’s efforts
to secure a reduction in violence across the country,
including over the course of the upcoming round of
talks between the Government and the Ejército de
Liberación Nacional, are therefore crucial. In that
context, we thank Foreign Minister Leyva Durán for his
recent letter (S/2023/112, annex) inviting the Security
Council to consider an expanded role for the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, and we look
forward to the Secretary-General’s advice on possible
outcomes. It is also clear that much of the ongoing
violence is driven by criminality, in particular the drug
trade. It is essential that we bear down together on those
who are profiting from misery and destruction. We look
forward to working with the Colombian authorities to
tackle that shared problem with renewed vigour.

23-103197/20

S/PV.9303

Colombia

Thirdly, with regard to the issue of rural reform,
we welcome the progress made on the restitution of
land to indigenous communities and the Government’s
ambition to further expand access to land. We urge
further momentum in its implementation, including
through the agreement and delivery of the national
development plan and the provision of support to
former combatants living outside reintegration areas.
We commend wider reintegration efforts, including to
promote greater political participation.
Colombia remains an example to the world of the
transformative power of peace, but realizing the full
benefits of the peace agreement and securing sustainable
peace across the country will require continued
investment. The United Kingdom remains committed
to supporting Colombia through that process.
Mr. Biang (Gabon): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the African members of the
Security Council (A3), namely, Mozambique, Ghana,
and my own country, Gabon.
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, the Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission, His Excellency
Mr. Ivan Šimonović, and Mr. Rodrigo Londoño
Echeverri for their enlightening briefings. We welcome
the participation of His Excellency Mr. Álvaro Leyva
Durán, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia.
Mozambique, Ghana and Gabon recognize the
determination and efforts undertaken by President
Gustavo Petro Urrego, his Government and the
Colombian people, in line with the 2016 Colombia Peace
Accord, to build peace and stability in the country after
decades of armed conflict. We reaffirm our full support
for the national reconciliation process and the building
of lasting peace in Colombia.
The information contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia (S/2023/222) over the last three
months is very encouraging and commendable,
especially with regard to the Government’s actions
promoting inclusive dialogue through the involvement
of the Colombian society, including communities
affected by the conflict, women’s organizations,
indigenous and Afro-Colombian people, and former
members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP). In this
regard, we welcome the introduction in Congress of
the proposed National Development Plan for the period
8/20

13/04/2023

2022–2026 as well as the budget of $10.7 billion for its
implementation, reflecting such priorities as human
security, social justice, climate action, the fight against
inequality and the total peace policy.
We also welcome the agreement reached between
the Colombian Government and the former FARC-EP,
to extend, for a period of four years, the mandate of
the Commission for the Follow-Up, Promotion and
Verification of the Implementation of the Final Peace
Agreement. The formal appointment of senior officials
by the Government as its representatives before the
Commission reflects the importance it attaches to this
body in the search for lasting peace and stability.
The improvement of living conditions for former
fighters and their families is a necessary component
of a successful reintegration programme for these
individuals. In this regard, we welcome the approval
of 128 collective projects by the National Reintegration
Council, of which 118 received financial support
benefiting 3,898 former combatants, and the approval
of 5,327 individual projects involving 6,419 former
combatants.
We commend the actions undertaken by President
Petro Urrego in his total peace policy, by engaging
various armed groups in peace talks. We note with
satisfaction the outcome of the second round of peace
negotiations between the Government and the Ejército
de Liberaciön Nacional (ELN) on 10 March, in Mexico
City. The A3 encourages the parties to maintain the
same level of commitment with a view to holding the
third round of negotiations, to take place this month in
Cuba. We also support the Colombian Government’s
request to expand the mandate of the United Nations
Verification Mission to include monitoring and
verification of future agreements with other armed
groups.
Despite the aforementioned efforts made by the
Colombian Government, there remain challenges to
the peace process. Mozambique, Ghana and Gabon
regret and condemn the attack perpetrated by the
ELN on 29 March 2023, which resulted in the death
of nine Colombian soldiers. We strongly encourage all
parties involved to give the negotiation process their
full attention and refrain from taking any measures
that could undermine efforts to maintain peace and
stability. We encourage the Colombian Government to
continue its efforts in search of a ceasefire and put an
23-10319

13/04/2023

Colombia

end to hostilities through negotiation, for the benefit of
the good people of Colombia.
The successful implementation of the ethnic chapter
and the comprehensive rural reform are fundamental to
consolidating peace and resolving issues of inequality
and exclusion, which mainly affect indigenous Afrodescendent communities. On the ethnic chapter,
the report indicates that the implementation rate
of its provisions is 44 per cent compared to the
average 60 per cent rate of the provisions of the Final
Agreement overall. In this context, we encourage
the continued work of the Office of Her Excellency
Ms. Francia Márquez, Vice-President, together with the
Unit for the Implementation of the Final Agreement,
aimed at improving the implementation of the ethnic
chapter with a view to facilitating and improving the
social integration of indigenous and Afro-Colombian
communities.
The issue of rural reform is of utmost importance
in building a sustainable peace and an egalitarian
society. We therefore welcome the proposed National
Development Plan, including the significant budget
allocation thereto. We also welcome the legal actions
undertaken for the restitution of more than 1 million
hectares of land to the five prioritized territories
included under the ethnic chapter in Chocó, Guaviare,
Nariño and Córdoba.
Mozambique, Ghana and Gabon note with concern
the persistent security challenges, especially in regions
historically affected by limitations on the presence of
the State, with a record of violence that mostly affects
indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities. The
presence of State institutions in these regions is critical
to the effectiveness and success of ongoing attempts to
dismantle criminal organizations.
In conclusion, we reaffirm our full support for
the Government of Colombia in the implementation
of the Final Peace Agreement. We also call on the
international community, the United Nations and their
partners to sustain their political and financial backing
of the Colombian Government as it strives to bring
about peace and stability across the country.
We extend our support for the Verification
Mission and the Special Representative in their task
of monitoring the fulfilment of the commitments of
the Peace Agreement, through their engagement with
various actors in Colombian society.

S/PV.9303

Mrs. Shino (Japan): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Carlos
Ruiz Massieu, and Mr. Rodrigo Londoño Echeverri
for their briefings, as well as Ambassador Šimonović,
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, for his
valuable briefing. I also extend a warm welcome
to the Colombian Foreign Minister, His Excellency
Mr. Álvaro Leyva Durán.
The peace process in Colombia demonstrates once
again that it is vital to have ownership and commitment
by all stakeholders. Japan commends the focused
implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace
as well as active dialogues with non-signatory groups
in the context of the total peace policy. In particular,
Japan welcomes the ongoing discussion in the peace
talks between the Government and the Ejército de
Liberaciön Nacional, including commitments for the
next round of ceasefire negotiations. We encourage all
parties to constructively engage in the peace process
through dialogue, without violence. I agree that only
peace will improve people’s lives.
Japan appreciates the good offices and work of
Special Representative Ruiz Massieu and the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia in supporting
Colombia’s efforts. It is important to strengthen
coordination among stakeholders and cooperation
between the United Nations agencies involved and
other relevant actors. Japan takes note of the Colombian
Foreign Minister’s request to the Council regarding the
possible expansion of the Mission’s mandate to support
efforts in the context of the “total peace” policy. We
look forward to receiving recommendations and
options from the Secretary-General on the possible
role that the United Nations could play in that regard
and to engaging constructively with our fellow Council
members on the best way forward.
As was highlighted by the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, comprehensive rural reform and the
implementation of the ethnic chapter of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace, especially based on inclusivity
and the principle of human security, are vital to the
consolidation of peace. Japan encourages the Mission
to accelerate its support with its expanded mandate.
Notwithstanding the progress that has been made,
Japan remains concerned about the level of violence in
Colombia. In order to curb the incidence of violence, it

23-103199/20

S/PV.9303

Colombia

will be essential to establish and implement appropriate
security and justice mechanisms. In that regard, we
encourage the Colombian Government, with support
from the Verification Mission, to increase its efforts
to enhance coordination on security guarantees and
the work of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace. Japan
stresses the importance of ensuring that those efforts
have the interests of all Colombians, including AfroColombians, indigenous people, social leaders and
former combatants who have joined the peace process,
at their centre. A people-centred, inclusive and
cooperative approach, with the engagement of women,
young people and people in vulnerable situations, is
fundamental to long-lasting peace and a resilient society.
Let me conclude by reaffirming Japan’s unwavering
commitment to supporting the peace process and
peacebuilding efforts in Colombia.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative
of the Secretary General and Head of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, for his informative
briefing and the Secretary-General for his most recent
report on the Verification Mission (S/2023/222),
which includes elements on the implementation of the
comprehensive rural reform and the ethnic chapter. We
welcome the presence here today of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Colombia, Mr. Álvaro Leyva Durán.
We listened attentively to the briefers today and are
also grateful for the participation of Mr. Ivan Šimonović,
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, in today’s
meeting. His presence is of particular importance as
Chair of the advisory body to the Council tasked with
supporting countries in situations of conflict, or, like
Colombia, in the process of transitioning to peace.
Ecuador supports the peacebuilding efforts in Colombia
and considers most timely the renewed commitment
of the Government to attacking the root causes of the
conflict and addressing the problems of inequality,
exclusion and marginalization that undermine the social
fabric and fuel spirals of violence. Ecuador supports
all actions that contribute to the implementation of the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace in Colombia. In that regard,
I would like to bring up three important points.
First, Ecuador recognizes the relevance of the
national development plan presented by the Colombian
Government, which positions rural reform as a priority.
Enabling more equitable and broader access to land
10/20

13/04/2023

for the population affected by the conflict is vital to
continuing to lay a path to peace.
Secondly, the successful reintegration of excombatants is an essential part of a stable and lasting
peace. In that connection, I welcome the approval of
new collective projects aimed at their socioeconomic
reintegration. We call for all such efforts to include
greater access to the benefits of reintegration for
women ex-combatants and their active participation in
decision-making as a priority on the agenda.
Thirdly, my delegation underlines the importance
of the Colombian State’s commitment to the
transitional justice process. Actions that promote
better coordination between the Government and the
Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and
Non-Repetition are essential to eliminating impunity
and fostering confidence in justice, especially for all
victims of the conflict, as well as the implementation of
restorative sentences.
Ecuador believes firmly that a comprehensive and
lasting peace will be possible only through dialogue.
For that reason, recent acts of violence by groups with
whom dialogue is precisely what is being sought are
a cause for concern. That is why international support
for peace in Colombia through the Security Council
must be based on a greater and more focused effort to
establish full control over its territory and curb illegal
forces fuelled by acts outside the law and the agreements
in place. They not only affect the country’s internal
circumstances but are also having an increasingly
negative impact on its neighbours, placing the peace of
inhabitants near the borders at risk.
We acknowledge the efforts of the Colombian
Government in its dialogues with other armed groups
and support the decision to suspend bilateral ceasefire
declarations where necessary. I want to reiterate
the need for ceasefire agreements and negotiations
to be conducted in good faith, as it must be ensured
that no actors view them as a consent that weakens
the presence of the State to the detriment of the
population’s well-being and risks contributing to the
proliferation of illicit activities. Ecuador takes note of
Mr. Leyva Durán’s request of 14 February in which he
asks that consideration be given to expanding the role
of the Mission, with the objective of accompanying the
dialogue and ceasefire processes with other groups.
For my delegation, the process of establishing the
recommendations and options for the possible wider
23-10319

13/04/2023

Colombia

role of the United Nations Verification Mission, as
well as the implications for its configuration, should be
carried out with the broad and inclusive participation of
stakeholders and taking into account the principles of
the Final Agreement.
In conclusion, I want to once again express
Ecuador’s full support for the peace process in Colombia
and for the full implementation of the Final Agreement.
Here I would like to echo the words of the SecretaryGeneral in his report in recognizing the leading role
of Colombian women as peacebuilders and agents of
justice and reconciliation.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I thank Special Representative
Ruiz Massieu for his briefing today and the crucial
work of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia. I also thank Mr. Ivan Šimonović, Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission, and Mr. Londoño
Echeverri for their briefings, and I welcome the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Colombia to this meeting.
Since our previous meeting in January (see
S/PV.9240), Colombia has continued to demonstrate
steadfast determination on its journey to sustainable
peace. The Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/222)
highlights the Colombian Government’s continuing
commitment to the implementation of its “total
peace” policy. Malta commends the steps taken by the
Government in that regard and underscores that the
focused implementation of the 2016 Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace across all its sections must remain at the
core of its efforts for peace. We welcome the Colombian
Government’s commitment to dialogue and ensuring
women’s full, equal and meaningful participation. We
were pleased to see the progress made on key topics
at the recent peace talks held in Mexico and hope
that the momentum can continue at the next round
of negotiations.
Despite the positive steps, it is regrettable that
Colombia continues to suffer from high levels of
violence. Malta strongly condemns the attacks that
killed 10 Government soldiers and left several injured
in the state of Norte de Santander on 29 March. Violent
attacks against, and killings and abductions of, social
leaders and human rights defenders also remain a major
concern. The increase in violence against women leaders
is unacceptable, and more must be done to prioritize
the protection of civilians. Any violence directed
against former combatants who remain committed

S/PV.9303

to transitioning to civilian life is also unacceptable.
Resources must be made available to provide for the
security and support that they require.
Malta is seriously concerned about the increased
protection risks faced by Afro-Colombians and
Indigenous people, who continue to be disproportionally
affected by humanitarian emergencies involving mass
displacement and confinement. More than 25,000
people from those communities have been recently
displaced or forcibly confined, owing to violence in the
first three months of 2023 alone. The several reports of
child recruitment by illegal armed groups, especially
among Indigenous and Afro-Colombian children, is
utterly reprehensible. Malta encourages the Government
to continue strengthening its efforts for the protection
of children in the implementation of its “total peace”
policy. Malta is also deeply concerned about all the
forcibly missing and disappeared persons in Colombia,
whose number is estimated at more than 100,000. Their
families deserve answers on the fate of their loved ones.
Attention must continue to be paid to that crucial topic,
and resources must be made available to strengthen the
Unit for the Search for Persons Deemed as Missing,
including by guaranteeing its access to the information
that is essential for its work.
Malta commends the Government’s actions to
implement comprehensive rural reform and the steps
taken to advance the implementation of the ethnic
chapter across the Final Agreement. We strongly support
Colombia’s transitional justice system and welcome
the progress being made to provide truth, justice and
reparations to victims on all sides of the armed conflict,
with a view to guaranteeing non-repetition. All actors
must meaningfully contribute to the effort to address
the needs of victims. Malta is also pleased to note the
progress made in the work of the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace, with the issuance of restorative sentences
expected in the coming months. We support the call of
women’s and LGBTI organizations to open Case 11, on
sexual and gender-based violence.
Malta believes that 2023 has the potential to be a
defining year for Colombia’s journey towards achieving
sustainable peace. We are confident that, with the
continued commitment of the Colombian people and
the Government, the international community and
the Council, we can be optimistic for Colombia’s
bright future.

23-1031911/20

S/PV.9303

Colombia

Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I join others in thanking Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his
briefing. I would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Croatia to the United Nations, in his
capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, and
the President of the Comunes party for their first-hand
accounts. I welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia, Mr. Álvaro Leyva Durán, to this meeting.
The search for peace must involve dialogue. That
is why we welcome the conclusion of the second round
of negotiations held in Mexico City with the Ejército
de Liberación Nacional. We hope that the negotiations
will lead to a lasting ceasefire. France also welcomes
the efforts made by the Colombian authorities to
consolidate the ceasefires under way with several armed
groups. We hope that the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia will be able to play a timely
role in monitoring the implementation of the various
commitments in order to reduce the violence. Indeed,
France remains extremely concerned about the current
level of violence affecting certain regions of Colombia.
We strongly condemn the recent attacks on Colombian
law enforcement. We recall that the security guarantees
remain insufficient for former combatants, human
rights defenders and civil society representatives.
France welcomes the Government’s commitment to
land access and rural reform. The presentation of the
national development plan to the Congress presents an
opportunity to move forward on the issue by allocating
the required funding. France also welcomes the
Government’s prioritization of the implementation of
the ethnic chapters of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
We encourage the Government to pursue that path in
order to offer new viable socioeconomic opportunities
to the populations that have suffered from the conflict.
Finally, France welcomes the steady progress made
by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace. The start of
the trial phase, which opens the way for restorative
sentencing and a new chapter for reconciliation, must
also be commended.
Colombia is an example for the international
community. The Final Agreement is a historic
achievement, and the four-year extension of the
mandate of the Commission for the Follow-Up,
Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of
the Final Agreement is an extremely important step.
We support the Colombian authorities in their efforts
12/20

13/04/2023

to fully implement the Final Agreement and in the
discussions opened within the framework of the policy
of “total peace”. Of course, there is still a long way to
go, as well as many challenges. But Colombia is on the
right track, and France stands ready to provide it with
its full support.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I welcome the participation in this meeting of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, Mr. Leyva
Durán. His presence attests to the continued cooperation
between Colombia and the Security Council. I also
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Carlos Ruiz Massieu and the Permanent Representative
of Croatia, Mr. Ivan Šimonović, in his capacity as Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission, for their briefings.
My thanks also go to Mr. Rodrigo Londoño Echeverri
for his statement.
For more than 20 years, Switzerland has actively
supported efforts to achieve lasting peace in Colombia,
including through citizen participation and dealing
with the past. We are aware that building lasting peace
is rarely a linear process, and we therefore welcome
the renewed commitment of the parties to advance the
full implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
As a partner State in the peace negotiations between
the Colombian Government and the Ejército de
Liberación Nacional, we commend the progress made
in the second round of negotiations and highlight the
Colombian Government’s efforts to pursue dialogue
with all major actors and armed groups. Following the
recent violence, we call on all armed actors to keep the
channels of dialogue open and step up efforts to reach
ceasefire agreements and end hostilities.
Switzerland underscores the outstanding work and
adaptability of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia in carrying out its mandate, as well as its
close cooperation with all stakeholders. For the first
time since the expansion of the Mission’s mandate,
the Security Council has received a comprehensive
progress report (S/2023/222), including with regard
to the implementation of the rural reform and the
ethnic chapters of the Final Agreement. I would like to
highlight the following three points.
First, violence directed against social leaders,
human rights defenders and former combatants remains
alarming. The conflict-related violence and the resulting
displacement and confinement of civilians, most of
23-10319

13/04/2023

Colombia

whom are of Afro-Colombian and Indigenous origin,
require humanitarian and rapid de-escalation measures.
Switzerland supports the Secretary-General’s call for
increased State presence in conflict-affected regions to
combat violence. Furthermore, the widespread use of
explosive devices by non-State armed groups and their
humanitarian consequences remain a cause for concern.
Switzerland condemns the use of anti-personnel mines,
which disproportionately affect civilians. As part
of our comprehensive mine action programme, we
support Humanicemos Desminado Humanitario, an
organization founded by former combatants, which
exemplifies the reintegration and confidence-building
efforts achieved through the implementation of the
Final Agreement.
Secondly,
Switzerland
welcomes
the
commencement by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace of
the eleventh and final case on sexual and gender-based
violence, thanks in part to the continued advocacy
of civil society. The participatory development of
recommendations on reparations underscores the
victim-centred approach in the transitional justice
process in Colombia. In preparation for the first
reparations awards by the Special Jurisdiction, it
is essential that their future implementation be
ensured so as to respect the rights of the victims. In
this regard, Switzerland calls for the optimization of
institutional coordination and the allocation of funds
across the system as a whole, in order to ensure
adequate capacity for implementation, particularly of
the Truth Commission’s recommendations. Improving
information-sharing to advance the search for missing
persons is also necessary.
Finally, Switzerland hopes that the Security
Council can once again show unity by responding to
Colombia’s call to expand the Verification Mission’s
mandate to include ceasefire monitoring. Should that
be the case, Switzerland stands ready, based on its
long-standing experience, to support such efforts. We
reiterate our full support for the full implementation of
the Peace Agreement and remain ready to assist efforts
in favour of dialogue towards a lasting peace.
I wish to conclude with words from the National
Centre of Historical Memory in Bogota:
(spoke in Spanish)
“Recognizing, making visible, dignifying and
humanizing the victims are commitments inherent

S/PV.9303

in the right to truth and reparation, and in the
State’s duty to remember them.”
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I thank the Special
Representative, Mr. Ruiz Massieu, for his briefing and
for his efforts and those of his team in supporting peace
in Colombia. I also thank the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission for his briefing. We also listened carefully
to Mr. Londoño Echeverri’s briefing. We welcome the
participation today of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia, His Excellency Mr. Leyva Durán, and
commend the Government’s continued efforts aimed
at implementing the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace,
including rural reforms and the ethnic chapter, as
well as devising innovative and holistic approaches to
ensure that the perspectives of various stakeholders in
Colombia are taken into account.
We also welcome continued progress in the
preparation of the National Development Plan, in
particular its focus on climate action and tackling
social inequality. However, we remain concerned over
the persistent violence and threats against civilians,
including former combatants and community leaders.
In this regard, it is important to note that implementing
the security guarantees of the Final Agreement is one
of the key tools to providing the necessary protection
for Colombians. We are all aware that the full
implementation of the Final Agreement along with the
adoption of measures to stop violence in the country are
two necessary objectives for achieving sustained peace
and security in Colombia. Each objective reinforces the
other in efforts to achieve the desired peace.
In that context, we believe that the progress made
in the dialogue and the various peace processes is
encouraging. But for those efforts to be successful, we
reiterate that it is essential that all hostilities cease. We
therefore look forward to the next round of peace talks in
Cuba, as they have the potential to contribute to further
consolidating peace in Colombia. The SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations on any potential role of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia will
also be helpful in supporting such efforts.
We stress that strengthening reconciliation among
communities in Colombia requires continued focus
on local initiatives for reintegration and other locally
led initiatives, and that the perspectives of those

23-1031913/20

S/PV.9303

Colombia

13/04/2023

directly affected by violence in Colombia are taken
into consideration.

peace process is the best guarantee for a long-lasting
and irreversible peace for the future.

It is also important to ensure the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women and the inclusion
of youth in such initiatives as their role is fundamental
in the peacebuilding process, conflict resolution
and reintegration. The nearly 15 per cent increase in
participation of female former combatants in productive
projects in a year, as reported by the SecretaryGeneral (S/2023/222), is a step in the right direction.
Undoubtedly, the progress made across the different
components of the comprehensive system for truth,
justice, reparation and non-repetition continues to lay
the necessary groundwork for holistic reconciliation and
effective accountability in Colombia, including in the
cases being considered under the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace.

We commend the Colombian Government
for — and the presence of Foreign Minister Leyva
Durán in the Council Chamber today is further
testimony of — its strong anchoring in the agenda
for total peace of its commitment to the agenda’s full
implementation, leading to reconciliation, which is the
right way — the only way — to ensure lasting peace
in Colombia. The four-year extension of the mandate
of the Commission for the Follow-Up, Promotion and
Verification of the Implementation of the Final Peace
Agreement is another testament to this commitment.

In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates underscores
its full support for the Government and the people of
Colombia in their efforts to achieve sustainable peace,
as well as for the important role of the United Nations
Verification Mission in making that objective a reality.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia, Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, for his continued
work and for his update on the developments in
the country. I thank Ambassador Šimonović for
his thoughts and recommendations as Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission. I also thank Mr. Londoño
Echeverri for his insights. His participation is beyond
symbolic, as it represents the true nature and the depth
of the commitment to peace in Colombia.
There is no denying that Colombia and its people
have faced colossal challenges on their path to peace.
Yet despite the immense difficulties, peace has
prevailed. Colombia has shown convincingly that where
there is a will, there is a way. The Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace and the positive developments during the last
seven years are the result of the unwavering efforts
of various stakeholders, the Government and former
combatants, and represent the very peace dividend the
Colombian people deserve. These years of building
peace have shown that while conflict hits the most
vulnerable hardest, peace, in contrast, benefits all.
Therefore, making everyone a direct beneficiary of the
14/20

Constructive dialogue continues to be paramount in
advancing the implementation of the Peace Agreement.
The ongoing negotiations between the Government
and the Ejército de Liberaciön Nacional, the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo and other armed groups are very encouraging
signs of progress. The establishment of ceasefires is of
great importance, and, if properly implemented, as we
hope and urge for, that will not only reduce violence,
but also contribute to, establish and consolidate trust,
which is the first and most important element in
reaching agreement on sustainable peace.
As we all know, peace is never an easy or a straight
path, and challenges can always rise on the way forward.
There is still much work to be done, particularly in
improving security in conflict-affected areas through
dialogue with justice, by advancing forward-looking
strategies and through concrete life-changing actions
to protect vulnerable communities and populations.
All efforts must be made to prevent violence from
standing in the way of peace. In this respect, Albania
supports the proposed National Development Plan
and the prioritization being given to comprehensive
rural reform, a key component in this process. The
steps taken so far in comprehensive rural reform and
the progress made in the ethnic chapter demonstrate
a true commitment to peace, and they deserve praise
and support.
We commend the work of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia with respect to rural
reform as part of its expanded mandate, and we will
support any proposal for expansion of its mandate to
include a ceasefire verification role.
Transitional justice plays a vital role in achieving
peace, and we support the efforts of the Special
23-10319

13/04/2023

Colombia

Jurisdiction for Peace to address the conditions faced
by individuals within its purview, including their
security. All actors involved must play their part in
this process in order to ensure accountability for
crimes and justice for victims; it is the only secure path
towards reconciliation.
Colombia and Colombians have been through too
much violence for too long. The dialogue and peace
process have opened a new chapter, making the country
a success story, thanks to its sustainable investment in a
decent life with rights and dignity for all.
(spoke in Spanish)
In conclusion, Albania remains steadfast in its
support for Colombia and the Colombian people in their
efforts to build “total peace” and a shared future.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): It is
an honour for me and my country to take the floor to
comment on the implementation of the Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace in Colombia. I thank the briefers for their
presentations and welcome Foreign Minister Leyva
Durán to the Council.
Colombia
has
demonstrated
exceptional
commitment and determination in its quest for
reconciliation and its efforts to build a lasting peace.
Brazil firmly believes in the country’s capacity and
political will to overcome the challenges to the full
implementation of the peace agreement and consolidate
peace across its territory. We are pleased to note the
progress made in the implementation of the peace
agreement, especially with regard to rural reform, the
political participation of ex-combatants and attention to
the victims of the conflict. The expansion in January of
the mandate of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia, including as regards monitoring the rural
reform and ethnic chapter elements of the agreement,
represents an important step towards strengthening the
peace process in the country.
Brazil congratulates Mr. Petro Urrego’s Government
on its efforts to seek “total peace” throughout its
territory. As noted by the Secretary-General in his
most recent report to the Council (S/2023/222), the
additional dialogue efforts under way are both welcome
and essential to extending the benefits of peace in
Colombia. The consolidation of peace depends on the
full implementation of the Final Agreement and also
on the capacity of the authorities to curb the violence

S/PV.9303

that continues to be perpetrated by other armed groups
and that disproportionately affects Afro-Colombians,
indigenous peoples, women and the most vulnerable
segments of the population.
In the context of efforts seeking to build an
inclusive and sustainable peace, as a guarantor country
Brazil reaffirms its commitment to supporting the
dialogue between the Colombian Government and
the Ejército de Liberación Nacional. We welcome the
results of the second round of negotiations and the
prospects for progress towards an agreement achieved
in Mexico. It is with deep regret, however, that we
deplore the persistent trends resulting in new tragedies.
We recall, with deep respect and solidarity, Colombia’s
national day of remembrance and solidarity with
victims of the conflict, marked on 9 April. We hope
that the common goal of the parties at the negotiating
table is putting a definitive end to the creation of new
victims and achieving peace in Colombia. We therefore
reiterate the importance of a constructive dialogue
between the parties to create conditions of mutual trust
and to encourage the belief — in Colombia and the
international community — that the ceasefire, an end
to the hostilities and the transformation of the country
can become a reality with society’s full participation.
As we have emphasized, the comprehensive
deployment of State capacities in every corner of the
country’s territory, especially areas affected by conflict
or historically neglected, is essential to the consolidation
of peace. Progress on agrarian reform will contribute
decisively to that end, as will the Colombian Congress’s
approval of the national development plan, which
incorporates key priorities for the implementation of
the peace process. Despite the important challenges
already overcome, we recognize those that lie ahead in
the implementation of the peace process in Colombia.
The security situation of ex-combatants, social leaders
and human rights defenders continues to be a worry
and efforts to guarantee their protection and prevent
violence must be intensified. The full reintegration of
ex-combatants into civilian life depends on their access
to land, housing and productive projects. We also call
attention to the need to strengthen policies to address
the serious problem of gender-based violence.
As we have emphasized many times, we must not
forget that the Security Council’s work in Colombia is
based on the expectations and requirements expressed
by the Colombian Government. In that regard, Brazil
is ready to study in detail the Secretary-General’s

23-1031915/20

S/PV.9303

Colombia

recommendations in order to analyse how the
Verification Mission can collaborate on the ceasefire
agreements with various armed groups in Colombia, as
the Colombian Government has requested.
Brazil reaffirms its commitment to cooperate with
the Government of Colombia so that the peace achieved
through its people’s hard work can be consolidated and
spread throughout its territory.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
Let me start by underscoring our appreciation for the
vital role that the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia continues to play in supporting peace
in Colombia. Let me also welcome Foreign Minister
Leyva Durán once again to the Council Chamber.
The United States remains committed to supporting
Colombia as it seeks to deepen its implementation of
the 2016 Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. The expansion
of the United Nations Verification Mission’s mandate
to include the ethnic chapter helped to achieve that
goal. As the first international accompanier of the
ethnic chapter of the 2016 peace accord, the United
States seeks to help Colombia promote diversity,
equity and inclusion by addressing inequality and
political and socioeconomic exclusion, issues that
have disproportionately affected indigenous and AfroColombian communities. The presentation of President
Petro Urrego’s national development plan to Colombia’s
Congress is an important step as Colombia’s leaders
consider the best methods to tackle inequality. We are
encouraged that the Verification Mission has already
taken important steps to address the ethnic chapter
and rural reform by engaging with the Ministry of
Agriculture and civil-society organizations.
We take note of the Colombian Government’s
efforts to expand its “total peace” plan through
negotiations with the Ejército de Liberación Nacional,
dissident groups of the former Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo and
other armed groups that did not sign the peace accord
in 2016. The efforts to expand peace in Colombia are
laudable, but also require time and a demonstrated
commitment by terrorist and illegal armed groups to
abiding by any future negotiated terms. Those efforts
should also recognize the importance of combating
illicit drug production and avoiding impunity for acts
committed by terrorist and illegal armed groups. We
are encouraged that the Verification Mission reported a
16/20

13/04/2023

reduction in killings in many rural regions of Colombia,
but we note that high levels of conflict-related violence
continue. Violence against indigenous and AfroColombian communities, environmental and human
rights defenders, labour leaders and women remains a
concern, with the Verification Mission reporting that
in some areas of the country the level of violence has
increased as compared to one year ago. The United
States remains supportive of efforts to help Colombia
achieve a real and lasting peace. We hope that those
efforts lead to a demonstrable reduction in violence
from illegal armed groups.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to begin by welcoming Mr. Leyva Durán,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia. I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Massieu and the Permanent Representative of Croatia,
Mr. Ivan Šimonović, in his capacity as Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for their briefings, and I
listened closely to the statement made by Mr. Londoño
Echeverri, President of the Comunes party.
Since the beginning of the year, the Colombian
parties have continued to work tirelessly to achieve
“total peace”. The Colombian Government, under the
leadership of President Petro Urrego, has been fully
implementing the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace and is
committed to curbing violence and achieving a broader,
sustainable peace through dialogue and negotiation.
We appreciate all such efforts, and we support and
expect all parties in Colombia to work together and
make progress on the long-term stability, peace and
development of the country.
China welcomes the progress made in the ceasefire
negotiations among the Colombian Government, the
Ejército de Liberación Nacional and other armed groups.
We hope that the new round of negotiations, to be held
in Cuba in May, will achieve positive results and lead to
the agreement of a permanent ceasefire and a political
solution. Colombia cannot consolidate and build peace
without the support and assistance of the international
community. We hope that the countries of the region,
the guarantor States and the accompanying States will
continue to play an active role in promoting peace
talks. The full implementation of the Final Agreement
remains key to achieving peace and development,
which will require sustained investment in the national
development plan of the Colombian Government over
the next four years. The implementation of the Final
23-10319

13/04/2023

Colombia

S/PV.9303

Agreement is a key cross-cutting element. We appreciate
the Colombian Government’s development-for-peace
approach to governance and support the increased
investment of financial resources in areas such as rural
reform, the reintegration of former combatants and the
substitution of illicit crops.

to hear, for the first time in this Chamber, the views of
a key participant in the peace process, a representative
of the former leadership of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo and
President of the Comunes party, Mr. Rodrigo Londoño
Echeverri.

We hope that those efforts will contribute to
addressing long-term issues, such as poverty, uneven
development and social injustice, and to eliminating
the root causes of conflict. The United Nations country
team, the Peacebuilding Commission, other entities
and international partners should provide more support
to that end. In his report (S/2023/222), the SecretaryGeneral expresses concern about the grave security
situation and the frequent incidents of violence
in several areas of Colombia. China supports the
Colombian Government in increasing the deployment
of security forces to former conflict-affected areas that
lack effective control, deterring violence, adopting
targeted initiatives to ensure the security of former
combatants and strengthening the protection of women,
children and ethnic minorities.

The peacebuilding process in Colombia is dynamic.
We see Bogotá’s efforts to comprehensively implement
the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. We see progress
on rural reform and the ethnic chapter of the Final
Agreement, which the United Nations Verification
Mission was recently mandated to supervise, as well as
on the reintegration of former combatants. At the same
time, the key problem of guaranteeing the security of
former combatants remains. The implementation of the
peace agreements will undoubtedly be facilitated by the
current extension of the mandate of the Commission
for the Follow-Up, Promotion and Verification of the
Implementation of the Final Agreement, as well as the
first sentences handed down by the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace, the implementation of which will also be
monitored by the United Nations.

Under the leadership of Mr. Massieu, the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia has done
much to support the implementation of the Final
Agreement. We appreciate its important contribution
and support its important role in helping the Colombian
Government to advance the vision of total peace and
progress towards achieving lasting peace through
dialogue and negotiation. China stands ready to
work with the rest of the international community to
continue to support the Colombian-led and Colombianowned peace process. We look forward to even greater
achievements being made by the Colombian people
on their path to establishing comprehensive stability,
peace and development.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
We welcome the participation in today’s discussion
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia,
Mr. Álvaro Leyva Durán. We are grateful for the
views expressed by the Head of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, Mr. Carlos Ruiz
Massieu, and by the Permanent Representative of
Croatia, Mr. Ivan Šimonović, in his capacity as Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission. We are sure that it was
also useful for all the members of the Security Council

Despite the peaceful aspirations of the Colombian
authorities and all of Colombian society, the country
has not seen a decrease in the level of violence. The
violence has shifted from a confrontation between
the State and illegal armed groups to confrontations
among armed groups fighting for control of territory
and drug-trafficking channels. In addition to the
implementation of the Final Agreement, the Colombian
Government and the international community are now
focused on dialogue with the remaining armed groups,
especially the Ejército de Liberación Nacional (ELN).
We expect that agreements between the authorities
and the rebels will soon be reached, including on a
ceasefire, during the next round of talks, to be held in
Cuba. We understand Bogotá’s desire to consolidate
the gains made in dialogue with the armed groups
through the verification of possible agreements by
the Mission. We trust that the Secretary-General will
provide the Security Council with detailed proposals
on the possibility of involving the United Nations to
that end. All Colombian stakeholders should be able to
participate in discussions on that initiative, given the
difficult peacebuilding situation.
The eventual expansion of the Mission’s mandate
will create many additional risks and threats that must
be addressed. For example, it is important not only to

23-1031917/20

S/PV.9303

Colombia

verify the bilateral ceasefire agreements between the
Government forces and the illegal armed groups but
also to separate the competing groups on the ground
and prevent them from clashing with one another,
especially in territories in which the State is either
entirely absent or is unable to exercise effective control.
That calls for a clear acknowledgement by the militias
involved in the bilateral ceasefires of the Mission’s
authority and requiring them not to fire on one another.
We are convinced that the question of contacts
between the United Nations and the recognized criminal
groups involved in drug trafficking requires separate
and serious analysis, including in consideration of the
possible consequences for the Mission’s credibility. We
emphasize that the current multi-vector dialogue must be
built on the basis of the 2016 Final Agreement and must
not in any way undermine its implementation. Only the
full implementation of the Final Agreement can build
trust among new participants in the peace process.
The series of incidents that occurred during the past
month, including the suspension of the ceasefire with
the Clan del Golfo and the killing of nine Colombian
soldiers by ELN, demonstrate that comprehensive
reconciliation will not be achieved overnight. It is
encouraging that the current Colombian authorities
are aware of the complexity of the task at hand and
are willing to continue the painstaking work despite
all the current problems. As a permanent member of
the Security Council, Russia will continue to provide
all assistance to the Colombian peace process and to
the United Nations Verification Mission, led by Carlos
Ruiz Massieu.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia.
Mr. Leyva Durán (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
am going to be brief because members of the Security
Council have all spoken for me. It is impressive. I hear
China, and it is Colombia speaking. The same thing
happened to me when I heard the United States, Albania
and Mozambique. This is a miracle that needs to be
shared across the planet. I met Mr. Rodrigo Londoño
more than 30 years ago, when he was a combatant.
Today he spoke not as a member of a party, but on
behalf of a contracting party to the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
18/20

13/04/2023

Peace, an agreement that Council members may think
is only 10 or 15 pages long; it is more than 300.
I had the honour — I do not know
why — of participating in the negotiation and drafting
of the Agreement. I was one of the six who designed the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace. What I mean to say is that
I am willing to sign off on every one of the paragraphs
in the report of the Secretary-General that Mr. Ruiz
Massieu introduced earlier (S/2023/222), which gives
me great satisfaction. What, then, is the role of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs? My duty is not to oversee,
but rather to follow up on, the implementation of the
Agreement, so that total peace is indeed achieved.
But let us return to formality. It is an honour for me
to be present once again in this Chamber, even more so
for me in my role as the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia, at a time when the world is in danger and
humanity is perplexed by daily events. It is good for
my homeland to be a model in such a historic moment,
since what brings us together once again is the concrete
proof from my homeland and from this very Chamber
that dialogue and peace win, not war.
After a few years of witnessing attempts to stop
the national reconciliation agreements signed between
the Colombian State and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP), not to say efforts to tear them up, as if
they were an expression of harmful Security Council
intentions, we all now know and can attest to the fact
that the phoenix exists.
Blessed are those who ran the United Nations at
the time when the first light of peace was born for
Colombia. They wisely endorsed those agreements, and
then-President Juan Manuel Santos Calderón, today a
Nobel Peace Prize winner, after having made a State
declaration, built an impregnable wall of defence
around them. This is how the international community
has understood it. This is what makes this magnificent
Organization a wonderous mechanism that cannot be
tampered with.
Peace is the word — peace — peace underpinned
by the United Nations Charter in the application of
international law, international human rights law
and international humanitarian law — all of which
proceeds from the jus gentium arising from natural law,
as expounded by Francisco Suárez and Hugo Grotius
centuries ago, and proposed by Friedrich Fromhold
23-10319

13/04/2023

Colombia

Martens, the Russian representative to the 1899 Hague
Peace Conferences, when he declared:
“Until a more complete code of the laws of
war is issued, the High Contracting Parties think
it right to declare that in cases not included in
the Regulations adopted by them, populations
and belligerents remain under the protection and
empire of the principles of international law, as
they result from the usages established between
civilized nations, from the laws of humanity and
the requirements of the public conscience.”
Thus was jus cogens born. This notion was echoed
by the International Law Commission in the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties. This is something
I will repeat whenever and wherever I get the chance:
dialogue and peace win, not war.
All of this has captured the attention of President
Petro Urrego, who, though an armed combatant many
years ago, as was Rodrigo Londoño, swore to uphold
the Constitution of 1991 and all of Colombia’s laws and
regulations after he was popularly elected President
of the Republic. But having known war and achieved
peace, the fact of being elected transcends the peace
that we are trying to implement in this regard, reaching
towards the need for and the achievement of total peace.
Council members may ask with whom this total
peace is made. Total peace is made with those who
want to make peace. Naturally there is a great deal
of disorder and violence in Colombia, and total peace
has led to engaging with groups that are not political
in nature. There is talk of submitting to justice, which
is something else altogether. These are negotiations
under very clear conditions, within the ordinary justice
system, involving groups that have no natural political
inclinations. For this reason, I must highlight a part of the
letter that I sent a few weeks ago seeking the extension
of the mandate of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, which reads as follows:
“We trust that the Security Council will give
favourable consideration to the possible expansion
of the role of the verification mission in Colombia”
(S/2023/112).
The Security Council had already done so once
before, when hostilities were ceased five years ago, for
the dialogues with the Ejército de Liberación Nacional
that took place in the Republic of Ecuador. The Council
was asked to provide monitoring, and it did so. Basically,

S/PV.9303

something similar is being requested now, but with a
fundamental difference: the understanding that there
is a legal distinction between political negotiations and
proceedings that might be brought within the ordinary
justice system for groups that are willing to accept the
legal framework applicable to such cases.
The achievement of total peace is within the
Government’s purview; obviously, the Security
Council is not going to be asked to provide it. We must
be careful: there can be no confusion as to what falls
within our ordinary justice system. However, it is also
true that I am often asked to play a role that is not
always the most pleasant one.
I reiterate that I am in a position to sign on to every
single one of the paragraphs of the report that is before
the Council for its consideration today. However, I must
sound the alert on those that should be of concern, in
particular paragraph 15 of section II, which states that:
“The Special Jurisdiction for Peace filed a
criminal complaint against former members of
the Office of the Attorney General for alleged
obstruction of justice, fraud against a court order
and concealment of evidence in 2018, during the
process of no-extradition guarantee of former
FARC-EP leader Seuxis Paucias Hernández
Solarte, also known as Jesús Santrich, who
returned to arms.”
Some of us believed that this was an attempt to
entrap the Special Jurisdiction for Peace. I therefore
feel it is my obligation to remind the Security Council
that we do indeed have enemies of the peace process.
Therefore, after reflecting on it, we will have to
see whether it would be appropriate to create an
international commission of inquiry of the United
Nations. Within the context of the United Nations,
commissions of investigation and fact-finding missions
have been established in order to investigate allegations
of violations of international law. Furthermore, I would
highlight the following: as a result of the growing
need to take measures to avoid further impacts on
the peace process caused by obstacles imposed by
external forces, which have given rise to dissent and
weakened the agreement, it is necessary to establish an
international commission of inquiry or an independent
group of experts with the support of the SecretaryGeneral. We are considering how to fully engage our
reason in further support of the commendable work that
the Security Council is promoting.

23-1031919/20

S/PV.9303

Colombia

In addition, President Petro has completed the
implementation, because this concerns total peace
not only within our country, but beyond our borders
as well. We have restored diplomatic relations with
Venezuela. On 25 April, in our capital city, Bogotá,
a conference will be held with the countries of Latin
America — and including the United States, Canada
and European countries — to see how to resume the
political dialogues on which we had made progress
in Mexico, of course, with the opposition parties and
with President Maduro. This is a gesture of total peace,
and I would add that one of the mandates of the peace
agreement is to convene, under its chapter four, on illicit
crops, an international conference on the topic of drug
trafficking. The Secretary-General is already aware
of this initiative, and of course it extends beyond this
specific issue arising from the peace agreement with
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo. That conference will take place in
the second half of this year, in Bogotá, and of course

20/20

13/04/2023

we will invite all interested nations in order to find a
definitive solution to the topic of drug trafficking.
That is what I wanted to share with the Council,
in terms of expressing the faith that we have in this
institution, which was created precisely to prevent
conflicts. What better example for the world than
Colombia — an example of what can be possible thanks
to joint efforts with the Security Council. I would
reiterate: dialogue and peace are indeed victory. So I
would invite those present to continue to work hard on
this wonderful project for humankind, and to make of
peace a total victory.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion of this subject.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

23-10319
