S/2007/507

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 August 2007
English
Original: French

Letter dated 22 August 2007 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Recent events in Gaza and the West Bank make it more urgent than ever to
move forward with the search for peace in the Middle East. The Quartet, comprising
the United Nations, the European Union, the Russian Federation and the United
States of America, recently reaffirmed its goal of promoting an end to the conflict in
accordance with the road map and expressed its intention to step up its efforts in that
regard.
The urgency of recent events has made it even more necessary for the
international community, bearing in mind the obligations of the parties, to help the
Palestinians as they build the institutions and economy of a viable State in Gaza and
the West Bank that is able to take its place as a peaceful and prosperous partner, at
peace with Israel and its other neighbours.
In order to facilitate efforts to achieve these objectives, on 27 June 2007 the
Quartet announced the appointment of Tony Blair as the Quartet Representative. His
mandate is to:
(a) Mobilize international assistance to the Palestinians, working closely
with donors and the existing coordination bodies;
(b) Help identify and secure the international support needed in order to
address the institutional governance needs of the Palestinian State, focusing as a
matter of urgency on the rule of law;
(c) Develop plans to promote Palestinian economic development, including
private sector partnerships, by building on previously agreed frameworks, especially
concerning access and freedom of movement; and
(d) Liaise with other countries, as appropriate, in support of the agreed
Quartet objectives.
As Representative, Mr. Blair will bring continuity and intensity of focus to the
Quartet’s efforts in support of the Palestinians, within the framework of its efforts to
promote an end to the conflict in accordance with the road map.
It is envisaged that as from 1 September 2007, he will spend significant time
in the region, working with the parties and with others to help create viable, lasting
government institutions representing all Palestinians, as well as a robust economy
and a climate of law and order for the Palestinian people.

07-48970 (E) 240807 240807

*0748970*

S/2007/507

The members of the Quartet have agreed that an office of the Quartet
Representative will be established in Jerusalem. The Quartet Representative will be
assisted in his work by a small team of experts seconded by partner countries and
institutions.
The Quartet has encouraged robust international support for the
Representative’s efforts. In the context of Security Council resolution 1515 (2003),
in which the Council endorsed the Quartet’s road map and encouraged the
diplomatic efforts of the Quartet and others, I would be grateful if you could
confirm the Council’s support for the proposed arrangements. In view of the urgent
nature of Mr. Blair’s mission, it would then be my intention to proceed swiftly with
the provision of logistical, technical and financial assistance in support of his
mandate.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

2

07-48970
