United Nations

S/PV.6069

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6069th meeting
Friday, 16 January 2009, 11.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ripert . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Tiendrébéogo
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Weisleder
Mr. Skračić
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Ms. Eloeva
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Mugoya
Ms. Pierce
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
Letter dated 22 November 2006 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2006/920)
Report of the Secretary-General on the request of Nepal for United Nations
assistance in support of its peace process (S/2009/1)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-21130 (E)

*0921130*

S/PV.6069

The meeting was called to order at 11.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 22 November 2006 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2006/920)
Report of the Secretary-General on the request
of Nepal for United Nations assistance in
support of its peace process (S/2009/1)
The President (spoke in French): I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite the representative
of Nepal to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Acharya
(Nepal) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in French): I propose, with
the consent of the Council and in accordance with the
provisions of article 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, to extend an invitation to Mr. Ian
Martin, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in Nepal and head of the United Nations
Mission in Nepal.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Martin to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the request of Nepal
for United Nations assistance in support of its peace
process, document S/2009/1.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Ian Martin, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Nepal and head of the United
Nations Mission in Nepal. This will be the last briefing
that Mr. Martin will give to the Council in his capacity
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General. On

2

behalf of the members of the Council, I should
therefore like to express our gratitude to him and tell
him how much we have appreciated, year after year,
the effectiveness of his efforts at the helm of the
United Nations Mission in Nepal, his honest and direct
interaction with the Council and the sincerity of his
commitment to the peace process in Nepal. We shall
remember him fondly and wish him every success in
his future endeavours. I am sure the members of the
Council associate themselves with those sentiments.
I now give
Representative.

the

floor

to

the

Special

Mr. Martin: Thank you for those kind words,
Mr. President. This is indeed the tenth and last time
that I shall brief the Council on the assistance of the
United Nations in support of Nepal’s peace process,
and in particular the work of the United Nations
Mission in Nepal (UNMIN). Although neither the
peace process nor the Government’s desire for the
support of UNMIN has come to a conclusion, it is an
appropriate moment not only to consider developments
since the last briefing, in November, but also to reflect
on the achievements and remaining challenges in
sustaining peace in Nepal.
First, let me report on developments, positive and
negative, since the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/1) was written. Most important for the
mandate of UNMIN, political agreement has finally
been reached regarding the composition and terms of
reference of the special committee to supervise,
integrate and rehabilitate Maoist army personnel; its
first meeting was held today in Kathmandu. Each of
four major parties, including the Nepali Congress,
which remains outside the Government coalition, has
two representatives, and the Prime Minister is
presiding personally. This will be especially welcome
to the Council as the effective functioning of the
special committee is of critical importance not only to
the completion of UNMIN’s mandate, but to the overall
success of the peace process.
There has been progress too regarding the work
of the Constituent Assembly and cooperation among
the political parties towards the drafting of a new
constitution. The chairpersons of the committees of the
Assembly have been chosen on the basis of agreement
among the larger political parties, although not to the
satisfaction of all smaller parties. The former General
Secretary of the Communist Party of Nepal (Unified

09-21130

S/PV.6069

Marxist-Leninist) (UML), Mr. Madhav Kumar Nepal,
agreed to the proposal of the Maoist leadership that he
should accept nomination to the Assembly and chair its
Constitutional Committee, which has a central
responsibility for reaching agreement on the overall
draft constitution and the challenge of enabling its
completion by May 2010.
There have been discussions among the major
parties, including between the Communist Party of
Nepal (Maoist) — which has now been renamed the
Unified Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) following
its merger with a smaller communist party, although I
shall still refer to it as the CPN (M) — and the Nepali
Congress about establishing a greater degree of
cooperation in completing the peace process and
drafting the constitution.
The Nepali Congress ended its boycott of the
legislature-parliament after the Prime Minister reported
to parliament that fresh instructions had been given to
implement his undertakings in response to its demands,
including the return of property and ending the
paramilitary activities of the Young Communist
League, which will be monitored by a parliamentary
committee.
The Government’s efforts through negotiations to
bring an end to the violence by armed groups operating
in the Tarai have now resulted in initial agreements
setting forth conditions for talks being signed with four
such groups, while other informal contacts have taken
place and continue.
However, there have been clashes between the
Maoist Young Communist League and the UML’s
Youth Force, in one case leading to the amputation of
the leg of a Youth Force member. Maoist trade
unionists have used violence or threats of violence
against media critical of Maoist conduct. The horrific
murder last Sunday of a woman journalist in the Tarai
by a gang of perpetrators so far unidentified has further
exemplified the weak rule of law and the threats faced
by journalists, especially outside Kathmandu, from
various sources.
Public discontent is mounting with the inability
to maintain electricity supply — now reduced to eight
hours a day for many consumers — although the major
responsibility rests with previous Governments through
decades of underinvestment and neglect. This power
shortage is now combining with trade union action to

09-21130

seriously threaten the operation of factories and, thus,
employment opportunities.
A recent controversy of particular concern to
UNMIN and the peace process relates to recruitment
by the Nepal Army and its recognition of the authority
of the elected Government; this has a potential
seriousness which I think requires me to explain its
background. The code of conduct agreed at the outset
of the ceasefire in 2006 committed both parties not to
recruit new people. When the Agreement on
Monitoring the Management of Arms and Armies was
being negotiated in November 2006, with the United
Nations acting as secretariat to the negotiation, the
Nepal Army argued that it should nonetheless be
permitted to continue to fill vacancies. This was
initially supported by the Government side, but it was
resisted by the Maoist side and was not agreed. The
stipulation of the Agreement that recruiting additional
armed forces is prohibited unless mutually agreed by
the parties should thus be understood to apply to any
recruitment, including the filling of vacancies. The
Maoist army was the first to breach the Agreement by
bringing thousands of new recruits, many of them
minors, into their cantonments; they eventually either
left the cantonments or were disqualified by UNMIN’s
verification, although as the report of the SecretaryGeneral emphasizes yet again, the discharge of those
disqualified who remain in the cantonments is long
overdue.
Meanwhile, in mid-2007 the Maoist side
complained to the Joint Monitoring Coordination
Committee (JMCC) that the Nepal Army was
undertaking recruitment. The Nepal Army then
confirmed that they were recruiting to fill vacancies;
regrettably, they had not informed the JMCC of this at
the outset. The JMCC, which operates by consensus,
could not resolve the issue and referred it to me. I
wrote to the then Prime Minister, who was also
Minister of Defence, setting out UNMIN’s view that
this recruitment was a breach of the Agreement, and
met with the Chief of Army Staff to communicate this
to him. Eventually the Secretary of Defence responded,
maintaining that recruitment to fill vacancies, up to the
standing strength of 95,700 when the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement was signed, was not a breach of any
agreement.
In November 2008 the Nepal Army again placed
advertisements for further recruitment. The Army
states that they had written to the Ministry of Defence

3

S/PV.6069

to notify that they intended to recruit to fill vacancies
and went ahead after having received no reply. Again,
UNMIN and the Maoist army were not informed,
through the JMCC or otherwise. At a time when no
progress was being made regarding the future of
Maoist army personnel, this was the subject of strong
exception within the cantonments. The Deputy
Commander of the Maoist army stated publicly that the
Maoist army would itself recruit to fill vacancies. I
stated UNMIN’s consistent position that any new
recruitment by either army is a breach of the
Agreement. Following a Cabinet discussion, the
Ministry of Defence wrote to instruct the Nepal Army
to suspend its recruitment; the Nepal Army is reported
to have replied that the process was almost complete
and suspension would be inappropriate. The Minister
of Defence, one of the CPN (M) members of the
Government, criticized a public statement by the Chief
of Army Staff and threatened action against him. Other
political actors publicly supported recruitment by the
Nepal Army to fill vacancies. The Minister of Defence
and the Chief of Army Staff have since met to discuss
the issue, but it is not clear that it is resolved. I have
expressed concern to the Chief of Army Staff that the
Nepal Army has not acted in this matter with good
faith towards the United Nations as the mandated
monitor of the Agreement.
This controversy, at a time when what is needed
is cooperation among the political actors and between
the armies to resolve issues through the special
committee, is symptomatic, and I fear may be
indicative of difficulties ahead. Before I address further
those difficulties, I want to reiterate recognition of the
great achievements of Nepal’s peace process, to which
the Secretary-General and I have paid tribute on
numerous occasions, as indeed has the Council. When I
went to Nepal more than three and a half years ago, in
May 2005, to open the office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the armed conflict
was heading into its tenth year, with grave violations of
international humanitarian law being committed by the
Maoists and by the security forces, and the
Government headed by the then king was curtailing
democratic rights. It is the Nepalese political and civil
society leaders who brought the armed conflict to an
end, negotiated the holding of an election which has
produced an inclusive Constituent Assembly, and
peacefully introduced a republic.

4

Nepal’s peace process was founded on mutual
commitments by the Maoist and non-Maoist political
parties, enshrined first in the 12-point understanding of
November 2005 and eventually in the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement of November 2006 and the interim
constitution. The CPN (M) committed itself to
democratic norms and values, including the
competitive multiparty system of government,
fundamental human rights, civil liberties, press
freedom and rule of law. The parties elected to the
1999 parliament committed themselves to the election
of a constituent assembly, the restructuring of the State
and progressive socio-economic change.
Regarding the armies which had fought the
10-year armed conflict without either being defeated,
Maoist combatants were to be “integrated and
rehabilitated”, while the Nepal Army was to be
“democratized” through an action plan which would
determine its appropriate size, develop its national and
inclusive character and impart training in accordance
with the norms and values of democracy and human
rights. All parties agreed to act on the basis of political
consensus until a new constitution had been framed by
the Constituent Assembly.
For all the important achievements of the peace
process, I fear that there is now a danger that these
fundamentals are being challenged and eroded. Actions
of Maoist cadres which involve violence or threats of
violence and do not respect pluralism or the rule of
law, the failure of the party leadership to take firm
action against those who commit such acts, and
internal ideological debates which do not convey a
clear long-term adherence to multi-party democracy:
all these lead some to question the sincerity of the
strategic choice the CPN (M) committed itself to in the
12-point understanding or the ability of its leadership
to ensure that the party as a whole respects it. It is
crucial, now that the CPN (M) leads the Government,
that it act consistently in a manner that allays these
doubts. The party which leads the Government has a
particular responsibility to strive for the political
consensus required for completion of the peace process
and the drafting of the new constitution.
But this responsibility rests, too, on other parties
that fought the election on a promise of continuing
cooperation in Government within the framework of an
Interim Constitution which promised socio-economic
change and inclusion. The distribution of votes in the
Constituent Assembly election of approximately 30 per

09-21130

S/PV.6069

cent to the CPN (M) and a little over 20 per cent each
to the Nepali Congress and the UML can best be
interpreted as a mandate for change, but with an
expectation that the parties would cooperate as
promised on the basis of their respective support. The
emergence of Madhesi parties in the Tarai was a strong
reminder that the commitment to inclusion of all
groups in all aspects of the State must be carried out if
continuing disaffection is not to lead to further
violence and ethnic division — perhaps the greatest
threat that could lie ahead for Nepal.
Most immediately, however, I believe that the
spirit of the original agreements regarding the armies
must also be maintained if a critical post-conflict
challenge is to be successfully overcome and a stable
peace is to be achieved and sustained. As the
Secretary-General
says
in
his
report,
the
“Comprehensive Peace Agreement did not fully
negotiate the future of the armies, but confined itself to
defining processes” (S/2009/1, para. 64) with regard to
the special committee to supervise, integrate and
rehabilitate Maoist army personnel and the action plan
for the democratization of the Nepal Army.
But there was an informal understanding among
the negotiators that integration meant the incorporation
of a significant number but by no means all of the
Maoist combatants into the Nepal Army. The action
plan for the democratization of the Nepal Army was a
significant parallel aspect of the agreements, including
a commitment to inclusion, the importance of which
has been reinforced by later undertakings in
agreements with Madhesi parties. Only if both armies
are respected by negotiators on all sides and if both
armies recognize their need for change and their
subordination to democratic multiparty governance is
the special committee likely to reach an outcome which
will stabilize the peace.
One need for change to which no political party
and neither army is yet truly committed is the need for
an end to impunity. I say this with particular regret, as I
went to Nepal as representative of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, yet in more than
three and a half years since then not a single
perpetrator of a major human rights violation, whether
committed during the armed conflict or since its end,
has been properly brought to justice.
In May 2006, I was responsible for the
publication by the Office of the High Commissioner

09-21130

for Human Rights (OHCHR) in Nepal of a report of
investigation into arbitrary detention, torture and
disappearances at the Maharajganj barracks in
Kathmandu of the then Royal Nepalese Army in 2003
and 2004. No action has resulted. Paragraph 39 of the
Secretary-General’s report refers to the recent release
by OHCHR of its investigations into disappearances in
Bardiya district from 2001 to 2003, citing 156 cases of
disappearances linked to State authorities, mostly after
detention by the then Royal Nepalese Army, and
14 similar cases attributed to the CPN (M). The report
documents the systematic use of torture in the Royal
Nepalese Army’s Chisapani barracks, and I urge
members of the Council to read its chilling details.
The promise to investigate disappearances was
first made by the parties in May 2006. It has been
reiterated time and time again in later agreements, but
only now is legislation to establish a commission to
investigate disappearances about to be considered by
the Legislature-Parliament. It remains to be seen
whether appointments made to this commission will
indicate a serious intent to uncover the truth and bring
those responsible to justice in the face of the denial and
obstruction which have so far characterized the
response of the Nepal Army, in particular. Efforts are
being made to provide compensation to victims of the
conflict, but victims who suffered at the hands of the
Maoists, as well as victims of the security forces, are
still in distress. The wounds of Nepal’s conflict will not
be healed by denial or by compensation alone and
require the effective implementation of the promises
made to pursue truth and justice.
While impunity continues to prevail for
violations committed since the end of the conflict, the
CPN (M) and other political parties are quick to protect
their supporters from justice, rather than to support the
impartial application of the rule of law. Even in cases
where the perpetrators are known, such as the killings
of members of the Young Communist League in Dang
district two days before the Constituent Assembly
election and the killing of a businessman in a Maoist
cantonment site, highlighted in paragraph 44 of the
report of the Secretary-General, they are not brought to
justice.
The great strength of Nepal’s peace process has
been the capacity of the Nepalese actors to pursue
dialogue to bridge their differences. Such dialogue
brought about the 12-point understanding which led to
the People’s Movement and the end of the armed

5

S/PV.6069

conflict; it produced the peace agreements and the
Interim Constitution, and paved the way for the
Constituent Assembly election; it maintained the
framework of the Seven-Party Alliance and eventually
overcame substantial disagreements and delays.
Very recently, Prime Minister “Prachanda” has
spoken publicly of the need for a new 12-point
understanding. That is a matter for the political parties
to consider, but in my own view there is indeed a need
to re-establish the basis for cooperation among
political parties, some of which have emerged since the
original Seven-Party Alliance was formed, towards
successful completion of the peace process and the
drafting of the constitution. Competitive politics must
not be allowed to derail these overriding national
priorities.
The weakness of the peace process, however, has
been the failure to implement commitments made. In
my opinion, the need now is therefore not only for a
renewed basis of understanding and cooperation, but
also for a continuous mechanism for ensuring such
implementation. Past agreements have provided for a
high-level joint monitoring committee to monitor
whether all understandings and agreements are being
implemented, a high-level peace commission, and a
high-level
monitoring
committee
to
monitor
implementation of the agreement between the former
Interim Government and the United Democratic
Madhesi Front. None of these has ever been formed.
The Joint Monitoring Coordinating Committee
convened by UNMIN remains the only implementation
mechanism which has met regularly to fulfil its limited
mandate relating to the management of arms and armed
personnel. My strong parting advice to the parties,
whether they enter into a new understanding or
recommit themselves to those they are already bound
by, is that they now establish such a comprehensive
implementation mechanism.
If I have one particular regret, it is that the parties
did not take up our offer in late 2007 for the United
Nations to assist by supporting the implementation of
peace process commitments more generally than in the
case of arms monitoring alone. It could, for example,
have assisted the impartial monitoring and
implementation of the return of property, which has
been a constant impediment to political cooperation.
This would in no way have detracted from the fact that
the peace process has always been a Nepalese process
or infringed upon national sovereignty. The parties

6

have not made full use of what the United Nations has
to offer, notwithstanding their recognition that
UNMIN’s presence has had a value well beyond its
specific electoral and arms monitoring functions.
I shall leave Nepal with some anxieties, but few
regrets. It has been a privilege to be responsible for the
role of the United Nations in supporting two of the
basic demands of the people of Nepal: respect for
human rights and lasting peace. The two most
remarkable moments have been those when the people
of Nepal took their future in their own hands: in the
19 days of the People’s Movement of April 2006 and in
the Constituent Assembly election of April 2008. Their
demand for peace, for change and for inclusion was
and is unmistakable. I hope that their political leaders
will not let them down. I hope, too, that the
international community understands that long-term
stability is far from having been achieved in Nepal and
that, despite the many demands upon it, it will remain
concerned for 27 million of the poorest people in Asia,
who deserve a better future.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Martin for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Nepal.
Mr. Acharya (Nepal): First of all, I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council. I would also thank
you for allowing me yet another opportunity to appear
in the Council during the discussion regarding our
request for continuation of United Nations support for
the peace process in Nepal.
I would like to thank Mr. Martin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
comprehensive presentation on developments in the
peace process in Nepal since the Council’s last
discussion on the subject.
On behalf of the Government of Nepal, I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his personal
support for the peace process in Nepal and for his latest
report to the Council (S/2009/1) recommending
extension of the United Nations Mission in Nepal
(UNMIN) by another six months, at our request.
As Mr. Martin has just explained in his brief,
following the submission of the report, important
political developments have taken place in Nepal that
have far-reaching impact on the success of the peace

09-21130

S/PV.6069

process. The Constituent Assembly has elected its
various committees and the respective chairpersons
entrusted to start the task of drafting a new
constitution, mostly on the basis of consensus among
major political parties. In a statement to the
Constituent Assembly on 7 January, the Right
Honourable Prime Minister Pushpa Kamal Dahal
“Prachanda” made several important commitments to
the implementation of the peace process, including on
the issues regarding the return of property and the
commitment to continuing the practice of taking all
major decisions related to the peace process through
consensus among the major political parties. The
Government has also started to meaningfully engage
some of the Tarai armed groups and has, in fact,
already signed framework agreements for negotiations
with a few of them.
We understand the concerns of the SecretaryGeneral and of some members of the Council regarding
the delay in progress in certain aspects of the peace
process, especially on the issue of the integration and
rehabilitation of Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist)
(CPN (M)) armed personnel in the cantonments.
Though this process has taken some time, it is
important to note that an agreement has been reached
in the formation of the special committee to supervise,
integrate and rehabilitate the Maoist army personnel in
the cantonments through consensus and mutual
accommodation among the parties represented in the
coalition Government and outside. The special
committee has now been constituted under the
leadership of the Prime Minister and includes
representation of all the major political parties. In its
first meeting earlier today, the special committee
amended the terms of reference and decided to prepare
a work plan to complete the integration and
rehabilitation process within the next six months.
In view of the remaining tasks in the integration
and rehabilitation of the CPN (M) army personnel
remaining in the cantonments, we have requested an
extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Nepal for another six months. We highly
appreciate the Council’s support for the extension of
the mandate of UNMIN until 23 July 2009.
It is our intention to terminate the United Nations
monitoring requirements by that time. In fact, it is our
expectation that the monitoring requirements will be
substantially reduced as soon as we start the

09-21130

implementation of the political decisions on the
integration and rehabilitation process that will be
reached in the special committee. We are not
contemplating any interim or alternative monitoring
arrangements before the termination of the United
Nations monitoring presence, because that will only
contribute to further delay in the integration process.
But the Government of Nepal is committed to taking
the necessary measures to help assist the exit strategy
of UNMIN, bringing a logical end to the peace process,
especially the current monitoring arrangement, within
the next six months.
In this regard, we have no objection to the
Secretary-General’s proposals for further downsizing
UNMIN and reducing the rank of head of Mission from
special representative to representative.
On behalf of the Government and the people of
Nepal, I would like to take this opportunity to place on
record our sincere appreciation and gratitude to Mr. Ian
Martin, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for the excellent manner in which he has
carried out the mandate of the Security Council in
assistance to the peace process, upon Nepal’s request. I
would also like to thank his dedicated team at UNMIN
for the work it has done for Nepal.
Despite the various challenges, some of which
Mr. Martin just mentioned, Nepal’s peace process has
come a long way since its inception in 2006 and has
completed several important milestones, such as the
election of the Constituent Assembly and the
declaration of Nepal as a federal democratic republic.
As we have always done so far, we are confident that
we will succeed in bringing the process to a logical
conclusion, resolving all the remaining issues through
dialogue and mutual accommodation. Though it has its
own characteristics and pace, Nepal’s peace process
will succeed at the end, and the support of both
Mr. Martin and the Council will not be in vain.
Before concluding, I would like to express my
gratitude to each of the member States for its continued
support for the peace process in Nepal.
Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, on behalf of the delegation of Costa Rica
and in my personal capacity, I would like to bid a warm
farewell to Ambassador Khalilzad of the United States
upon his imminent departure. Ambassador Ripert, the
President of the Council, has emphasized central
elements of Ambassador Khalilzad’s personality and

7

S/PV.6069

work in the Council, and we would like to second those
fitting impressions. We hope that these greetings will
be conveyed to Ambassador Khalilzad.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report of
2 January 2009 (S/2009/1), which updates us on the
situation of Nepal. We would also like to thank Mr. Ian
Martin, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for his briefing this morning and for his
outstanding work in Nepal over all these years. We
wish him every success in his future endeavours.
Likewise, we thank the Permanent Representative
of the Government of Nepal for the information he
provided to the Council this morning on recent events.
Nepal is a successful example of democratization
and pacification of a society that experienced a bloody
armed conflict for many years. That success belongs
first and foremost to the Nepalese people, but the
United Nations can also be satisfied over these
achievements, given its contribution to the process.
However, as with any process of social transformation,
the changes in Nepal, and especially its pacification,
remain incomplete, precarious and fragile following
the initial parliamentary and constitutional elections, as
we have pointed out in the past. We said then that the
transition from monarchy to republic would accentuate
differences and contradictions that may have been
obscured until now by the civil war. Unfortunately, that
has taken place to a significant degree.
We are concerned by several specific matters.
First, we still have not seen the dismissal of minors and
former Maoist guerrillas who are ineligible to join the
army, a process that should take place as soon as
possible, pursuant to the request made by the
Secretary-General at his last meeting with the
Government. We must emphasize the fact that the
release of these minors must not depend on the
formation of the special committee. For Costa Rica, the
issue of child soldiers is of great concern in this and in
all other cases.
This morning, we learned the excellent news that
the special committee has finally been set up and has
held its first meeting. We hope that these events will
open the path to addressing other pending matters, such
as the return of property, the deadline for which has
expired, in accordance with agreements signed and
sealed; the activities of paramilitary groups affiliated
with young Maoists; the demobilization of combatants

8

who were minors in May 2006; and the problem of new
illegal seizures of land.
Costa Rica is also concerned by the issue of
transitional justice, especially with respect to people
who disappeared during the civil war. There can be no
peace without justice. We note that the Special
Representative highlighted that in particular as one of
the important elements in his briefing this morning
when he spoke about his concern about continued
impunity. In addition, we regard as inexplicable the
decision taken by the Nepal Cabinet on 27 October,
according to the Secretary-General’s report, to
withdraw 349 cases filed at the district level either
before a court or the District Administration Office,
because it considered them to be of a political nature.
It is essential that the various Nepali political
forces make a supreme effort to overcome their
differences, which constitute obstacles, so that UNMIN
can move forward and complete its important mission.
The international community faces great and serious
challenges, and the Council must set priorities with
respect to where, when and how it intervenes.
Therefore, we favour a further extension of UNMIN’s
mandate, as requested by the Secretary-General. At the
same time, however, we hope that Nepal’s political and
social forces, in particular the Government, will clearly
note that the international community would like this
process to come to a swift conclusion.
In sum, Costa Rica appreciates the significant
progress made by Nepal and congratulates its people
and its various political and social forces for that. We
also appreciate the significant efforts of the
Government. We welcome the news that we received
today concerning the progress that has enabled the
special committee to be established and to begin its
work.
At the same time, however, we wish to encourage
all those sectors to comply more strictly with the basic
commitments undertaken vis-à-vis both their society
and the international community, by the agreed
deadlines. I would like to stress that that applies in
particular not only to the demobilization of former
combatants, particularly minors, but also to the
drafting of the new constitution, transitional justice and
issues basic to economic and social development, both
in terms of land ownership and property rights in
general and in terms of strengthening the State so that
it can provide essential services to the population.

09-21130

S/PV.6069

Undoubtedly, those challenges can be better addressed
when greater commitment and trust is developed
among the political forces.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers on my list. In accordance with the

09-21130

understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion of the
subject.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

9
