146

General Assembly-Forty-fifth Session

--------------

developed and developing countries, bearing in mind
trends in the energy markets;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report on the implementation of the present
resolution to the General Assembly at its forty-seventh
session, through the Economic and Social Council at its
second regular session of 1992.

71st plenary meeting
21 December 1990
45/210.

Environment and international trade

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 44/228 of 22 December
1989 on the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development,
Affirming decision 384 (XXXVII) of 12 October 1990
of the Trade and Development Board, entitled
"UNCTAD's contribution, within its mandate, to sustainable development",59
Also affirming decision 1/25 of 31 August 1990 of the
Preparatory Committee for the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, entitled "Environment and development", 77
Reaffirming the statement on sustainable development contained in annex 11 to decision 15/2 of 26 May
1989 of the Governing Council of thc United Nations
Environment Programme,78
1. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, in
close co-operation with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development and relevant United Nations bodies, taking
into account the relevant parts of Trade and Development Board decision 384 (XXXVII) and the work done
by international organizations and in other relevant forums and in conformity with General Assembly resolution 44/228, in which it was stated that environmental
concerns and considerations are crucial to achieving
sustainable development for all countries but should
not serve as a pretext for creating unjustified barriers
to trade, to prepare a comprehensive analytical study,
to be submitted to the Preparatory Committee for the
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development at its third session, on the present situation
and future trends regarding the relationship between
environmental issues and international trade and covering, inter alia, the following subjects:
(a) The consideration of trade and environment, in
the light of the analysis requested of the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development in paragraph 5 of Trade and Development Board decision 384 (XXXVII) concerning the
issue of sustainable development, in particular the reduction of poverty and its interface with policies and
mechanisms in environmentally sensitive sectors, such
as agriculture, energy, industry and transport, as well as
with relevant structural policies, such as those related
to the enterprise sector;
77 See Official Records ofthe GeneralAssembly, Forty-fifth Session,
SUfl'lemellt No. 46 (N45(46). annex I.
Ibid., Forty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 25 (AI44/25), annex

I.

(b) Adjustment of the Trade Control Measures Information System of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development to monitor environmental regulations for possible protectionism and to monitor nontariff measures that have a bearing on the environment,
in accordance with paragraph 6 of Trade and Development Board decision 384 (XXXVII);
2. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Environment and Development
to consult the Secretary-General of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development and relevant
United Nations organs, organizations and programmes
in preparing the report on transfer of technology rcquested in decision 1/8 of 30 August 1990, adopted by
the Preparatory Committee for the United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development at its
first substantive session,2 for submission to the third
session of the Preparatory Committee, including an examination of the obstacles on both the importing and
exporting sides that impede the transfer of environmentally sound technologies.

7lst plenary meeting
21 December 1990
45/211.

United Nations Conference on Environment
and Development

The General Assembly,
Recalling the report of the Preparatory Committee
for the United Nations Conference on Environment
and Development on its organizational session, held in
New York from 5 to 16 March 1990,79
Having considered the report of the Preparatory
Committee on its first session, held at Nairobi from 6
to 31 August 1990,80
1. Reaffirms its resolution 44/228 of 22 December
1989 on the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development;
2. Stresses the fundamental interrelationship between environment and development, and reiterates
the need to integrate and keep the balance between the
environmental and developmental dimensions during
the entire preparatory process and during the Conference, and the need for cross-sectoral issues to be fUlly
integrated into that work;
3. Endorses the decisions contained in the report of
the Preparatory Committee for the United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development on its
organizational session;79
4. Takes note of the report of the Preparatory Committee on its first session and endorses the decisions
contained therein;81
5. Decides that the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development shall take place at Rio
de Janeiro, Brazil, from 1 to 12 June 1992;
6. Urges that representation at the Conference he at
the level of head of State or Government;
7. Invites the Secretary-General of the United Nations to issue invitations to all States Members of the
79 Ibid., Supplemenr No. 48 (N44/48).
80 Ibid.,

81 Ibid.,

Forty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 46 (N45/46).
annex I.
