18

General Assembly-Twentieth Session

•

•

•

The Preside11t of the General Assembly. in pursuance of
paragraph 3 of resolution B above, nominated 1hr fo!lowinn
Member States: CHILE, MoRocco, NlGERlA, PAKISTAN and
SWEDEN.14

2078 (XX). Effects of atomic radiation

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 913 (X) of 3 December 1955,
which established the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation, and its
subsequent resolutions reaffirming the desirability of
the Committee continuing its work,
14 [bid., Twentieth Session, Plenary Meetings,

. _15 [bid., N_ineteenth. Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/5814) ;
ibid., Twentieth Sess1011, Annexes, agenda item 34, document
A/6123.

1408th meeting,

para. 174.

•

--------- - - - - - - - - - - -

Concerned about the potentially harmful effects to
present and future generations resulting from the levels
of rc1diation to which man is exposed,
Conscious of the continued need for compiling mformation on atomic radiation and for analysing its
effects on man and his environment,
1. Takes note of the reports of the United Nations
Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation on the work of its thirteenth. fourteenth and
fifteenth sessions ;1 ~
2. C om111ends the Scientific Committee for its
valuable contributions to wider knowledge and understanding of the effects and levels of atomic radiation
during the ten years of the Committee's existence:
3. Requests the Scientific Committee to continue its
programme, including its co-ordinating activities, to
increase the knowledge of the levels and effects of
atomic radiation from all sources:
4. Commends the \,Vor!d Meteorological Organization for its work in carrying forward the scheme for
monitoring and reporting levels of atmospheric radioactivity;
5. Acknowledges with appreciation the assistance
rendered to the Scientific Committee by the World
Meteorological Organization, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and the International Atomic Energy Agency:
6. Recommends that all parties concerned continue
their co-operation with the Scientific Committee;
7. N ates the intention of the Scientific Committee
to submit a report to the General Assembly at its
twenty-first session ;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide the Scientific Committee with the assistance
necessary for the conduct of its work and the dissemination of its findings to the public.
1403ra plenary meeting,
18 December 1965.

( b) Relief for dependants of persons persecuted by
the Government of South Africa for acts arising from
opposition to the policies of apartheid;
( c) Education of prisoners, their children and other
dependants ;
( d) Relief for refugees from South Africa;
3. Requests the President of the General Assembly
to nominate five Member States, each of which should
appoint a person to serve on a Committee of Trustees
of the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa,
which will decide on the uses of the Fund;
4. Authorizes and requests the Committee of
Trustees to take steps to promote contributions to the
Fund, and to promote co-operation and co-ordination
in the activities of voluntary organizations concerned
with relief and assistance to the victims of the policies
of apartheid of the Government of South Africa ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
necessary assistance to the Committee of Trustees in
the discharge of its responsibilities ;
6. Appeals to Governments, organizations and individuals to contribute generously to the Fund.
1395th plenary meeting.
15 December 1965.

*

•

Note

Peaceful settlement of disputes (item 99)
At its 1403rd plenary meeting, on 18 December 1965, the General Assembly
approved the recommendation of the Special Political Cornmittee 16 that the consideration of this item should be postponed to the twenty-first session.
16

Ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, agenda item 99, document A/6187, para. 11.
