Reaolotion• adopted without referencti to a Committee

ceptional cases, the duration of regular sessions should
not exceed thirteen weeks,
Takes note of the observations contained in the report
of the Ad H oc Committee on the Improvement of the
Methods of Work of the General Assembly and approves
the recommendations submitted by the Committee, in
particular those which provide that:
(a) The President of the General Assembly should
make every effort to ensure that the general debate proceeds in a methodical and regular manner, and should
close the list of speakers, with the consent of the Assembly, as soon as he considers it feasible;
( b) All the Main Committees, except the First Committee, should begin their work not later than two
working days after they have received the list of agenda
items referred to them by the General Assembly ;
( c) The First Committee should meet as soon as possible to organize its work, determine the order of discussion of the items allocated to it and start the systematic consideration of its agenda ; at the beginning
of the session, such meetings might be held when there
is an interruption in the general debate; later, plenary
meetings might be held during one part of the day, the
other part heine; reserved for the First Committee, thus
enabling the Committee to proceed with its regular
work as· soon as possible after the opening of the
session;
( d) Each of the Main Committees should establish
its programme of work as soon as possible, including
the approximate dates on which it will consider the
various items referred to it and the date on which it
proposes to conclude its work, on the understanding
that this programme will be transmitted to the General
Committee to enable it to make such recommendations
as it may deem relevant, including, when the General
Committee considers it appropriate, recommendations as
to the dates by which Main Committees should conclude their work;
( e) Each of the Main Committees should consider
the establishment, in the circumstances referred to in
paragraphs 29 to 32 of the report of the Ad H oc Committee. of sub-committees or working groups of limited
size but representative of its membership, for the purpose of facilitating its work;
( f) The Genernl Committee should fulfil its functions
under rules 40, 41 and 42 of the rules of procedure
and, in particubr, make appropriate recommendations
for furthering the progress of the Assembly and its
Committees, in such a way as to facilitate the closing
of the session bv the date fixed ; to this end, the General
Committee should meet at least once every three weeks ;
(g) Presiding officers should make use of the resources provided by the rules of procedure and exercise
their prerogatives under rules 35 and 108, in order
to accelerate the work of the General Assembly ; to
that effect they should, inter alia:
( i) Open meetings at the scheduled time ;
(ii) Urge representatives to take the floor in the
order in which they were inscribed on the list
of speakers, it being understood that representatives prevented from so doing will normally be placed at the end of the list. unless
they have arranged to change places with other
representatives ;
(iii) Apply the rules of procedure in such a way
as to ensure the proper exercise of the right

5

of reply, explanations of votes and points of
order.
1256th plenary meeting,
11 November 1963.
1907 (XVIIl). International Co-operation Year
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 1844 (XVIII) of 19 De-

cember 1962,
Noting the report of the Preparatory Committee on
the International Co-operation Year/'
Conscious of the many grave international problems
which remain unresolved and of the consequent need
for international co-operation,
Considering it essential that Member States should
endeavour to promote measures aimed at the elimination
of international tension,
Convinced that increased public awareness of the
extent and significance of existing everyday co-operation
would lead to a better appreciation of the true nature
of the world community and of the common interests
of mankind,
Convinced that devoting a year to international cooperation would help to bring about increased world
understanding and co-operation, and thereby facilitate
the settlement of major international problems,
1. Designates 1965, the twentieth year of the United
Nations, as International Co-operation Year ;
2. Expresses appreciation to the Preparatory Committee on the International Co-operation Year for its
work;
3. Takes note of the general criteria, the suggested
activities and the publicity proposals recommended by
the Preparatory Committee in its report;
4. Calls 1epon all Member States, the specialized
agencies, the International Atomic Energy Agency and
the non-governmental organizations concerned :
(a) To take note of the designation of 1965 as International Co-operation Year ;
( b) To publicize to the widest extent feasible the
activities of international co-operation in which they
have been and are at present engaged and their efforts
to strengthen and expand these activities ;
( c) To formulate such plans and programmes as
seem to them appropriate to promote the purposes of
the International Co-operation Year ;
5. Decides to establish a Committee for the International Co-operation Year, which would be composed of
not more than twelve members to be appointed by the
President of the General Assembly;
6. Requests the Committee:
(a) To draw up and co-ordinate plans for, the International Co-operation Year, taking into account the
views and intentions of the Governments of Member
States, the specialized agencies, the International Atomic
Energy Agency and the non-governmental organizations
concerned;
( b) To organize and prepare for suitable activities
for the International Co-operation Year to be undertaken by the.United Nations, bearing in mind the report
of the Preparatory Committee;
Ii Ibid.,

agenda item 24, document A/5561.

General Assembly-Eighteenth Session

6

7. Invites Member States, the specialized agencies,
the International Atomic Energy Agency and the nongovernmental organizations co!1cer~ed to m~ke availab~e
to the Committee, as appropriate, mformatton on their
plans and intentions for the International Co-operation
Year;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, taking into account United Nations participation in the International
Co-operation Year, to provide within existing budgetary limits all necessary facilities for promoting and
carrying forward the International Co-operation Year ;
9. Requests the Committee to submit an interim
report to the General Assembly at its nineteenth session.
1262nd plenary meeting,
21 November 1963 ..

•

•

•

The President of the General Assembly, in pursuance of
paragraph 5 of tlze above resolution, appointed the members
of the Committee for the International Co-operation Year.
The Committee will be composed of the following Member
States: ARGENTINA, CANADA, CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC,
CEYLON, CYPRUS, CzECHOSLOVAKIA, FINLAND, INDIA, IRELAND,
LIBERIA, MEXICO

and UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC.

1949 (XVIll). Question of Aden
The General Assembly,
Having considered the part of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situa~ion with regard ~o the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the Territory of Aden, 6
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961 and 1810
(XVII) of 17 December 1962,
Bearing in mind the unanimous desire, expressed _to
the Sub-Committee on Aden, for an early end of colomal
domination,
Considering the strong desire of the population for
the unity of the Territory,
Deeply concerned at the deteriorating situation in the
Territory, the continuation of w?ich is !ikely to lead to
serious unrest and to threaten international peace and
security,
Convinced of the necessity of consulting the people
of the Territory at the earliest possible time,
1. Approves the report of the Special Co~mittee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, and endorses th. conclusions
and recommendations of the Sub-Committee on Aden;
2. Expresses deep regret at the refusal of the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland to co-operate with the Sub-Committee
on Aden, particularly its refusal to allow the SubCommittee to go to the Territory in pursuance of the
tasks entrusted to it by the Special Committee ;
3. Endorses the resolutions adopted by the Special
Committee on 3 May7 and 19 July 1963 ;8
4. Reaffirms the right of the i:eople of the Territory
to self-determination and fr~edom from colonial rule
e Ibid., addendum to ager:i~. item 23, document A/5446/Rev.1,
chapter V.
1 Ibid., chapter V, ?,'iJendix, para. 6.
8 Jbid., chapter V, ,,ara. 478.

in accordance with the Declaration on the granting of
independence to colonial countries and peoples;
5. Considers that the maintenance of the military
base in Aden is prejudicial to the security of the region
and that its early removal is therefore desirable;
6. Recommends that the people of Aden and the
Aden Protectorate should be aJlowed to exercise their
right to self-determination with regard to their future,
the exercise of that right to take the form of a consultation of the whole population, to be held as soon
as possible on the basis of universal adult suffrage;
7. Calls 1tpon the administering Power:
(a) To repeal all the laws which restrict public
freedoms;
( b) To release all political prisoners and detainees
and those who have been sentenced following actions
of political significance;
( c) To aJlow the return of those people who have
been exiled or forbidden to reside in the Territory
because of political activities;
( d) To cease forthwith aJI repressive action against
the people of the Territory, in particular military expeditions and the bombing of villages;
8. Further calls upon the administering Power to
make the necessary constitutional changes with a view
to establishing a representative organ and setting up
a provisional government for the whole of the Territory
in accordance with the wishes of the population, such
legislative organ and government to be constituted
follow:ing general elections to be held on the basis of
nniversal adult suffrage and with full respect for
fundamental human rights and freedoms;
9. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Special Committee and the administering
Power, to arrange for an effective United Nations
presence before and during the elections referred to in
parag-raph 8 above;
10. Recomm!'nds that these elections should be held
before the attainment of independence, which will be
granted in accordance with the freely expressed wishes
of the inhabitants ;
11. Recommends that conversations should be opened
without delay between the government resulting from
the elections mentioned above and the administering
Power, for the purpose of fixing the date for the
granting of independence and the arrangements for the
transfer of power ;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution to the administering Power and to
report to the Special Committee on its implementation ;
13. Requests the Special Committee to examine again
the situation in Aden and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its nineteenth session.
1277th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.

1950 (XVIII). Question of Malta
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1%0,
Having considered the part of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
