A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/111
18 February 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 110
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/52/642)]
52/111. Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination and the
convening of a world conference against racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its objectives as set forth in the Charter of the United Nations of achieving international
cooperation in solving problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character and in
promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction
as to race, sex, language or religion,
Reaffirming also its firm determination and its commitment to eradicate totally and unconditionally
racism, in all its forms, and racial discrimination,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination2 and the Convention against Discrimination in
Education, adopted by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization on 14
December 1960,3

1

Resolution 217 A (III).

2

Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.

3

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 429, No. 6193.

98-76789

/...

A/RES/52/111
Page 2

Recalling also the outcome of the two World Conferences to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination, held at Geneva in 19784 and in 1983,5
Welcoming the outcome of the World Conference on Human Rights, held at Vienna from 14 to 25
June 1993, and, in particular, the attention given in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action6 to
the elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and other forms of intolerance,
Stressing the importance and sensitivity of the activities of the Special Rapporteur of the Commission
on Human Rights on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance,
Recalling its resolutions 48/91 of 20 December 1993 and 49/146 of 23 December 1994, by which,
respectively, it proclaimed the Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination and adopted
the revised Programme of Action for the Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination,
Noting with grave concern that, despite the efforts of the international community, the principal
objectives of the two previous Decades for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination have not
been attained and that millions of human beings continue to this day to be the victims of varied forms of
racism and racial discrimination,
Noting with great concern that, despite the efforts undertaken by the international community at
various levels, racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related forms of intolerance, ethnic
antagonism and acts of violence are showing signs of increase,
Noting with concern that the dissemination of racist and xenophobic propaganda is also being
channelled through new communication technologies, including such computer networks as the Internet,
Having considered the report submitted by the Secretary-General7 within the framework of the
implementation of the Programme of Action,
Firmly convinced of the need to take more effective and sustained measures at the national and
international levels for the elimination of all forms of racism and racial discrimination,
Recognizing the importance of strengthening national legislation and institutions for the promotion
of racial harmony,

4

See Report of the World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, Geneva, 14-25
August 1978 (United Nations publication, Sales No.E.79.XIV.2).
5

See Report of the second World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, Geneva,
1-12 August 1983 (United Nations publication, Sales No.E.83.XIV.4 and corrigendum).
6

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

7

A/52/528.
/...

A/RES/52/111
Page 3

Deeply concerned about the fact that the phenomenon of racism and racial discrimination against
migrant workers continues to increase despite efforts undertaken by the international community to
improve the protection of the human rights of migrant workers and members of their families,
Recalling the adoption at its forty-fifth session of the International Convention on the Protection of
the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families,8
Acknowledging that indigenous people are at times victims of particular forms of racism and racial
discrimination,
I
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROGRAMME OF ACTION FOR THE THIRD DECADE TO
COMBAT RACISM AND RACIAL DISCRIMINATION AND COORDINATION OF ACTIVITIES
1. Declares once again that all forms of racism and racial discrimination, whether in their
institutionalized form or resulting from official doctrines of racial superiority or exclusivity, such as ethnic
cleansing, are among the most serious violations of human rights in the contemporary world and must be
combated by all available means;
2. Recalls with satisfaction the proclamation of the Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination, which began in 1993, and requests the Secretary-General to make a further review of the
Programme of Action for the Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, with a view
to making it more effective and action-oriented;
3. Urges all Governments to take all necessary measures to combat new forms of racism, in
particular by constantly adapting the means provided to combat them, especially in the legislative,
administrative, educational and information fields;
4. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to give a high priority to
the follow-up to programmes and activities for combating racism and racial discrimination;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to accord special attention to the situation of migrant
workers and members of their families and to include regularly in his reports all information on such
workers;
6. Calls upon all Member States to consider signing and ratifying or acceding to the International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families as
a matter of priority;
7. Commends all States that have ratified or acceded to the international instruments to combat
racism and racial discrimination;
8. Encourages the mass media to promote ideas of tolerance and understanding among peoples and
between different cultures;

8

Resolution 45/158, annex.
/...

A/RES/52/111
Page 4

9. Affirms its determination to combat violence stemming from intolerance on the basis of ethnicity,
which it considers an issue of particular gravity;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the study on the effects of racial discrimination on
the children of minorities and those of migrant workers in the fields of education, training and
employment and to submit, inter alia, specific recommendations for the implementation of measures to
combat the effects of that discrimination;
11. Regrets the lack of interest, support and financial resources for the Third Decade and its related
Programme of Action, reflected in the fact that very few of the activities planned for the period 1994-1997
were carried out;
12. Also regrets that the contributions made by the international community to the Trust Fund for
the Programme of Action for the Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination remain
below the level required, and requests the Secretary-General to include in his report to the General
Assembly at its fifty-third session concrete proposals on how to ensure the financial and personnel
resources required for the implementation of the Programme of Action, including through the United
Nations regular budget and extrabudgetary sources;
13. Welcomes the convening, at Geneva from 10 to 14 November 1997, of a seminar on the role
of the Internet with regard to the provisions of the International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Commission on Human Rights at its fifty-fourth
session on the outcome of the two seminars held on the implementation of the Programme of Action
concerning migration, racism and racial discrimination and on the role of the Internet with regard to the
provisions of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;
15. Recommends that the activities being organized to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights include programmes targeted at combating racism and racial
discrimination;
16. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to take duly into account
the repeated appeals of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council for the establishment
of a mechanism for coordinating all the activities of the Third Decade;
17. Considers that voluntary contributions to the Trust Fund are indispensable for the implementation
of the Programme of Action;
18. Urges the Secretary-General, United Nations bodies, the specialized agencies, all Governments,
intergovernmental organizations and relevant non-governmental organizations, in implementing the
Programme of Action, to pay particular attention to the situation of indigenous people;
19. Requests States and international organizations to consider the relevant decisions of the
Economic and Social Council on the integrated follow-up to previous world conferences and the need to
make optimum use of all available mechanisms in the struggle against racism;

/...

A/RES/52/111
Page 5

20. Strongly underlines the importance of education as a significant means of preventing and
eradicating racism and racial discrimination and of creating an awareness of principles of human rights,
particularly among young people, and, in this regard, renews its invitation to the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to expedite the preparation of teaching materials and
teaching aids to promote teaching, training and educational activities on human rights and against racism
and racial discrimination, with particular emphasis on activities at the primary and secondary levels of
education;
21. Considers that all parts of the Programme of Action should be given equal attention in order to
attain the objectives of the Third Decade;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the necessary financial resources are provided for
the implementation of the activities of the Third Decade during the biennium 1998-1999;
23. Also requests the Secretary-General to accord high priority to the activities of the Programme
of Action;
24. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit each year to the Economic and Social Council
a detailed report on all activities of United Nations bodies and the specialized agencies, containing an
analysis of information received on such activities to combat racism and racial discrimination;
25. Invites the Secretary-General to submit proposals to the General Assembly with a view to
supplementing, if necessary, the Programme of Action;
26. Invites all Governments, United Nations bodies, the specialized agencies and other
intergovernmental organizations, regional organizations and interested non-governmental organizations to
participate fully in the Third Decade;
27. Strongly appeals to all Governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and
individuals in a position to do so to contribute generously to the Trust Fund, and, to this end, requests the
Secretary-General to continue to undertake appropriate contacts and initiatives to encourage contributions;
II
WORLD CONFERENCE AGAINST RACISM, RACIAL DISCRIMINATION, XENOPHOBIA
AND RELATED INTOLERANCE
28. Decides to convene a World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and
Related Intolerance, whose main objectives will be:
(a) To review progress made in the fight against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance, in particular since the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and
to reappraise the obstacles to further progress in the field and ways to overcome them;
(b) To consider ways and means to better ensure the application of existing standards and the
implementation of the existing instruments to combat racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance;

/...

A/RES/52/111
Page 6

(c) To increase the level of awareness about the scourges of racism and racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance;
(d) To formulate concrete recommendations on ways to increase the effectiveness of the activities
and mechanisms of the United Nations through programmes aimed at combating racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
(e) To review the political, historical, economic, social, cultural and other factors leading to racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
(f) To formulate concrete recommendations to further action-oriented national, regional and
international measures to combat all forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance;
(g) To draw up concrete recommendations for ensuring that the United Nations has the financial and
other necessary resources for its actions to combat racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance;
29. Also decides:
(a) That the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related
Intolerance will be convened not later than the year 2001;
(b) That, when the agenda of the World Conference is decided upon, inter alia, the need to address
in a comprehensive manner all forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
contemporary forms of intolerance will be taken into consideration;
(c) That the World Conference will be action-oriented and focus on practical measures to eradicate
racism, including measures of prevention, education and protection and the provision of effective
remedies, taking into full consideration the existing human rights instruments;
(d) That the Commission on Human Rights will act as the preparatory committee for the World
Conference and that its deliberations should be open-ended, allowing for the full participation of all States
Members of the United Nations, members of the specialized agencies and observers, in accordance with
established practice;
30. Requests Governments, the specialized agencies, other international organizations, concerned
United Nations bodies, regional organizations, non-governmental organizations, the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination, the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and other human
rights mechanisms to assist the preparatory committee, to undertake reviews, to submit recommendations
concerning the World Conference and the preparations therefor to the preparatory committee through the
Secretary-General and to participate actively in the World Conference;
31. Stresses the importance of systematically taking a gender perspective into account throughout
the preparations for and in the outcome of the World Conference;

/...

A/RES/52/111
Page 7

32. Calls upon States and regional organizations to hold national or regional meetings or to take
other initiatives in preparation for the World Conference, and requests the regional preparatory meetings
to submit reports to the preparatory committee through the Secretary-General on the outcome of their
deliberations, including practical and action-oriented recommendations to combat racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
33. Decides that the World Conference will be conducted effectively and efficiently and that its size,
duration and other cost factors should be determined with due regard for economy;
34. Also decides to keep the item entitled "Elimination of racism and racial discrimination" on its
agenda and to consider it as a matter of high priority at its fifty-third session.
70th plenary meeting
12 December 1997
