UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY--S-IXTH

Y’EAR
th
MEETING:

5 NOVEMBER

1981

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2306) .,.,,,,,,,,..,,.I.,..................

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President ,,III*III...II............II

1

Adoption of the agenda I..1........,,.,,,,.,,...I...O...I.O.~I.II....

1

Election of five members of the International Court of Justice (S/14501, S/14502/
Rev. 1, S/14503 and Con’.1 and 2, S/14645) .,,........,.........I,......

1

SlPV.2306

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents
are comrosed
of capital
billed with figures.
Mention
of such a symbol indicates a reference
Nations document.

letters comto a United

Documents
of the Security
Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally
published in
quarterly
S~~~~~/~rort.s
of the Of/kitr/
Ncc~~tls (!/‘//IO Sccwity
C’ouwil.
The date
of the document
indicates
the supplement
in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions
of the Security
Council,
numbered
in accordance
with a
system adopted
in 1964, are published
in yearly volumes
of R~~,so/rr/iom
tr~rrl
D~wkiwrs
oJ’ //w Sccwity
Cormi/.
The new system,
which has been applied
retroactively
to resolutions
adopted before I January
196.5, became fully operative
on that date.

2306th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 5 November 1981, at 3 p.m.
Presideof:

Mr. Tdieb SLIM (Tunisia),

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, German Democratic Republic, Ireland,
Japan, Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philippines, Spain,
Tunisia, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.

-~~~~Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2306)

n
te
r-

R
<I
d
‘c:

1, Adoption of the agenda
2. Election of five members of the International
Court of Justice (S/14501, S/14502/Rev.l,
S/14503 and Corr.1 and 2, S/14645)
The meeting

was called

to order

at 3,20 p.m.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1, The I,RESIDENT (interpretcrfiou
fiwn
Fw~~9~):
At the beginning of this meeting I should like to express,
on behalf of the Council, my deep appreciation to
Ambassador Jaime de PiniCs, the Permanent Representative of Spain, for his services as President of the
Council for the month of October. Ambassador de
Pin&, whom I am proud to consider a personal friend
of long standing in the United Nations and who represents a country with which Tunisia has always had
solid and friendly relations, has, I am sure all the
members of the Council will agree, won our complete
admiration for the courtesy and competence with
which he guided the deliberations of the Council last
month. I wish to express to him my warmest congratulations on his outstanding contribution.
Adoption of the agenda

of five members of the International Court of
Justice (S/14501,’ S/14502/Rev.l,> S/14503 and
Corr.1 and 2, S/14645”)

Election

2. The PRESIDENT (irrtc,rf~r,c~rcrfi[~/~ .jiwr~ f+cwch):
The Council will now proceed to the election of five
members of the International Courr of Justice. in
accordance with p;uqraph I ol’t\r~i\~l: I7 ol’~he Sl:~lute
of the Court, to till the five scats which ~111 become
vacant on 5 February 1982 on the expiry of the terms

of office of the following Judges: Sir Humphrey
Waldock, Mr. Isaac Forster, Mr. Andri Gras, Mr. Nagendra Singh and Mr. Jo& Maria Ruda. ~
3. I should like to point out that document S/14645
reproduces the text of a note verbale dated 25 August
1981, in which the President of the Security Council
informed the Secretary-General of the following:
“The Security Council has taken note with deep
regret of the death, on 15 August 1981, of the President of the International Court of Justice, Sir Humphrey Waek,
“The Security Council has noted that Sir Humphrey’s term of office was to have expired on 5 February 1982 and that his seat is one of the five seats
which will be filled for nine-year terms, commencing
on 6 February 1982, during the elections to the Court
to be held in the Security Council and in the General
Assembly in the course of the forthcoming thirtysixth-session of the Assembly.
“On the basis of consultations with the members
of the Security Council, the President wishes to
inform the Secretary-General that the Council
considers that, as the vacancy which has arisen in
the Court will be filled through the regular election
procedure as from 6 February 1982, no purpose
would be served by invoking the procedures of the
Statute of the Court relating to the filling of a casual
vacancy for the remainder of Sir Humphrey’s term
of office. These procedures are applicable in cases
where otherwise a considerable delay would elapse
in filling a vacancy. No such delay is involved in this
instance, as the seat concerned will be filled as
from 6 February 1982.”
4. The list of candidates nominated by national
groups for the five vacant seats is contained in document S/14502/Rev. 1. I should like to draw the attentior:
of the Council to the fact that the Acting Charge d’affaires of the Permanent Mission of Barbados informed
~rfc this morning that Sir William Douglas had decided
that he no longer wished to be considered a candidate,
S. Document S/14503 and Corr.1 and 2 contains the
curricula vitae of all the candidates.
6. The Security Council also has before it a memorandum by the Secretary-General in document S/14501,

settiilg out the procedure to be followed in the conduct
of the election. I should like to remind the Council
that under Article 10, paragraph 1, of the Statute of
t!le International Court of Justice,
~~

9. The Council will have to proceed to another ballot
for the designation of the three remaining members.
In this ballot, members may vote for any of the candidates except those who have already received the
required majority. I would remind members that any
ballot paper containing votes for more than three
names wiil be regarded-as invalid.

“Those candidates who obtain an absolute majority of votes in the General Assembly and in the
Security Council shall be considered as elected.”
The required mr\jority in the Council is eight votes.
If, however, more than five candidates obtain the
required mdority, we shall apply the procedure which
has been followed in similar cases in the past and which
is described in paragraph 14 of the Secretary-General’s
memorandum-that
is, a new vote will be held on all
the candidates. If, on the other hand, fewer than five
candidates receive the required mdority, the Council
will continue balloting until the remaining vacancies
are filled, subject, of course, to the concurring vote of
the General Assembly.

IS
0

1.5
8
Number

of IWC~S obrctitrd:

Mr. KBba Mbaye (Senegal) . , . , , , . ,.. . I
Mr. Nagendra Singh (India) .I.,...,,..
Mr. Hector W. Jayewardene (Sri
Lanka) ..I.,...,,,.I.,I~..I~...I...
Mr. Jo& Maria Ruda (Argentina) .I...,
Mr. Antonio GBmez Robledo (Mexico). . .
Mr. Juan Jose Calle y Calle (Peru) .,,I.
Mr. Edilbert Razafindralambo (Madagascar) . . . . . . ..I.......~...........
Mr. Anwarul S. Haq (Pakistan) , . . . . . , .
Mr. Tun Mohamed Suff’ian (Malaysia), . .

7. Voting will be by secret ballot. Members of the
Council are asked to place a cross next to the name of
the candidate for whom they wish to vote. The only
votes that will be counted will be those for candidates
whose names appear on the ballot paper. I should
like to remind members of paragraph I1 of the memorandum by the Secretary-General, which specifies that
“Each elector may vote for not more than five candidates oil-the first ballot.” Consequently, any ballot
containing votes for more than five names will be
declared invalid.

11
8
6
4
:
3
1
1

jiw~ Fwrrcl~):
10. The PREEIDENT (itzterprcmtiott
The following two candidates have received the required majority of votes in the Council: Mr. K6ba
Mbaye and Mr. Nagendra Singh.

11. The Council will have to proceed to another ballot
for the fifth place. In this ballot, members may vote
for any of the candidates except those who have already
received the required majority. I would remind members that any ballot papers containing votes for more
than one name will be regarded as invalid.
Ntrtttbrv

12. I should like to inform members of the Council
that I have just received a letter from the representative of Pakistan in which he informs me that the
candidacy of Mr. Anwarul S. Haq has been withdrawn.
I trust that he has also so informed the President of
the General Assembly. The Council is herebv informed
that there is one less candidate.

of’vo~c~s obrcrittetl:

Mr. Guy Ladreit de Lacharriere (France),
Mr. Robert Y. Jennings (United King
dom) ..I..,..I.II......I..I...,.II.
Mr, Kdba Mbaye (Senegal) , . . . . , . . . , , ,
Mr. Nagendra Singh (India) **..4*.,...
Mr. Hector W. Jayewardene (Sri
Lanka) , , . , . I . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . , ,
Mr. Edilbert Razafindralambo (Madagascar) . . . . ..I.II.I.I...,,,..,,,I,.
Mr. Antonio Gdmez Robledo (Mexico) . , ,
Mr. Jose Maria Ruda (Argentina), , , , . , .
Mr. Juan JosC Calle y Calle (Peru) . , .
Mr. Laurel B. Francis (Jamaica) . , , , . .
Mr. Anwarul S. Haq (Pakistan) . . , . . ,..
Mr. Tun Mohamed Suffian (Malaysia)

IS
0
15
8
Nlltrlbc~r

of’

I’0le.Y

lhrtrirll~cl:

Mr. Jose Maria Ruda (Argentina) ,..**.
Mr. Antonio G6mez Robledo (Mexico) , . ,
Mr. Juan JosC Calle y Calle (Peru) . . . . .
Mr. Hector W. Jaycwardene
(Sri
Lanka) . . . . . ..I.......I............

8. The PRESIDENT (itrl[,rp~c~ttrliotr
jhtr
Ft~~trclt):
The following two candidates have received the
required majority of votes in the Council: Mr. Guy
Ladreit de Lacharrikre and Mr. Robert Y. Jennings.
2

7
4
3

I

J

er ballot
lembers.

the canived the
that
any
p three

1.5
0
15
_

8

11
8

=

6
4
:
3
1

-

1

‘I’CIfCI?):
the re. KQba

in the General Assembly and in the Security Council
and are, therefore, elected members of the International Court of Justice.“*

13. The PRESIDENT (itirc~rpl’etcrtiott J~YWI Frmch):
Since no candidate has received the required~majority,
the Council will proceed to another ballot for the
election of one member. Once again I would remind
members that all candidates are eligible, except, of
course, for the four candidates who have already
obtained the required majority. I would also remind
members that any ballot paper which contains votes
for more than one name will be considered invalid.

Nwnb~r
/tivalid
Nunhv.
Keqrtird

of hullor pujwrs:
ballots:
of w/it/ ballots:
nwj01 ity:

Nundx~r

ufwtc~s

16. It would therefore appear that the Security
Council and the General Assembly, which have hehI
concurrent elections for the five vacancies in the
International Court of Justice, have concluded their
work. Our task is therefore concluded, and I should like
to thank all members of the Council for their COoperation, patience and courtesy.
17. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialis:
Republics) (iutcrpretutiun
fiorn Russian):
Mr. President, I believe that today’s meeting should not constituts a precedent, since many members of the Council
were absent when you read out the communication, and
it would have been more correct to have waited until
all the members of the Council were present at the
table. Therefore I consider that today’s meeting should
not and does not constitute a precedent.

15
~~~~ 0

15
8

obtuitwd:

Mr. Jo& Maria Ruda (Argentina)
Mr. Juan Jose Calle y Calle (Peru)’ : : : : :
Mr. Antonio Gdmez Robledo (Mexico). . .

9

:

18. The PRESIDENT (i~~terpretarion
fiwn Frcwc~b’
I do not believe there is any precedent, since the Council was in session. Members of the Council were
supposed to be in their places when I began to make
my statement. This statement was a formality, since
we have all been following what has been happening
there and here. I am sure this creates no precedent,
and it will not do so if members of the Council remain
in their-places dvring meetings.

14. The PRESIDENT (ittterpwtatiw
$YNI F~frch):
Since five candidates have now obtained the majority required for the five vacancies, I shall communicate
the results of the vote to the President of the General
Assembly. I would request the Council to remain in
session until the President of the Assembly has informed thenCouncil-of-the results ofthe voting~in the
Assembly.

‘r ballot
xy vote
already
1 memm- more

IS. The PRESIDENT (i/rtc~rprc~tcrtio,l from Frerdr):
I should like to inform the members of the Council
that I have iust received from the President of the
General Assembly the following letter:

Zouncil
presenxtt the
drawn.
dent of
formed

“I have the honour to inform you that at the
48th plenary meeting of the General Assembly,
held today for the purpose of electing five members
of the International Court of Justice, the following
five candidates obtained an absolute majority of
votes in the General Assembly: Mr. Guy Ladreit
de Lacharribre, Mr. Robert Y. Jennings, Mr. K6ba
Mbaye, Mr. Nagendra Singh and Mr. Jose Maria
Ruda.

1.5
0
15

“I note from your letter of today’s date that at
the 2306th meeting of the Securitv Council the following five candidates obtaineb the necessary
maority of votes in the Council: Mr. Guy Ladreit
dc Lacharriere, Mr. Robert Y. Jennings, Mr. KCba
Mbaye, Mr. Nagendra Singh and Mr. Josh Maria
Ruda.

19. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom):
Mr. President, I wish to apologize very sincerely to you
and through you to the Council for not having been in
my seat at the correct time. My problem is that I am
rather slow On my feet these days and I just did net
make it.
20. Mr. ARCILLA (Philippines): I too should like
to express apologies for the absence of my delegation
at the time when you called the meeting, Mr. President.
It simply happened that my Permanent Representative
was called elsewhere, and I had to be fetched from
another room. I should like to express support for
what the representative of the Soviet Union said, that
it is hoped that this will not constitute a precedent.
The nrwting

8

“I informed the General Assembly that Mr. Guy
Ladreit de LacharriPre, Mr. Robel’t Y. Jennings,
Mr. KCba Mbayc. Mr. Nag:ndra Singh and Mr. Jose
Maria Ruda had rcccivctl
;III :~bsolute
majority
both

* Rend in English

3

rose at 5.50 pm.

by the President.

Las puhlicaciones
de Ius Nacioner
todas panes del mundo. Co~wdrc
NUCVA York o Ginehra.

Unid;ir cst&l cn venla en librerias y casas dinlribuidoras
cn
a su librcro o dirijasc a: Nacioncs Umdas. SecciOn dc Vetlcas.
