S/2016/843

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 October 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation with
respect to piracy and armed robbery at sea off the
coast of Somalia
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 33 of Security
Council resolution 2246 (2015), in which the Council requested me to report on
the implementation of that resolution and on the situation with respect to piracy
and armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia.
2.
The present report covers major developments since my previous report of
12 October 2015 (S/2015/776) through 30 September 2016. The assessment and
observations herein are based on information provided by Member States and
regional organizations, in conformity with paragraph 32 of Security Council
resolution 2246 (2015). Information was provided by Italy, Latvia, Madagascar,
Oman, Sri Lanka, Sweden and Turkey, as well as by the European Union and the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). The United Nations system, the
International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL), the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) and the Monitoring Group on Somalia and
Eritrea were also consulted.

II. Main developments and trends regarding piracy off the
coast of Somalia
3.
More than three years have passed since Somali pirates successfully
hijacked and held a large commercial vessel for ransom. As at August 2016, no
seafarers from large commercial vessels were being held hostage by Somali
pirates. Those developments reflect the trend of an overall decli ne in piracy off
the coast of Somalia. Some significant challenges remain, however. Pirate
activity has increasingly shifted to the hijacking for ransom of dhows and
foreign fishing vessels. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) has reported that the number of smaller vessel seafarers currently in
captivity stands at 39, comprising 26 hostages from the Naham 3 (Oman), 10
remaining hostages from the Siraj (Iran (Islamic Republic of)) and 3 hostages
from the Abdi Khan (Yemen). Pirate gangs are believed to be holding other
hostages for ransom, including five Kenyans. During the reporting period, the
total number of incidents caused by Somalia-based pirates, as reported to the
International Maritime Organization (IMO), increased slightly to 15, fr om 12 in
2014, but was still radically reduced from the peak of 237 pirate attacks in 2011.

16-16886 (E)

101016

*1616886*

S/2016/843

4.
Progress in building a federal state in Somalia, combined with collective
international naval efforts and anti-piracy policies from the regional states, such
as Puntland, has contributed to the reduction of onshore safe havens for pirates
along the Somali coast. The results of a recent survey undertaken by the Food
and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and Oceans Beyond
Piracy indicated that territories considered safe havens for pirates have shrunk
from significant swathes of the 3,333km-long coastline of Somalia to a roughly
150km-long stretch between Xarardheere and Garacad. Most international ships
have deterred pirate attacks through situational awareness and assertive
responses in accordance with IMO guidance and its Best Management Practices
for Protection against Somalia-based Piracy. It is clear that the combined
presence of naval warships, the implementation of the Best Management
Practices, the presence of armed guards on ships and the prosecution and
detention modalities supported through the Trust Fund to Support Initiatives of
States Countering Piracy off the Coast of Somalia are succeeding as a deterrent
against attacks on large commercial vessels. Pirate activity against such vessels
has been effectively suppressed.
5.
Although significant, such progress remains fragile and reversible.
Credible reports indicate that Somali pirates possess the intent and capability to
resume attacks against large commercial ships, should the opportunity present
itself, and to endanger smaller vessels, which remain particularly vulnerable.
There have been reports of pirate groups being organized and equipped in
Mudug and in the area in the Horn of Africa east of Boosaasoin Puntland. The
uncertain political situation in the central region of Somalia, coupled with the
finite mandate of the international naval force stationed off the coast, has the
potential to become a security vacuum that could trigger a resurgence of piracy.
6.
The complex linkage between piracy and illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing continues to be of concern. The rise in the number of
seafarers held by pirates in 2015 is largely attributable to hijackings of small
fishing vessels. Many local communities view ransom payments for hostages as
compensation for what they perceive as fishing revenue lost through illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing by such vessels, and, to that extent, the
perception and the reality of illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing
activities can be a driver for piracy.
7.
The Somali Maritime Resource and Security Strategy of 2013 has enabled
Somali leaders to begin addressing maritime governance issues and to promote
the establishment of a federal Somali fisheries authority so that fishing can be
properly licensed and regulated, with revenues shared equally between the
Federal Government and the regional states. That work is supported by FAO,
UNODC and the Secure Fisheries programme of Oceans Beyond Piracy, among
others. Somalia still lacks the abilities to patrol its own waters and carry out
basic fisheries protection measures. Those areas still require significant support
from the international community.
8.
The drivers that have triggered piracy remain unchanged since 2005. The
lack of economic opportunity has been identified by the Federal Government
and international partners as the principal driver of pirate recruitment. It is
notable that the criminal networks behind piracy remain undefeated, with
kingpins such as Mohamed Osman Mohamed still at large, according to recent
Oceans Beyond Piracy research. There is widespread agreement that without
changes to the underlying factors and networks, piracy could re -emerge.

2/18

16-16886

S/2016/843

III. Hostage release and support efforts
9.
So far in 2016, Somali pirates have released only one hostage, who h ad
been kidnapped onshore and held by pirates in the Mudug region with his
colleague, a Kenyan woman. He was released in February 2016 following an
operation carried out by Somali security personnel and repatriated to Kenya by
the Hostage Support Partnership with the help of the Embassy of Kenya in
Somalia, Oceans Beyond Piracy and UNODC. Sadly, the Kenyan woman is still
being held hostage.
10. Twenty-six crew members from the Omani fishing vessel Naham 3, which
was hijacked in 2012, remain in captivity. A continuing dialogue has been taking
place with the pirates holding the crew to try to secure their release. Recently
obtained proof of life, in the form of videos and photographs, has shown that the
crew remains alive but in deteriorating condition. The H ostage Support
Partnership has provided food and medicine through intermediaries, and the
Partnership has expressed the hope that, through active dialogue involving the
local community, they will secure their release. The 10 remaining Iranian crew
members of the Siraj are also still in captivity, whereas three Yemeni crew
members of the Abdi Khan have been unaccounted for since 2011. International
partners continue to support efforts to achieve the objective of zero ships and
zero seafarers held captive by Somali pirates, agreed upon by the Contact Group
on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia on 14 Ma y 2014.

IV. Development of counter-piracy efforts in Somalia
A.

Legal and policy frameworks
11. The Federal Government of Somalia has developed a comprehensive
approach to maritime capacity-building, with the assistance of a coalition of
donors and implementers under the Somali Maritime Resource and Security
Strategy, which is overseen by the Maritime Security Coordination Committee
chaired by the Deputy Prime Minister of Somalia. At its nineteenth plenary
session, held in Victoria from 31 May to 3 June 2016, the Contact Group
endorsed the Committee as the sole mechanism for implementing the Strategy.
12. The Strategy comprises six elements, which are led by international
organizations in partnership with Somali and other international partners. IMO
is leading three of the elements, namely, maritime governance, maritime safety
at sea and maritime response and recovery. The element on maritime law
enforcement is led by UNODC in cooperation with the European Union Mission
on Regional Maritime Capacity-Building in the Horn of Africa, the element on
maritime security by the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM), and the maritime economy element by FAO. The Maritime Security
Coordination Committee conducts regular reviews of policy and legal reforms in
law enforcement and other areas of marine safety jointly with the Contact
Group. The Committee remains the only mechanism through which some active
cooperation exists between “Somaliland” and the Federal and regional
administrations of Somalia.
13. The Federal Government of Somalia is revising its Maritime Code and has
prepared guidelines for establishing a maritime administration department under
the Ministry of Ports and Marine Transport. That work is being undertaken with
the assistance of IMO. The proposed department would aid the Federal

16-16886

3/18

S/2016/843

Government in undertaking its flag, port State and coastal State maritime
responsibilities. UNSOM is facilitating the ratification of the revised Somali
Maritime Code of 1959, which will enable the establishment of the department.
14. The Federal Government of Somalia is also developing a policy
framework for the Somali coastguard, with technical assistance from UNSOM
and the European Union Mission on Regional Maritime Capacity-Building in
the Horn of Africa. UNSOM established a sub-working group under the naval
coastguard working group on 12 October 2015. The aim of the sub -working
group was to develop a plan to train and equip, referred to as the Naqude
[Captain] plan, for the Somali coastguard. The Naqude plan is on hold, however,
until the Federal Government decides whether authority over the coastguard will
be transferred from the Ministry of Defence to the Ministry of Internal Security.

B.

Capacity-building
15. During the reporting period, the Federal Government of Somalia and the
regional administrations continued to build their maritime security capacities,
with some assistance from international partners in conjunction with the Trust
Fund to Support Initiatives of States Countering Piracy off the Coast of Somalia.
The first of a series of planned maritime operations centres was established in
Berbera, “Somaliland”, under the command of the “Somaliland” coastguard,
with assistance from Oceans Beyond Piracy, the European Union Mission on
Regional Maritime Capacity-Building in the Horn of Africa and the UNODC
Global Maritime Crime Programme. The centres are designed to provide Somali
maritime institutions with greater situational awareness and improve
communications in coastal areas and between local maritime security
institutions and international naval forces, while increasing knowledge of local
maritime crime issues.
16. The maritime law enforcement authorities in “Somaliland”, Puntland, and
southern and central Somalia continued to develop their maritime security and
justice sectors, with assistance from UNODC and the European Union Mission
on Regional Maritime Capacity-Building in the Horn of Africa. The UNODC
Global Maritime Crime Programme provided in-country maritime law
enforcement and engineering and communications mentors who delivered on the-job training and mentoring to Somali maritime police and coastguard units.
The Programme supported prison operations in Hargeysa, “Somaliland”, and
Garoowe, Puntland, and the Mogadishu central prison through the provision of
food, health-care services and other procurement needs, and custodial staff
received training on security and information management. In collaboration with
UNODC, mentors routinely reviewed security conditions at the prisons to
reduce the risk of escape or mistreatment, in particular with regard to prisoners
transferred under the Piracy Prisoner Transfer Programme and other high -risk
offenders. Funding is being sought to continue the programme beyon d 2016.
17. In Mogadishu, the maritime unit of the Somali police force continued to
benefit from a UNODC mentoring programme focused on building maritime and
policing skills. The unit now undertakes regular patrols of Mogadishu harbour
and the adjacent coastline. The unit also supports the maritime forces of the
African Union Mission in Somalia in patrolling the waters off the coast near
Mogadishu International Airport. However, insecurity has restricted the
programme to Mogadishu harbour. On land, UNODC continued its multi-year
programme of training, procurement and construction work at the Mogadishu

4/18

16-16886

S/2016/843

prison and court complex, which will be the most technologically advanced and
secure prison facility in the central southern region. The complex will provide a
secure environment for the trials of high-risk prisoners, such as pirates,
terrorists and former combatants. During the reporting period, construction work
at the complex progressed on a high-security cell block, a court complex and
accommodations for judges. Training of Somali custodial officers continued
with a view to improving security and professionalism.
18. In Puntland, construction of the new headquarters for the Boosaaso port
police began in 2015 and is nearing completion. The headquarters will a lso
serve as a training and operations centre for the port police. The Boosaaso port
police have in the interim updated their equipment and communications
infrastructure with assistance from UNODC and have regularly interdicted
vessels in which people are being smuggled. In one 2-week period during
November 2015, they intercepted 12 vessels carrying a total of 980 people. The
lack of capacity for boat maintenance at the Boosaaso port remains a challenge.
In Mudug, refurbishment of the police station, which had been damaged by
floods, in south Gaalkacyo was completed, with the addition of a new secure
armoury, funded by the Trust Fund to Support Initiatives of States Countering
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia.
19. The “Somaliland” coastguard updated its sea operations with radio
operator training and other support from the UNODC Global Maritime Crime
Programme. The training and mentoring efforts are credited with contributing to
the coastguard’s interdiction of illegal fishing vessels and human smugglers.
During the reporting period, the “Somaliland” coastguard successfully carried
out a rescue operation in the Sanaag region, off the east coast of Maydh town, in
which 72 migrants were rescued from a boat headed to Yemen after it had
drifted off the coast for more than a week.
20. Those efforts notwithstanding, the development of coastguard capacity
across Somalia remains at an early stage, with challenges including the volatile
security situation and the lack of adequate equipment and resources to meet
operating costs. Training and awareness-raising efforts have continued.
21. Between April and July 2016, the Federal Government of Somalia
nominated two of its staff to participate in a special strategic fellows programme
hosted by the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea of the Office of
Legal Affairs. Upon their return to Somalia, the two fellows are expected to be
assigned to government positions focusing on maritime and ocean affairs. The
fellowships were funded by the Trust Fund to Support Initiatives of States
Countering Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, through project No. 61. The holding
of Division briefings on maritime and piracy legal frameworks was offered to
the Somali federal parliament and will be scheduled following the holding of the
upcoming 2016 electoral process.
22. Within the framework of the European Union Critical Maritime Routes
Law Enforcement Agency Project, 21 Somali law enforcement personnel
received training from INTERPOL in two sessions, held in October 2015 and
August 2016 at the INTERPOL regional bureau in Nairobi. In October 2015,
four officers from the INTERPOL National Central Bureau in Mogadishu were
trained on INTERPOL tools and services. In August 2016, 17 officers from the
criminal investigation division of the Somali federal police based in Mogadishu
were trained in investigative techniques. There are plans to train another group
of 20 officers in October 2016.

16-16886

5/18

S/2016/843

C.

Tackling root causes of piracy
23. The root causes of piracy include a fragile economy, a l ack of alternative
livelihoods, insecurity and weak governance structures. Efforts to address such
challenges are continuing within the framework of the Somali compact for
peacebuilding and state-building. The latest developments are reflected in my
reports to the Security Council on Somalia of 8 January 2016 ( S/2016/27),
9 May 2016 (S/2016/430) and 6 September 2016 (S/2016/763).
24. Many non-governmental organizations have been involved in efforts to
improve economic conditions onshore by providing microfinance and business
development opportunities and alternative livelihoods throughout Somalia.
Those activities are essential to the fight against piracy and the long-term
improvement of livelihoods onshore. Non-profit organizations, such as Adeso,
FairFishing and Shuraako, have unique access to affected communities and have
been instrumental in generating economic progress in coastal areas.
25. As part of the effort to address the complex linkage between illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing and piracy, the Ministry of Fisheries and
Marine Resources is identifying such fishing activities in its exclusive economic
zone (EEZ) through the collection of information from various sources,
including data from the automatic identification system, with assistance from
FAO. At the end of 2015, the European Union began sharing with the Ministry
information collected by European Union Naval Force vessels on sightings of
“clearly identified” fishing vessels in the EEZ of Somalia. In 2016, Somalia
became the eighth member of the task force of Fish-i Africa, which is a group of
countries in the western Indian Ocean that are sharing infor mation in order to
combat and eliminate illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing activities in the
region. The Somali authorities have taken steps to halt the activities of some of
the vessels identified, however, a weak legal framework and inadequate
enforcement capacities often prevent effective action. Somalia is a party to the
Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal,
Unreported and Unregulated Fishing of FAO, the first international treaty aimed
at combating illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing through port State
measures. The Agreement entered into force on 5 June 2016 and the Federal
Government of Somalia requested the assistance of FAO in its implementation.
26. Somali federal and regional fisheries authorities are implementing several
projects aimed at enhancing the fight against illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing and improving government regulation under the Somali Maritime
Resource and Security Strategy. Projects supported by FAO have included
biometric registration of fishers and boats, the creation of a sustainably funded
federal fisheries authority and the installation of a low-cost transponder
automatic identification system on registered coastal fishing boats in Puntland.
The European Union announced a multi-year project through its programme to
promote regional maritime security, to begin in late 2016. The effectiveness of
those programmes, however, partially depends on the conclusion of a final
agreement between the Federal Government of Somalia and the regional states
on fisheries management and sharing of revenue from licences, which remains
pending.

6/18

16-16886

S/2016/843

V. International cooperation
A.

Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia
27. The Contact Group held its nineteenth plenary session under the theme
“From the region, for the region: creating a lasting legacy”. The plenary session
was chaired by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Transport of Seychelles, Joel
Morgan. Other high-level participants included the Deputy Prime Minister of
Somalia, Mohamed Omar Arte, and the Attorney General of Somalia, Ahmed
A. Dahir. Participants expressed their gratitude to the Government of Seychelles
for its willingness to continue its work as the Chair of the Contact Group in
2017.
28. In addition to updates and presentations, participants considered the future
of the Contact Group. The discussion focused on three possible future
trajectories: expansion of the geographical mandate; streamlining functions and
shifting reporting to a regional organization such as the Indian Ocean Forum on
Maritime Crime; and disbandment. Participants agreed that the overall
framework of the Contact Group should match current threats and that the
balance of the response to piracy should gradually be shifted to Somalia and
Indian Ocean States and organizations. It was emphasized, however, that
international support for counter-piracy operations had been critical to the
success of the Contact Group and should be maintained under future structures.
Participants agreed that the future structure of the Contact Group should
maintain the minimum deterrence capacity required to prevent a relapse of
piracy off the coast of Somalia. The Contact Group would also need to maintain
a monitoring function that could assess the threat of piracy and galvanize action
if the level of Somali piracy increased.
29. Participants discussed whether the Contact Group should address such
issues as illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing and other maritime crimes
or maintain its focus on deterring piracy. Although there were calls for
expanding the mandate or geographic focus, the Contact Group decided to retain
its focus on piracy but instituted changes to its substructures, as set out in its
communiqué. The Contact Group resolved to delay its decision on the future of
the plenary until 2017. It reiterated that the solution to piracy lay onshore and
that it was vital to support Somalia in developing its maritime, counter -piracy
and related legislation without delay.
30. The working group on capacity-building recommended that it be
reconfigured to deliver a streamlined and sustainable approach to capacitybuilding, reflecting the desire for greater ownership from the Somalis, and
reflecting the Contact Group’s strategic direction towards enhanced Indian
Ocean and Gulf of Aden regional leadership. The legal forum, under the
chairmanship of Mauritius and Portugal, resolved to continue in its current form
and continue its cooperation with Contact Group stakeholders, including
UNODC and regional organizations implementing the programme to promote
regional maritime security. The working group on maritime counter piracy and
mitigation operations, under the chairmanship of Seychelles, the United Arab
Emirates and Japan, recommended the operationalization of the maritime
situation awareness framework, as agreed in the 2015 report. The work ing group
on disrupting pirate networks onshore, under the chairmanship of Italy,
recommended that pirate leaders and financiers be actively investigated,
prosecuted and sentenced and that countries of the region should be able to

16-16886

7/18

S/2016/843

strengthen their capacity to monitor and control the licensed and informal
financial entities operating in their jurisdictions.
31. In the communiqué issued following its nineteenth session, the Contact
Group decided to implement a transition strategy that would involve the trans fer
of the majority of its working groups’ coordination tasks to Somalia, the Indian
Ocean States and regional organizations, while maintaining current support
mechanisms for such regional programmes as the programme to promote
regional maritime security and UNODC related projects. In the communiqué,
the Contact Group reiterated that the solution to piracy lay onshore and that it
was vital to support Somalia in developing its maritime policing capacities and
maritime crime legislation without delay. The members of the Contact Group
agreed to share data and cooperate with the Somali authorities to facilitate the
arrest and prosecution of pirate kingpins and financiers, and to continue
monitoring the piracy threat. A plenary meeting would be convened in 2017 to
review the progress of the transition strategy.

B.

Trust Fund to Support the Initiatives of States Countering
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia
32. As at 31 May 2016, the Trust Fund to Support Initiatives of States
Countering Piracy off the Coast of Somalia had a total balance of $898,407.
Since December 2012, the Trust Fund has received a total of $13.4 million from
18 donors.
33. On 2 June 2016, the Board of the Trust Fund held its 18th meeting, in
Victoria, under the chairmanship of the Department of Political Affairs. It
approved projects amounting to $914,883, five of which were submitted by FAO
and UNODC. The cost of the FAO project is $400,578 and will provide an
automated information system to identify fishing boats and their activities in
Boosaaso, Puntland. The four UNODC projects are focused on the following:
prison reform, specifically the training and mentoring of pirate detainees in
Seychelles ($176,560); maritime law enforcement and security in northern
Kenya ($42,800); mentoring and vocational activities for pirate detainees at the
Shimo La Tewa and Kamiti prisons in Kenya ($145,520); and support for
activities of the task force of the Contact Group ($149,425). In the interim
period leading up to the 2 June meeting, the Board of the Trust Fund also
approved a hostage debriefing initiative of IMO and INTERPOL, a strategic
review of the Trust Fund and the provision of support to address fisheries crime
in Somalia for 18 months. The Chair of the Contact Group invited participating
States to submit expressions of interest to serve as members of the Trust Fund.
The Board members for 2016-2017 are as follows: Djibouti, Germany, Japan,
Kenya, the Netherlands (shared with Norway), Seychelles, Somalia, the United
Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
the United States of America. The Intergovernmental Authority on Development
was elected as observer.
34. The Trust Fund to Support Initiatives of States Countering Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia continues to provide financial assistance to strengthen the
judicial capacity of the regional states in combating piracy. Projects financed by
the Trust Fund are supporting a range of activities, including strengthening
regional capacity to prosecute persons suspected of acts of piracy, facilitating
minimum standards of treatment for prisoners and providing capacity -building
support to police departments in Kenya, Mauritius, Seychelles, Somalia and the

8/18

16-16886

S/2016/843

United Republic of Tanzania. Trust Fund projects are facilitating the safe
transfer of convicted pirates back to Somalia to serve their sentences and
enabling the rehabilitation of juvenile offenders to ensure that they acquire the
necessary skills for reintegration into society. Trust Fund projects also target
illicit financial flows derived from pirate activities, equip detainees and at -risk
young people in Somalia with livelihood skills and have already facilitated the
repatriation of 40 Somali nationals suspected of piracy who had been
apprehended by Maldives.
35. During the reporting period, notable achievements of the Trust Fund to
Support Initiatives of States Countering Piracy off the Coast of Somalia projects
included the registration of 4,468 fishers and 1,470 fishing vessels from eight
coastal districts in Puntland, 1,244 fishers and 156 vessels in Mudug and
Jubaland and 1,244 fishers in “Somaliland”. The registrations are enabling the
authorities to distinguish legitimate fishers from pirates. Trust Fund projects
contributed to an increase in the number of patrols in So mali waters, which
enabled the authorities in “Somaliland” to interdict at least 51 illegal fishing
expeditions and at least one illegal weapons shipment and the Boosaaso port
police in Puntland to interdict illegal shipments of fuel from Yemen. In
Mogadishu, a Trust Fund project allowed maritime police units to launch patrols
of Somali waters following a 20-year hiatus. Progress was slower in south
central Somalia, however, where political challenges and insecurity delayed a
project intended to strengthen the capacity of the judiciary to conduct piracy
trials and delayed the reconstruction of the Banadir court complex, which had
been attacked by Al-Shabaab in April 2013. Challenges also remain in the area
of piracy prosecutions, to which the Trust Fund allo cates approximately 19 per
cent of its funds. Although the past few years have seen progress in the arrest,
transfer, prosecution, detention and conviction of piracy suspects after trial,
pirate kingpins remain at large and criminal networks continue to op erate. Those
challenges underscore the importance of the international community ’s
continued support of the work of the Trust Fund in those vital areas.

C.

Cooperation on piracy-related prosecutions
36. The UNODC Global Maritime Crime Programme was established in 2009
to address human rights requirements as they pertain to the apprehension by
member States of suspected pirates at sea. The involvement of UNODC has
ensured that the arrest, detention and prosecution of suspected pirates in the
regional states, and their subsequent transfer to prisons in Somalia, are
undertaken in full respect of international human rights law. Human rights are at
the very core of the Programme’s work.
37. The UNODC Global Maritime Crime Programme continued to facilitate
the repatriation and transfer of Somalis convicted or acquitted of acts of piracy
as part of its efforts to alleviate the burden on prosecuting and detaining States,
while promoting closer ties with the families and home countries of pirates.
During the reporting period, the Programme repatriated nine Somali men from
Seychelles, eight of them following acquittals and one following the completion
of his sentence. UNODC supported the post-sentence repatriation of 14 Somali
men from Kenya to Somalia. It did not facilitate any prisoner transfers during
the reporting period. As piracy trials progress, more repatriations and transfers
are expected in the second half of 2016 and in 2017.

16-16886

9/18

S/2016/843

38. The UNODC Global Maritime Crime Programme supported regional
prosecution efforts through the provision of interpretation and court
transcription services, travel resources for prosecutors and witnesses to attend
trial and video facilities for remote witness testimony. UNODC also supported
vocational training for detainees and programming for preventing violent
extremism. Funding is being sought to continue the programme beyond 2016.
39. To date, the European Union Naval Force stationed off the coast of
Somalia has detained 154 suspected pirates, 143 of whom have been convicted.
A total of 48 men have been transferred for trial in Seychelles, 11 of whom have
been acquitted on appeal. In April 2016, the Supreme Court of Seychelles
returned a guilty verdict in the case concerning the Shane Hind and the Nave
Atropos vessels. All five Somalis were found guilty on two counts of piracy
dating back to January 2014. They were sentenced to 12 years ’ imprisonment for
each offence, with the sentences to run concurrently.
40. The last of the above-mentioned piracy cases in Seychelles was concluded
in July 2016 with the conviction of five Somali suspects who each received a
sentence of 12 years’ imprisonment. The case demonstrated the difficulty that
States face in securing foreign witnesses to testify at piracy prosecutions. T he
prosecution had made unsuccessful efforts, including a mutual legal assistance
request, to have the crew that was taken hostage brought in to testify, but other
testimony from the Japanese Maritime Self-Defence Force, the French navy onboard privately contracted armed security personnel and expert witnesses
assisted the court. Two cases are awaiting decisions on appeals, which should be
delivered by the Appeals Court later in 2016.
41. Following the successful appeal by the prosecution in December 2015, the
Supreme Court of Mauritius overturned not-guilty verdicts for 12 Somalis in the
case concerning the Jasmine vessel. The Supreme Court sent the matter back to
the Intermediate Court of Mauritius for further evidence to be heard. In July
2016, the Intermediate Court found the 12 Somalis guilty of piracy and indicted
that sentencing would occur on 11 August. On 11 August, they were sentenced
to five years’ imprisonment, but given the time served on remand and during
their appeal and a remission for good behaviour, they were released from prison
on that same day. UNODC is supporting their repatriation back to Somalia as
free men. That was the first and only piracy trial in Mauritius to date and was
the final European Union Naval Force regional piracy case.
42. The European Union Naval Force has now completed all current piracy
trials. Average sentences have ranged from 14 to 16 years, and the Naval Force
has assisted prosecutions in six countries, achieving an average conviction rate
of more than 92 per cent.
43. The only remaining case being heard in Europe was the case being tried in
France, concerning the 2011 attack on the French yacht Tribal Kat, in which a
French national was killed. In April 2016, the Court of Cassation found the
seven Somalis guilty of piracy and handed down sentences ranging from 6 to
15 years’ imprisonment, with the two Somalis deemed to be the recruiters
receiving the longest sentences.

D.

Naval activities off the coast of Somalia
44. During the reporting period, international naval missions from the
European Union, NATO and the Combined Maritime Forces coalition continued

10/18

16-16886

S/2016/843

to ensure security at sea by protecting merchant vessels and deterring pirate
activity in the Gulf of Aden and the Indian Ocean, as authorized in resolution
2246 (2015). In addition, individual States Members of the United Nations,
including China, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of) and the Russian Federation,
have continued to uphold security at sea by protecting merchant vessels and
deterring pirate activity off the coast of the Horn of Africa. The annex to the
present report lists additional contributions to the fight against piracy from
additional Member States.
45. The European Union Naval Force continued to deter piracy by means of its
operation Atalanta, which typically involves up to five warships, three maritime
patrol aircraft and more than 1,000 personnel, covering an area stretching from
the Red Sea to the Arabian Sea into the Indian Ocean down to th e Mozambique
Channel. Since the operation began in 2008, the Naval Force has successfully
protected World Food Programme ships delivering more than 1.3 million tons of
food and aid to Somali ports, as well as vessels working in support of the
African Union Mission in Somalia, such that no ship operating for either
organization has been seized by pirates. The Naval Force has reinforced its
piracy deterrence posture and presence by maintaining operations close to shore
and engaging with coastal communities. The European Union is discussing
proposals for a two-year extension of the operation’s mandate to better support
that comprehensive approach.
46. During the reporting period, NATO, through its operation Ocean Shield,
continued the periodic deployment of naval assets and maritime patrol aircraft
and the coordination of its activities at the tactical level with other counter piracy stakeholders, including the European Union Naval Force and the
Combined Maritime Forces. The NATO shipping centre in the United Ki ngdom
continued to support merchant shipping in the high -risk areas of the Indian
Ocean through the provision of timely maritime security information. NATO
continued to chair coordination meetings of the Shared Awareness and
Deconfliction mechanism on a rotational basis with the Combined Maritime
Forces and the European Union Naval Force. At the NATO summit held in
Warsaw in July 2016, Heads of State and Government of States members of
NATO agreed that operation Ocean Shield had achieved its military strate gic
objectives and resolved to terminate it at the end of 2016, while stressing that
NATO would remain engaged in the fight against piracy by maintaining
maritime situational awareness and close links with other international counter piracy actors.
47. The European Union Naval Force, NATO and the Combined Maritime
Forces presented the findings of their latest piracy threat assessment to the
Contact Group meeting held in Seychelles in June 2016. They indicated that the
combined effect of economics and demographics was such that there remained a
population of young men in Somalia willing to engage in piracy if and when
conditions allowed and that at least one pirate organization intended to continue
to conduct acts of maritime crime. The threat assessment also affirmed that,
historically, Somali pirates had tended to attack opportunistic targets and that it
was thus not possible to predict where future potential attacks might occur.
Nevertheless, the threat assessment suggested that if the collective response
mechanisms were maintained, it was likely that piracy would continue to be
deterred successfully off the coast of Somalia.
48. The threat assessment also identified the limitations of the current
international efforts to eliminate the intent and capabilitie s of would-be pirates

16-16886

11/18

S/2016/843

on land, given that piracy is a relatively simple practice with a low entry
threshold of requiring only basic equipment, such as a skiff and small arms. The
combined efforts of international military forces and the commercial shipping
industry would therefore have the greatest effect if they could deny criminals
the opportunity to engage in piracy. The continued presence of the multinational
counter-piracy forces, coupled with the shipping industry’s continued
application of best management practices, and the imposition of the rule of law
would continue to play a crucial role in denying opportunities to would -be
pirates.

E.

International capacity-building
49. During the reporting period, international capacity-building efforts focused
on reforming and strengthening law enforcement measures, developing policy
frameworks and regional information-sharing. A series of technical meetings
conducted in October 2015 by the Indian Ocean Forum on Maritime Crime
identified gaps in the legal and practical capacity of States of the region to
combat maritime crimes such as drug trafficking, the illicit trade of wildlife and
forest resources and trafficking in persons. At the technical meetings, a lack of
coordinated bilateral and multilateral action in combating such crimes was
identified, and States were urged to build greater capacity for maritime law
enforcement bodies charged with front-line responses. The inaugural meeting of
the fisheries crime group of the Forum was held in October 2015, in partnership
with the Secure Fisheries programme and the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission.
The group aims at prioritizing areas requiring urgent attention, including
intelligence-gathering, information-sharing and the strengthening of regional
and international conventions. In March 2016, a prosecutors’ network was
established as part of the Forum to help to enhance cooperation among Indian
Ocean States in investigating and prosecuting piracy and other maritime crimes.
50. As part of its anti-piracy capacity-building initiative, the mobile education
team of the multinational Maritime Security Centre of Excellence delivered a
sea safety training programme to participants from four States of the region
during the Cutlass Express exercise, which was held between 30 January and
6 February 2016. The training exercise benefited 56 officials, 24 from Djibouti,
11 from Kenya, 10 from Rwanda and 11 from the Sudan.
51. In an effort to provide greater clarity to the legislative framework for
privately contracted armed security personnel, the UNODC Global Maritime
Crime Programme has worked closely with the shipping and security industries
to develop a procedural manual that provides a framework for regulating armed
guards at sea, which is due to be published in the second half of 2016.
52. IMO has continued to assist signatory States to the Code of Conduct
concerning the Repression of Piracy and Armed Robbery against Ship s in the
Western Indian Ocean and the Gulf of Aden (Djibouti Code of Conduct) in
implementing capacity-building activities in cooperation with the NATO
maritime interdiction operational training centre, the European Union, UNODC
and other entities. In November 2015, a regional training centre in Djibouti was
formally opened. IMO is also currently working with signatory States to expand
the scope of the Djibouti Code of Conduct to address wider issues of maritime
security, such as countering illegal fishing and preventing the trafficking of
drugs, weapons and people.

12/18

16-16886

S/2016/843

53. Over the course of the six-year period from 2011 to 2016, INTERPOL has
been implementing the Critical Maritime Routes Law Enforcement Agency
Project with the aim of strengthening the forensic and investigative capacities of
targeted recipients, with an emphasis on financial investigations and the
prosecution of acts of piracy and other maritime -based organized crime. The
project has benefited nine western Indian Ocean countries, namely, Comoro s,
Djibouti, Kenya, Madagascar, Mauritius, Seychelles, Somalia, the United
Republic of Tanzania and Yemen.
54. Following calls by the international community to target the financing,
money-laundering and support structures on which the piracy networks surv ive,
INTERPOL has designed a project that aims at developing and enhancing the
financial investigative capacity of member States of the Common Market for
Eastern and Southern Africa and Somalia. The project is focused on providing
different levels of training and capacity-building to all competent law
enforcement agencies combating money-laundering and terrorism financing
activities stemming from maritime related crimes and will be implemented over
a three-year period.
55. INTERPOL is in the process of implementing a hostage debriefing
initiative that aims at interviewing seafarers who were kidnapped and held
hostage by Somali pirates. Information obtained from the debriefing of released
hostages will help to build a stronger understanding of pirate network s,
including determining the clan affiliations of pirates and evaluating the
relevance of other evidence identified by released hostages.

F.

Emerging issues in the Indian Ocean rim
56. The Indian Ocean Forum on Maritime Crime, which was launched in
January 2015, has established itself as a regional network for Indian Ocean
States in tackling maritime crime. It is supported by the UNODC Global
Maritime Crime Programme as part of the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2182 (2014) and 2244 (2015). Representatives of the Forum
participated at the African Union extraordinary summit on maritime safety and
security, in February 2015, and at the thirteenth United Nations Congress on
Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, in April 2015.

VI. International legal and judicial issues, including human
rights considerations
57. During the reporting period, there were no major developments on legal
and judicial issues. The fifth session of the United Nations intergovernmental
working group on private military and security companies, which was scheduled
to take place in May 2016, was postponed to December 2016 at the request of
Member States. There have been no new developments since June 2015, when
the Maritime Safety Committee of IMO updated its guidance on privately
contracted armed security personnel on-board ships to take into account the
publication of the International Organization for Standardizat ion Guidelines for
Private Maritime Security Companies. IMO work is ongoing to help signatory
States to the Djibouti Code of Conduct to enhance their legal systems.

16-16886

13/18

S/2016/843

VII. Observations
58. I welcome the significant progress made by Somalia and the inter national
community in fighting piracy off the coast of Somalia. I note, in particular, the
milestones achieved in deterring attacks against large commercial vessels. These
achievements are a testament to the unprecedented levels of international
cooperation in addressing this common threat to international peace and
security. I commend the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, the
international naval forces and the Federal and regional authorities for their
continued efforts in this endeavour.
59. I welcome the significant achievements made by the Federal Government
of Somalia, as well as the regional states, in its commendable efforts to develop
governance mechanisms for tackling piracy. I note with appreciation the
ongoing efforts to revise the Maritime Code and establish a maritime
administration department under the Ministry of Ports and Marine Transport. I
also note the implementation of the Somali Maritime Resource and Security
Strategy, the establishment of the coastguard and the Federal G overnment’s
commitment to establishing a transparent fishery licensing regime and legal and
resource-sharing frameworks, while recognizing the special status of
“Somaliland”. Recognizing that these initiatives and other activities aimed at
preventing a resurgence in piracy remain fragile and nascent, the United Nations
stands ready to assist the Federal Government of Somalia, as needed.
60. I remain concerned, however, about the continuing attacks against smaller
vessels and the resilience of the criminal networks behind piracy. Failure to curb
the reach of these networks could result in a resurgence of attacks against large
commercial vessels. Current threat assessments indicate that a resurgence of
piracy is more likely if the international naval presence dissipates and other
deterrents, such as private security on ships and best management practices, are
relaxed. The migration of refugees by sea from Yemen may also provide would be pirates with attractive targets. I therefore urge continued internationa l naval
presence in the region and continued vigilance in terms of private security and
adherence to best management practices.
61. It is particularly important to direct collective international efforts at
tackling the root causes of piracy off the coast of Somalia, in particular poverty
in coastal areas. In that vein, the continued presence of foreign fishing vessels
within sight of the Somali coast continues to spur public anger and discontent
among coastal communities. FAO and Oceans Beyond Piracy, in t heir 2015
and 2016 reports, both confirmed the presence of foreign boats as close as
10 nautical miles from the Somali coast. The absence of a mandate for
international navies to monitor fishing activities in Somali waters, coupled with
the absence of an effective communication strategy between the navies, the
Federal Government, the regional states and other stakeholders are
unfortunately contributing to the perception among many coastal communities
that international navies are protecting illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing. The results of a recent survey by the One Earth Future Foundation
indicated that many Somalis remained sympathetic to piracy and that piracy
may again receive increased support should economic prospects remain dismal.
The imperative to better understand and combat illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing in Somali waters is of immediate importance. I commend
UNODC, FAO and the Secure Fisheries programme for their efforts to address
the issue.

14/18

16-16886

S/2016/843

62. The international response to piracy off the coast of Somalia has revolved
around the twin axes of deterring pirate attacks and prosecuting pirates. Long term success will not be achieved, however, unless there is a sustained
international effort to target the financing, money-laundering and support
structures which the piracy networks depend on to survive. It is therefore
essential to continue support for the work of the law enforcement task force of
the Contact Group at the international level. It is important to align the
international community’s objectives with the Federal Government’s strategic
goals as outlined in the recently launched national development plan, as well as
the goals of the regional administrations. The Indian Ocean Forum on Maritime
Crime offers Indian Ocean States a much needed opportunity to coordinate their
responses to maritime crime, in particular through its prosecutors ’ network,
which enables the effective prosecution of transnational maritime crime across
the Indian Ocean region.
63. I reiterate my call to the Federal Government of Somalia to implement
international standards by becoming a State party to the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, strengthening its law
enforcement capacity and enhancing collaboration with other c ountries,
including on extradition agreements. It is important to promote the work of the
entities that continue to provide economic opportunities and are helping to
create alternative onshore livelihoods for would -be pirates.
64. I note with appreciation the decision of Seychelles to continue its
leadership role as Chair of the Contact Group for the period 2016 -2017.
65. I reiterate my call for the immediate and unconditional release of all
seafarers and other innocent civilians being held hostage in Somal ia so that they
can rejoin their families. I commend the work of the Hostage Support
Partnership in that regard. I call upon the Somali authorities and all relevant
stakeholders to redouble their efforts to secure that outcome. In the same vein,
I renew my call to Governments, industry and humanitarian organizations to
help to alleviate the suffering of piracy survivors and their families, including
through contributing to the Piracy Survivor Family Fund of the Contact Group.
66. The ultimate solution to the problem of piracy off the coast of Somalia lies
in a stable and secure future for Somalia. As such, the piracy problem must not
be tackled in isolation, but rather as part of a well -coordinated, international
support package for the Federal Government of Somalia and the regional states
to ensure, among other things, a stable political transition in 2016, a stronger
security sector and the creation of economic opportunities, especially for young
people and other vulnerable communities, with a key emphasi s on national
ownership. The United Nations remains committed to supporting the efforts to
eliminate the threat of piracy off the coast of Somalia.

16-16886

15/18

S/2016/843

Annex
Bilateral contributions for the implementation of
Security Council resolution 2246 (2015) made during the
reporting period, as submitted by contributing countries
Italy
Italy participated in operation Atalanta of the European Union Naval
Force, including by deploying a force commander from October 2015 to March
2016 and seconding three units of civilian personnel to the European Union
Mission on Regional Maritime Capacity-Building in the Horn of Africa.

Latvia
Latvia has participated in operation Atalanta since 2011 and currently has
one staff officer deployed to the operation. Latvia is also participating in the
financing of operation Atalanta, in accordance with the Athena mechanism,
which is a European Union agreed mechanism for handling common costs
relating to European Union military operations.

Madagascar
Madagascar sustained its maritime surveillance capacities and participated
in an international naval exercise organized by the navy of the United States of
America in Seychelles in January 2016. The establishment of a regional
maritime information fusion centre in Madagascar has been supported by the
European Union-funded programme to promote regional maritime security. In
paragraph 10 of the Djibouti Declaration on the Safety and Marine Security in
the Eastern and Southern African and Indian Ocean Region of 5 May 2016, the
international community is called upon to support the development of a regional
maritime surveillance mechanism through the operationalization of the regional
maritime information fusion centre and the regional coordination operational
centre in Seychelles.

Oman
Oman recently established a maritime security centre and is strengthening
cooperation with countries involved in the fight against piracy.

Sri Lanka
The navy of Sri Lanka patrolled the exclusive economic zone and the sea
lanes of communications south of Sri Lanka to deter acts of piracy. In addition,
surveillance activities and the escorting of vessels conducted by other
multilateral navies resulted in the high-risk area being shifted westward to the
65th parallel from the 78th parallel. The navy regularly conducted training
exercises, including anti-piracy operations, with such navies when ships made
port calls to Colombo harbour. Sri Lanka is facilitating the operations of armed
sea marshals, on-board security teams of merchant ships, at the outer port limits

16/18

16-16886

S/2016/843

off Galle and Colombo harbours and providing the sea marshals with safe
custody of arms and ammunition, among other things. The operations have
complemented other counter-piracy efforts off the coast of Somalia.

Sweden
Sweden has continued its support in countering piracy in the region by
seconding one person to the European Union Mission on Regional Maritime
Capacity-Building in the Horn of Africa and stationing approximately five staff
officers at the headquarters of operation Atalanta in Northwood, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, since 2011. Sweden has also
continued to contribute approximately 10 personnel, including a deputy
commanding officer, to the European Union military training mission in
Somalia.

Turkey
Turkey assumed command of the Combined Maritime Forces Task Force
151 for the period between 27 August and 21 December 2015. During that
period, the Turkish battleship Gemlink served as the taskforce’s flagship vessel.
In addition, the Turkish warship Gaziantep escorted the Sea Amore, which was
transporting humanitarian aid cargo to Somalia.

16-16886

17/18

S/2016/843

Map

18/18

16-16886
