S/PV.8886

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8886th meeting

Thursday, 21 October 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Omamo/Mr. Kiboino . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kenya)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Tirumurti
Mr. Brophy
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Mr. Abarry
Ms. Juul
Mr. Kuzmin
Ms. King
Mr. Ladeb
Lord Ahmad
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Dang

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security (S/2021/827)
Letter dated 13 October 2021 from the Permanent Representative of Kenya to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2021/875)

In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the Security Council
addressed to Permanent Representatives of Security Council members dated 7 May 2020
(S/2020/372), which was agreed in light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic, this official record of the Security Council will be supplemented by
a compilation of annexes (S/2021/886) containing the statements submitted by interested
non-members of the Council.

21-29844 (E)
*2129844*

S/PV.8886

Women and peace and security

21/10/2021

The agenda was adopted.

I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary General
and the Ministers and other high-level representatives.
Their presence today underscores the importance of the
subject matter under discussion.

Women and peace and security

I now give the floor His Excellency SecretaryGeneral António Guterres.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

Report of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security (S/2021/827)
Letter dated 13 October 2021 from the
Permanent Representative of Kenya
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2021/875)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Bulgaria, Canada, Costa
Rica, Cyprus, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, Guatemala, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, Morocco, Namibia,
Nepal, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the
Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Slovenia, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Arab
Emirates to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Sima Sami
Bahous, Executive Director of UN-Women; Ms. Bineta
Diop, African Union Special Envoy for Women, Peace
and Security; and Ms. Celia Umenza Velasco, Legal
Coordinator for the Indigenous Reservation of Tacueyo
and member of the Association of Indigenous Cabildos
of the North of Cauca.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite Her
Excellency Ms. Stella Ronner-Grubačić, Ambassador
for Gender and Diversity, European External Action
Service, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2021/827, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security,
and document S/2021/875, which contains the text of
a letter dated 13 October 2021 from the Permanent
Representative of Kenya to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General.
2/30

The Secretary-General: We just came from the
exhibition you mentioned before the start of the meeting,
Madam President. Indeed, we saw true women heroes.
I think their struggle, commitment and courage is an
inspiration for us all. I would say that nothing could
better start off our debate than the testimony of this
group of women heroes.
Seen through the lenses of talented women
photographers, the exhibition — In Their Hands:
Women Taking Ownership of Peace — vividly brings
to life the inspiring stories of women around the world
who are dedicating their lives to the most important and
consequential cause of all, peace. From the safety of this
Chamber, we discuss and debate pathways of peace for
countries around the world. But the women portrayed
in the exhibition are on the front lines of the fight for
peace. They are peacebuilders, change-makers and
activists, defenders of human rights, decision-makers
and leaders. They are mediating and negotiating
with armed groups, implementing peace agreements
and pushing for peaceful transitions. And they are
fighting for women’s rights and social cohesion in
their communities.
Yet, too often, women remain on the periphery
of formal peace processes and are largely excluded
from rooms where decisions are made. Today women’s
leadership is a cause; tomorrow it must be the norm.
We can no longer exclude one half of humankind from
international peace and security.
(spoke in French)
As I said to the General Assembly last month (see
A/76/PV.3), the time has come for truth. We face the
biggest avalanche of crises in generations. Our world
is moving backwards, and more and more rapidly.
Military coups are coming back. Power-grabbing is with
us again. A new arms race is being launched, and the
nuclear threat is at its highest level in almost 40 years.
As a percentage of gross domestic product, military
spending last year saw the biggest annual increase
since 2009. It now stands at around $2 trillion per year,
21-29844

21/10/2021

Women and peace and security

tying up funds that could be spent on development at a
time they are needed the most.
Those are not separate issues. Conflict prevention
and disarmament are precisely at the heart of the
movements for peace led by women for more than
a century. And, as this year’s report illustrates
(S/2021/827), there is a direct link between increased
investment in weapons and increased insecurity and
inequalities affecting women.
(spoke in English)
The power imbalance between men and women
remains the most stubborn and persistent of all
inequalities. It finds expression in many ways: in the
rising rates of violence and misogyny that women
and girls face in every society; in the extreme underrepresentation of women in decision-making positions;
and certainly in the myriad challenges faced by
women in situations of conflict. In every humanitarian
emergency, the clock on women’s rights has not stopped;
it is moving backwards.
In Myanmar, where women have long been a
force for peace — including in the civil disobedience
movement — a number of women’s organizations have
had to close their operations due to security reasons
after the military coup. Many are now continuing their
efforts underground. In Ethiopia, we hear chilling
reports of sexual violence being used as a weapon of
war — an outrage. Despite courageous efforts, Yemeni
women continue to be excluded from the overall
political process by the warring parties, and the latest
Government failed to include a single woman minister,
something unseen in 20 years. In Mali, after two coups
in nine months, the space for women’s rights is not just
shrinking, but closing. And in Afghanistan, girls and
women are seeing a rapid reversal of the rights they
achieved in recent decades, including their right to a
seat in the classroom.
We need to fight back and turn the clock forward
for every woman and girl. That commitment is at the
heart of my report Our Common Agenda as well as my
call to action for human rights. We want to fast-track
women’s full and equal participation in every aspect of
life. That includes across peace processes and political
transitions. Women represented only 23 per cent of
delegates in peace processes led or co-led by the United
Nations last year. Even getting to that point required
innovation, persistence and leadership. Sometimes, I
would also say stubbornness.

S/PV. 8886

But we are working to accelerate those gains. As
we have seen in Libya and Syria, for example, measures
including bold targets, inclusive principles and
incentives can be a powerful way to increase women’s
participation in mediation and peace processes. I
am committed to expanding measures like those
everywhere I can.
In Colombia, women’s organizations are key
partners of the United Nations Verification Mission,
and we are working closely with them to monitor
the implementation of the peace agreement. And
in Afghanistan, the United Nations is staying and
delivering and will continue to promote and defend the
rights of women and girls in all our engagements with
the de facto Taliban authorities. We will not stop until
girls can go back to school and women can return to
their jobs and participate in public life.
As part of our Action for Peacekeeping Initiative,
we are also investing in partnerships with local women
leaders and peacebuilders and increasing the number
of women across our peacekeeping operations. Since
January 2018, the percentage of women staff officers
and military experts has risen from 8 per cent to nearly
18 per cent today, and from 20 to 30 per cent among
individual police officers. We also have more women
leading our field missions than ever before; we now have
parity among our heads or deputy heads of missions.
And we are not stopping there. Increasing women’s
representation and leadership across every aspect of the
United Nations peace activities is critical to improving
the delivery of our mandate and better representing the
communities we serve.
But we need the Council’s support in three ways:
partnerships, protection and participation.
First, the Council must support our work to
strengthen and deepen our partnerships with local
women leaders and their networks, in line with my call
to action on women transforming peace and security.
They need to be able to meaningfully engage in peace
and political processes.
Secondly, the Council should help us protect
women human rights defenders and activists. The
heroes captured in the photo exhibit are risking their
lives to build peace in their communities. They deserve
protection as they carry out this essential work.
And thirdly, the Council must work with us
to promote women’s full, equal and meaningful

21-298443/30

S/PV.8886

Women and peace and security

participation in peace talks, peacebuilding and political
systems as countries transition to peace. We need full
gender parity — including through the establishment
of ambitious quotas — across elections, security
sector reform, disarmament, demobilization and
justice systems.
We know it can be done. Last month, the Deputy
Secretary-General travelled to Somalia to support the
30 per cent quota for women in the upcoming elections
there. Upon her return, she was met with expressions of
support from Council members. The time has come to
transform these words of support into action, not just
in Somalia but across all countries under discussion in
the Council.
Women will no longer accept reversals of their
rights. They should not have to — in countries in conflict
or anywhere else. For our part, the United Nations
will double down on truly inclusive peacemaking and
put women’s participation and rights at the centre of
everything we do, everywhere we do it.
The best way to build peace is through inclusion,
and the best way to honour the inspiring commitment
and bravery of women peacemakers is to open doors
to their meaningful participation. Let us turn the clock
forward on women’s rights and give half of humankind
the opportunity to build the peace we all seek.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Bahous.
Ms. Bahous: It is an honour to address the Security
Council to present the Secretary-General’s report on
women and peace and security (S/2021/827). In these
dark days of multiple crises, this topic is more important
than ever. As I start my tenure as Executive Director of
UN-Women, I look forward to working with the Council
to strengthen and accelerate the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda.
It has been 21 years since the Security Council
adopted resolution 1325 (2000) in this very Chamber.
Yet we still meet to discuss the limited progress made.
The doors that resolution 1325 (2000) was meant to
burst open have let in only a glimmer of light. But as
women, as peacebuilders, as development practitioners,
we take that glimmer and we fight.
As the Secretary-General has said, the United
Nations intends to push back, double down, and
4/30

21/10/2021

move forward. His report before the Council today
is rich in evidence. Let me focus on two of the most
salient lessons from those findings. First, we need to
significantly increase funding for the women and peace
and security agenda and, conversely, curb military
spending. Secondly, we need to do more to support
women’s meaningful participation in peace and
security processes.
On the need to curb military spending, if we want
to see a paradigm shift in the way we confront peace
and security issues, we need to take a hard look at
the levels and trajectory of global military spending.
Curbing military spending has been a chief strategic
objective of the women’s movement for peace. It was a
key objective of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action in 1995; it was reaffirmed recently during
the Generation Equality Forum; and it is essential to
achieving Sustainable Development Goal 16. The
evidence clearly shows that high levels of military
spending in post-conflict settings increase the risk of
renewed conflict. It also shows that investing in gender
equality has a high return in peace dividends.
Yet we continue to overspend in the former and
underinvest in the latter. Last year, global military
expenditure increased by 2.6 per cent, even in the face
of the contraction in the global economy of 3.3 per cent
and the competing demands of the coronavirus disease.
That is nearly $2 trillion spent in the same year when
all economies, whether in peace or conflict, struggled
to meet people’s basic needs.
In stark contrast, in humanitarian appeals, sectors
that addressed gender-based violence and sexual and
reproductive health services are funded at only 33 per
cent and 43 per cent, respectively, compared to an
average funding of 61 per cent for the overall appeal.
None of the ceasefire agreements reached between 2018
and 2020 included the prohibition of sexual violence,
and the percentage of peace agreements with gender
provisions stands at 28.6 per cent.
At this critical juncture, we have to review
prioritization. Thriving nations are equal nations, and
equal nations are more peaceful nations. But people
cannot thrive without investment in their basic needs,
such as health care and social protection. Conflictaffected countries spend two to three times more on
defence than they do on health care. The opposite is
true in most stable countries. When State support is
21-29844

21/10/2021

Women and peace and security

absent or inadequate, women rely even more on their
local organizations.
Yet the share of bilateral aid supporting feminist,
women-led and women’s rights organizations and
movements in fragile or conflict-affected countries
is a mere 0.4 per cent. Furthermore, there has been a
striking increase in the fragility of funding for these
organizations. More than 80 per cent of local civil
society organizations working on the front lines of
crises reported this year that their organization’s
existence was at risk due to lack of funding, up from
the 30 per cent reported last year.
There is no better predictor of our ability to advance
gender equality or reduce violence against women the
strength of the women’s movement. We cannot expect
women’s organizations to perform miracles if they
do not have enough funds to keep their lights on and
if their leaders are under constant threat. There is
an urgent need to accelerate both programmatic and
institutional financing.
One pathway to shift the spending paradigms is to
increase the number of women in elected and appointed
posts. I ask the international community to do more to
support the participation of women in decision-making
on defence and security sector expenditures, to expand
the use of gender-budgeting tools and programming to
influence military spending levels, and to strengthen
citizens’ oversight of military budgeting through
enhanced transparency and accountability.
My second request builds on the Secretary-General’s
call for partnerships, protection and participation,
which is also a central part of our common agenda
and a renewed social contract. Women’s equal and
meaningful participation in peace and security is the
central goal of resolution 1325 (2000), yet we continue
to fall short.
Quotas and other special measures are our best
mechanisms to accelerate positive change to increase
representation. The report shows us that women’s
parliamentary representation in conflict and postconflict countries doubles where there are legislated
quotas. The United Nations is committed to promoting
the use of quotas, not just in politics but in peace
processes and other relevant contexts.
Other recommended approaches include inclusive
selection measures, independent delegations of women
representatives, political commitment by Member

S/PV. 8886

States for processes they support, and investment in
better data collection, gender analysis and monitoring
of results across all peace efforts.
It is clear that women’s participation and their
protection are linked. We simply cannot have one
without the other. We cannot expect women to build
peace if their lives are constantly under threat. The
report provides examples of the violence committed
against women and girls in conflict settings and refugee
camps, much of it conducted with almost complete
impunity. This includes instances of targeted violence
against women in public life who are fighting for peace
or for their rights.
In Colombia, 10 of the 16 members of the Special
Forum on Gender, which monitors the implementation of
the gender provisions of the peace agreement, reported
threats made directly against them, as did women who
participated in the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum in
2020. The rapid takeover of Afghanistan by the Taliban
was preceded by a wave of killings of women civil
society activists and journalists and the targeting of
academics, vaccinators and women judges.
This is happening in other countries too. In 2020,
the United Nations verified 35 cases of killings of
women human rights defenders, journalists and trade
unionists, but this number is a significant undercount
and comes from only seven conflict-affected countries
with data.
We are falling short of providing protection to these
women, even those who risk their lives to collaborate
with the United Nations. This ranges from properly
assessing the risks and monitoring threats to planning
for contingencies, making rapid and flexible funding
available for individual cases, ensuring that women are
part of delivering and planning humanitarian aid and
taking all necessary measures to enhance digital and
physical security.
The Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund,
which has already supported more than 400 women’s
organizations since 2016, is working on opening a
special window for such cases. This could help to pay
for evacuation and resettlement costs, counselling and
mental health-care services and necessary equipment,
from computer software to security cameras.
In this context, again, we need Governments to
step up. We rely on Governments to open doors for
these women and facilitate and expedite the approval

21-298445/30

S/PV.8886

Women and peace and security

of applications for asylum, temporary relocation or
protected status owing to gender-based persecution.
We rely on the Security Council to support the work
of women’s civil society organizations, condemn,
investigate and punish attacks against them and review
the national laws that may be constraining their civic
space and curtailing their activities and funding.
When we act together, we can accomplish
transformative change. From Mexico City to Paris
this year, the resounding expression of political and
financial support for gender equality galvanized by the
Generation Equality Forum could not have come at a
better time. Part of that movement to advance gender
equality and all that it can bring was the new Compact
on Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian
Action, whose areas of work will be directly supportive
of the Secretary-General’s goals.
I invite participants today to join the 153 signatories
and make concrete commitments to advance our common
cause over the next five years. I hope that they feel — and
share — my sense of urgency to make progress in the
women and peace and security agenda. If we want to
see a tangible difference in the lives of women and girls
and a paradigm shift in the way we confront peace and
security issues, we need Governments to step up — and
not just the Governments in countries that are affected
by conflict, but also their regional neighbours, their
trading partners, their military allies, their donors, and
most of all, the Security Council.
For too long we have seen vast military spending
that is in bitter contrast to the limited investment in
other areas. For too long we have seen the violence
targeting women and their rights and, at the same time,
the extreme marginalization and exclusion of those
women from the very places where they can drive
change. Surely the time has come to say “enough”.
Surely there is hope. Today’s report recommends
solutions. I look forward to working with all Council
members and others in supporting the implementation
of those solutions.
The President: I thank Ms. Bahous for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Diop.
Ms. Diop: I thank Ambassador Raychelle Omamo,
Cabinet Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Kenya, for
presiding over today’s meeting. Let me also salute the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, His Excellency
6/30

21/10/2021

Mr. António Guterres, and all members of the Security
Council as well as civil society representatives.
First and foremost, I would like to congratulate
Kenya on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council and thank you, Madam President, for
convening today’s open debate on the women and peace
and security agenda in commemoration of the twentyfirst anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000).
Twenty-one years after resolution 1325 (2000) was
adopted, much progress has been made, but conflict
and its impact on women and girls continues and may
in fact be increasing. We have seen it most recently in
Afghanistan. In the Sahel region and in such countries
as Mozambique, Ethiopia and Somalia, women and
girls are at heightened risk of sexual violence and in
West Africa, the loss of already precarious livelihood.
Several countries are undergoing transition. Will
women be afforded an opportunity for their meaningful
participation and representation?
The evidence is clear: women’s participation in
peace negotiation, peacebuilding and post-conflict
recovery is not only a matter of justice and rights, but it
is a direct benefit for the success and sustainability of
those processes. In September of this year, the African
Union Commission released the Chairperson’s second
report from the Continental Results Framework for
Reporting on the Women, Peace and Security Agenda
in Africa, which presents the status of implementation
of the agenda in Africa. I would like to focus my
briefing on the findings from the report that align
with this year’s open debate theme: “Investing in
women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding”, and the
Secretary-General’s report on women and peace and
security (S/2021/827). I would speak on two pertinent
issues — investing in local women peacebuilders and
the implementation of national action plans.
The history of conflict and peace in Africa has
many examples in which local women have played a
critical role in conflict prevention and peacebuilding,
yet their actions have not been followed by sustained
investment. I offer two examples. First, the Mano River
Women’s Peace Network in West Africa was recognized
by the General Assembly with the United Nations Prize
for Human Rights in 2003. Despite that recognition, the
network has largely gone unfunded. Secondly, together
with the United Nations Deputy Secretary-General,
my sister, Amina J. Mohammed, I have visited Mali,
the Niger, eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
21-29844

21/10/2021

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8886

South Sudan, Somalia, just to name a few. In all these
countries, women peacebuilders are struggling using
their limited resources to fund their initiatives.

First is the imperative to create a flexible
funding mechanism to support the women in
peacebuilding initiative.

Allow me to also underscore the need to raise
our concern on women human rights defenders and
peacebuilders who are at constant risk of reprisal and
intimidation and are being denied their freedom of
speech and expression. Nevertheless, they are key actors
in driving the change we would like to see in the women
and peace and security agenda. That example serves
to reinforce the fact that the systematic integration
and resourcing of women and their agency and their
leadership role in collective peace, mediation and
development efforts must be increased and prioritized.
Investing in the Women’s Initiative is therefore the
most efficient way to counter threats and conflict.

The second recommendation is ownership
and coherent implementation of the development,
humanitarian and peace agenda enshrined in Agenda
2063, the Sustainable Development Goals and the
Generation Equality Forum. I think that that instrument
will address some of the root causes of conflict if it
is implemented.

Africa has the most robust framework for the
advancement of the women and peace and security
agenda. The African continent also leads in the world
in the development of national action plans, amounting
to 54.5 per cent of national action plans globally, as
of 20 December 2020. Despite the existence of strong
progressive and articulated continental policies, women
and girls continue to bear the brunt of conflict on our
continent. The African Union Continental Results
Framework 2020 report shows that most of the women
and peace and security frameworks and national
action plans in Africa have not translated into national
development plans and budgets and are still largely
dependent on external funding for implementation.
The recommendation of the Secretary-General for
the allocation of 15 per cent of all development funds
to activities that seek to bring about gender equality
and women’s empowerment is yet to be achieved.
The increase in military expenditure has come at the
expense of investment in human security, with negative
repercussions for women and girls, especially during the
coronavirus disease pandemic. Efforts have been made
to increase the number of women peacekeepers — cases
in point are is Kenya, Ethiopia and Senegal, just to
name a few.

Thirdly, we must leverage the existing platforms,
such as the African Women Leaders Network and the
Network of African Women in Conflict Prevention
and Mediation to enhance women’s participation and
representation in mediation and governance mechanisms.
Fourthly, we must accelerate the gender reform of
national defence and security forces to ensure women’s
meaningful participation, leadership and deployment to
peacekeeping missions.
Finally, we welcome the Photoville travelling
exhibition that will build bridges between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding missions and their host communities.
We hope to see the Photoville in Africa very soon.
The President: I thank Ms. Diop for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Umenza Velasco.
Ms. Umenza Velasco (spoke in Spanish): I am Celia
Umenza Velasco. I am an indigenous woman activist
dedicated to my people, our territory, the environment
and the cause of peace. I bring participants greetings
from the spirits of the natural world.

We welcome that. However, my recent visit to
Somalia demonstrated the need to better equip women
peacekeepers with the necessary tools and allow them
to pursue leadership roles in field operations.

I am honoured to address the Security Council
today on behalf of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security, as well as indigenous women and
women in all their diversity — peasant farmers, women
of African descent, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender,
queer and intersex (LGBTQI) persons, refugee and
migrant women, women with disabilities and women
from countries around the world who suffer from war,
poverty and discrimination. On that note, I want to
express my solidarity with the women and LGBTQI
people of Afghanistan, who continue to risk their lives
fighting for their rights and an equal place in Afghan
society. We stand with them.

As I conclude, I wish to put forward a few
recommendations for the kind consideration of the
Security Council.

Colombia remains one of the world’s most dangerous
countries for defenders of human rights and land and
territorial rights. Attacks on human rights defenders,

21-298447/30

S/PV.8886

Women and peace and security

especially women, LGBTQI persons and peasantfarmer, Afro-descendant and indigenous leaders
continue, including in response to the recent protests in
Colombia against extreme inequality, violence and the
limited implementation of the peace accord. On average,
at least one indigenous defender is killed every week.
In my territory, Cauca, three indigenous women leaders
with whom I worked were killed in 2020. Their brutal
murders illustrate how women often pay a terrible price
for their leadership.
For an indigenous person, land means everything to
us. We are nourished by it, and it is a part of our identity
and our history. Indigenous communities oppose
logging, mining, agribusiness and other large-scale
extractive and infrastructure projects because they
threaten the environment and deplete our natural
resources. Many such projects are actively supported by
the Government of Colombia. Indigenous defenders in
Colombia are viewed as a threat because we challenge
powerful economic interests. My people are killed for
protecting our waterways, forests, flowers and fauna,
when their courage and dedication should be held up as
a model in the non-violent struggle for territorial rights.
Violence against our communities also demonstrates
the devastating impact of militarized responses to
social crises. The only State presence that we have in
our territories are the military and the police, who often
seem to protect the economic interests of the powerful
sectors, not the rights of the local populations. That
represents a failure to comply with the provisions of the
peace accord. Furthermore, during the recent national
protests, police used excessive force against peaceful
demonstrators across the country, particularly in Cali,
where a large percentage of the population is of African
descent and where our indigenous security guards
were attacked. State forces have committed sexual and
gender-based violence. Peaceful protesters have been
subject to torture, illegal detention, disappearances and
killings, echoing the violence that has marked more
than five decades of war. The gravity of that situation
led to the Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights to call for the general demilitarization of the
police in Colombia.
The peace accord, with 130 provisions on gender
equality and women’s rights, was achieved due to the
determined struggle of Colombian feminist movements.
On paper, the peace accord provides the foundation for
a democratic country. However, five years since its
adoption, implementation is at a standstill, especially
8/30

21/10/2021

of its gender provisions and the ethnic chapter. The
Special Forum on Gender and the High-Level Forum of
Ethnic Peoples are both underfunded and lack political
support. Members of the Special Forum on Women
have been threatened and attacked.
Implementation is most delayed in provisions for
comprehensive rural reform, which would give women
access to land and enable them to chart a path to inclusive
and holistic development for their communities. Instead,
we see the expansion of extractive activities that exploit
natural resources, violate territorial rights, exacerbate
conflict and increase violence against human rights
defenders, especially those who defend their land.
Colombia’s peace accord may be unprecedented in
its incorporation of international standards of gender
equality, but what good are agreements and promises if
they are not kept?
Threats faced by women peacebuilders and human
rights defenders in one community are a threat to
all women everywhere. Despite the adoption of 10
resolutions and the repeated affirmations of the value
of civil society, the issue of women human rights
defenders remains a critical gap in the Security Council’s
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. Colombia is no different. Although the members
of the Security Council have regularly condemned the
targeting of women human rights defenders and social
leaders, they have not done enough to turn words into
action. Ending attacks against women human rights
defenders — not only in Colombia but in all conflicts
on the Council’s agenda — and ensuring the full, equal
and meaningful participation and leadership of women
in all their diversity is essential for sustainable peace.
I therefore urge the Security Council to call on the
Colombian Government to take certain steps.
First, it must fully implement and resource the
peace accord, in particular the ethnic chapter and the
gender provisions.
Secondly, it must adhere to free, prior and informed
consent processes with rural labourer, indigenous and
Afro-descendant communities with regard to economic
development in their territories and must ensure that
development processes comply with international
human rights law and principles and the peace accord.
Thirdly, the Government must address the crisis
of violence against human rights defenders, including
by ensuring adequate resources for the development
of collective and territorial self-protection measures
21-29844

21/10/2021

Women and peace and security

for indigenous, rural labourer and Afro-descendant
communities, as well as supporting their permanent
presence in forums where protection policies
are debated.
Fourthly, it must immediately demilitarize the
police force and redirect funding to social investment.
Finally, it must ensure the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women leaders in the implementation of
the peace accord and in negotiations with other armed
actors in Colombia.
Peace is more than the absence of war. To
indigenous women, it means an end to discrimination,
respect for human rights, justice, economic equality and
transformative change, with human life at its centre. As
the primary international organ responsible for peace
and security, I urge the Security Council to not allow this
open debate to become yet another occasion where the
Council listens to women civil society representatives
but fails to act on our concerns. The plight of Afghan
women illustrates all too clearly the cost of inaction.
Women around the world demonstrate daily that they
have the courage and conviction to fight for peace.
Today we call on the Council to fight for us all.
The President: I thank Ms. Umenza Velasco for
her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Cabinet Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Kenya.
I am greatly honoured to preside over the twentyfirst annual open debate on women and peace and
security. Kenya is delighted to open up the Chamber
for the first in-person participation by the wider
United Nations membership since the outbreak of the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
I thank His Excellency Secretary-General António
Guterres for his inspiring remarks. I also thank the
Executive Director of UN-Women and our other briefers
for their insightful presentations. I also welcome
my fellow Ministers who have joined us for today’s
debate — the Ministers of the United Kingdom and
Ireland — as well as Mrs. Linda Thomas-Greenfield,
who is here both as a Permanent Representative and as
a member of President Biden’s Cabinet. I thank them
for joining us today.
The Security Council is designed to offer solutions.
However, peace must be planted deeper and rise from
the grass roots. In the words of Ms. Hawa Games

S/PV. 8886

Dahad, a gender observer who recently participated in
the Juba peace talks:
“[p]eace cannot be confined to meetings and
speeches in conference halls; peace must be spread
from the streets”.
In that sense, peacebuilding and peacekeeping are
manifestations of the dignity, courage, tenacity and
ambition of ordinary people.
The Security Council and United Nations agencies
must continue to encourage and design peace processes
that include the people, particularly women at the grassroots level. Resolution 1325 (2000) and the subsequent
resolutions call upon us to recognize and actively seek
the participation of women in building, negotiating and
keeping the peace. We must therefore endeavour to see
women; we must make their work, their experiences
and accomplishments visible. We must invest in them;
we must walk in their pathways and on their streets
in order to incorporate their ambitions and needs into
national and international policies and strategies and
fully comprehend their interventions in the construction
and maintenance of peace.
That is why I was excited and humbled this morning
to walk through the Photoville exhibition alongside
the Secretary-General and the Executive Director of
UN-Women. I recommend the exhibition to everyone.
It features women leaders, peacebuilders, mediators,
peace signatories, parliamentarians, activists and
youth advocates. The photographs capture the tangible
outcomes we are all seeking in the implementation of
the resolution 1325 (2000) and the women and peace
and security agenda.
Kenya, in partnership with the Department of
Peace Operations, the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs and UN-Women, will today
launch the African tour of this travelling exhibition.
We thank Denmark, Canada, Australia and Norway
for energizing this collaboration, as well as the women
photographers who brought us these stories. We also
appreciate Kenya Airways for facilitating the voyage of
this exhibition to the Democratic Republic of Congo and
the Central African Republic, and to Nairobi next year.
Women are quietly working, organizing and
mobilizing for peace at the grass-roots level — in
villages, camps for internally displaced persons, refugee
camps and in the sprawling informal settlements that
dot across our continent and in myriad locations all over

21-298449/30

S/PV.8886

Women and peace and security

the world. They are rebuilding broken communities,
forging reconciliation and agitating for their rights,
even in the face of disruption and displacement,
sexual and gender-based violence and the brutality of
conflict itself.
The endeavour of women at the local level, at
the heart of conflict zones, is often overlooked and
underrated, yet sustainable peace must be owned and
nurtured by communities and families in the first
instance. It is therefore necessary to uplift the voices
of women in the field and to bolster their contributions
in conflict prevention and peacemaking. That demands
investment in women across the peacebuilding and
peacekeeping continuum.
In conflict-affected zones, investment in women
must correspond to context and the threat environment.
We ought to invest in the physical protection of
women and girls from abuse and violence. We must
invest in homegrown conflict management skills and
the knowledge of local women. We must invest in
building capacity in new mediation and negotiation
competencies. We must invest in livelihoods and in
women-led, small and medium-sized enterprises and
new agricultural practices. We must invest in the
recovery of women and children. We must invest in
their peace. We must invest in their advocacy. We must
utilize their agency as interlocutors in counter-violent
extremism programmes, disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration initiatives and climate action and
adaptation interventions in conflict zones. We must
bring local women from the periphery to the centre of
the women and peace and security agenda. Our peace
must be owned by women — local women. Kenya is
committed to that investment in local women because
these women are the heartbeat of our peace.
In that regard, let me highlight five action points.
The first is enhanced collaboration between local
women expertise with key stakeholders and new partners
to generate gender- and age-informed disaggregated
data, especially with regard to addressing the causes,
drivers and accelerators of conflict. Data must make
women visible.
Secondly, national action plans must deliberately
take into account the contribution and participation
of women at the grass-roots level and provide budget
lines, support and targeted programmes to amplify
their voices and build capacity and resilience.
10/30

21/10/2021

Thirdly, a key role of women peacekeepers must
be the protection of women and children in conflict
zones. In that regard, women peacekeepers must
acquire new skills and competencies. From our
experience in Somalia, we have identified women as
key drivers of peace. We are beginning to train them
in counter-improvised explosive devices skills at our
Humanitarian Peace Support School in Embakasi,
where we also offer training in engineering, within the
triangular partnership programme, in association with
the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs.
Fourthly, investment in meaningful partnerships
between local women and women peacekeeping mission
personnel is critical. For instance, the Kenya Defence
Forces deployed an all-women platoon to the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan to protect women in
that conflict zone. Furthermore, the agency of local
women in early warning and prevention should be
better utilized and incorporated into national, regional
and subregional early-warning mechanisms, such as
FemWise-Africa.
Fifthly, peace mission support should ensure
that post-conflict reconstruction and development
processes involve local women in relief and recovery,
security sector reform and demobilization processes.
The provision of psychosocial and legal support to
the survivors of sexual and gender-based violence
should also involve local expertise, local women and
local knowledge.
I conclude with the words of the late Thomas
Sankara who said, “I hear the roar of women’s silence;
I sense the rumble of their storm”. We must ensure that
the roar of the women at the grass-roots level is heard,
their contribution valued and their aspirations seen and
fully captured in the women and peace and security
agenda. For the sake of sustainable peace, let us walk
with women at the grass-roots level. Let us walk on
their streets and in their villages.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council who wish to make statements.
I call on the Permanent Representative of the
United States of America and member of President
Biden’s Cabinet.
21-29844

21/10/2021

Women and peace and security

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Secretary-General Guterres for his
report (S/2021/827) and his remarks.
I would like to welcome Sima Bahous, the new
head of UN-Women. We look forward to working with
her in the future.
I would like to thank our two briefers, who joined
us today for this annual debate on women and peace and
security and welcome all our guests. I would also just
like to take a moment to call out Bineta Diop and thank
her for her years of commitment to African women.
Wherever women have faced issues, Ms. Diop has been
there for more than 20 years. She has never given up on
her commitment, even in the face of some of the most
difficult challenges. I thank her.
I thank Kenya for convening us to fully reaffirm
our women and peace and security commitments and
discuss how to further support and amplify ongoing
efforts by women to craft and sustain peace.
Let me start by stating our firm and unequivocal
commitment to the women and peace and security
agenda, as laid out in resolution 1325 (2000). By
promoting women’s participation and leadership in
politics, education, mediation, negotiations and every
aspect of public life, we promote more security and
peace for all. That should not just be a priority for
women; it should be a priority for everyone who values
peace and progress.
For our part, the United States is proud of its
tireless work to advance this landmark resolution and
its tenets. The United States passed the Women, Peace
and Security Act in 2017, thereby making us the first
country in the world with a comprehensive domestic
law promoting this key agenda. Since that time, we
have made profound and tangible progress towards
advancing the women and peace and security agenda,
which has greatly increased the safety and security of
women, girls and people around the world.
Internally, we have improved the capacity and
technical expertise of our Government personnel to add
a women and peace and security lens. For example, our
Department of Defense has overhauled our women and
peace and security training and developed additional
in-house training to meet the growing needs and
demands for women and peace and security instruction.
Our Department of Homeland Security has trained

S/PV. 8886

hundreds of personnel to integrate women and peace
and security principles into their work.
Meanwhile, around the world, the United States
Agency for International Development has provided
critical health care, psychosocial support, legal aid and
economic services to more than 13.5 million survivors
of gender-based violence. Our Department of State has
invested approximately $138 million in women and
peace and security assistance, thereby complementing
our diplomatic and policy engagement in 60 countries.
My point is that those are not just talking points for
us. They are genuine commitments, clearly codified in
domestic legislation, that we are meeting as a key part
of our overarching foreign policy. In June, the White
House provided its first report to Congress tracking our
progress on this work. The challenges it detailed are
very real.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has led to
spiking and extraordinary rates of gender-based
violence and erased decades of progress on efforts to
protect and educate girls. Many of the girls affected will
never return to school if the international community
chooses to neglect and forget them. We cannot allow
that to happen. We need to work together to promote the
women and peace and security agenda around the world
because we know we make a difference. For example,
women played a leading role in the Sudan’s 2019
transition, and women’s representation in subsequent
political negotiations was crucial to maintaining peace
and security. That was a moment where women took
their seat at the table and pushed for resounding change
in their country. Of course, the work is not done. Those
women and others need to be included in transition
and reconciliation efforts to ensure that there is real,
sustainable peace in South Sudan.
Or let us look at Colombia, where there has been
significant progress following the truly inclusive peace
process, which resulted in numerous gender provisions
in the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. The United States
continues to support efforts to monitor and advance the
implementation of the peace accord there, including
provisions related to the safety and empowerment
of women and girls and the development of local
peace councils.
Those are just two examples of tangible progress,
but the world is poised to produce many, many more.
That starts with the Security Council’s work to prioritize

21-2984411/30

S/PV.8886

Women and peace and security

the safety, perspectives and participation of women in
peacekeeping operations and special political mission
mandate renewals.
Moving forward, we hope to see many more
mandates promote the inclusion of women in operations,
the perspectives and the needs of women and girls and
other groups at risk of violence and exploitation, and
the protection of human rights defenders and civil
society. We will continue to call for those commitments
on behalf of women and girls around the world, but the
challenges remain. We must continue to demand and
defend the rights of Afghan women and girls. We must
stand up against violence and the targeting of women
in war. We must defend girls’ rights to education and
so much more.
We hope that other States members of the Security
Council will join us in adopting and implementing
national action plans and strategies for the women
and peace and security agenda. Those important tools
hold us all accountable to our commitments, including
tracking progress on gender equality, addressing
gender-based violence, ensuring women’s participation
in decision-making forums that impact us and
our commitment.
The world’s women and girls need us, and we need
them. Let us move forward, do right by women and
girls, and use this agenda to advance peace and security
for all. As we heard in the film, there can be no lasting
peace without women.
The President: I now call on the Minister of State
at the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office
and the Prime Minister’s Special Representative for
Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Lord Ahmad (United Kingdom): Allow me to
say, first, what a great pleasure it is to be attending
this meeting of the Security Council under your
stewardship, Madam President, and I congratulate your
good self and, indeed, Kenya on choosing investing
in women peacekeepers and peacebuilders as today’s
theme. As we have already heard, we are all clear that
women’s participation is fundamental to sustainable
peace. Indeed, the evidence in support of that fact is
abundantly clear.
I also therefore really welcome His Excellency the
Secretary-General, and it is always a pleasure to hear
from him. I know of his personal commitment to this
12/30

21/10/2021

important agenda. Without women, there can be no
lasting, sustainable peace. I pay tribute to his team, the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed,
and in doing so also welcome Her Excellency Sima
Bahous to her new role as Executive Director of UNWomen. I can report to the Security Council that we
have already met on the important issue of Afghan
women and we look forward to strengthening that
relationship in that respect.
Allow me to also join in the tribute that we have
already heard being paid to Ms. B1neta Diop. I have had
the honour and pleasure to be on several panels with
Ms. Diop over many years, and her personal passion,
advocacy and expertise are beyond excellent. We need
to ensure that we really encompass that as we fulfil the
ambitions, and indeed our obligations, for women and
peace and security around the world.
I also welcome the contributions that we heard
from Celia Velasco. It was important that Ms. Velasco
reminded us, the Security Council, of our obligations
on this important agenda.
Let me assure all colleagues that the United
Kingdom remains fully committed to the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women in decision-making
and the full, equal and meaningful participation of
women, indeed, across the peace in all peace efforts.
Increasing the number of women peacekeepers and
women in leadership roles should not just be a key
priority. It is essential. It is the right thing to do. It is
vital to ensure operational effectiveness.
I understand that the annual United Nations award
for a champion of women in peacekeeping went to
Major Steplyne Nyaboga of Kenya. Through your good
offices, Madam President, we congratulate the Major
on that achievement. We also recognize that Kenya
is deploying such inspiring officers, who serve as an
example not just to women, but to men and women
across the world.
In that respect, I am delighted that the United
Kingdom has supported and continues to support the
Elsie Initiative since its launch, and has provided over
£4.7 million since 2019 to encourage more women
into peacekeeping and peacebuilding roles. We are
also further committed to meeting the United Nations
uniformed gender parity targets in that respect. To help,
the United Kingdom is conducting a gender barrier
study to better understand the obstacles faced by women
21-29844

21/10/2021

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8886

in the United Kingdom Armed Forces deploying in
peacekeeping operations.

is vital that their voices be not just heard, but be at the
heart of Afghanistan’s future.

From those grass roots to the international stage,
we encourage the United Nations, as a leading light, to
lead by example and make women’s direct participation
a requirement — a fundamental requirement — across
all peace processes it support. And it should be priority.

Negotiating and mediation teams need access
to gender expertise — I have already referred to the
women mediator networks — and women therefore
should be included in all national delegations. In that
regard, the United Kingdom continues to prioritize its
work on the women and peace and security agenda and
is currently developing its next national women and
peace and security action plan, which is due for launch
in early 2023.

The United Kingdom has supported the
Peacebuilding Fund since its inception, committing
over £175 million to empower women and, indeed,
young people. We also support the incredible women
mediators networks and we continue to fund women
mediators across the Commonwealth this year.
But let us be clear. Recently, in 2019, we amalgamated
those mediator networks of women, and we must get
women mediators at the front line of ensuring that we
resolve conflict. Those women have the expertise and
insight. Those women have the knowledge, yet what we
fail to do is leverage that expertise effectively for peace
around the world. More must be done.
Furthermore, the United Kingdom joins in the
calls condemning the persistent attacks on women
human rights defenders — a point well reflected in the
contributions of the Executive Director of UN-Women.
We need to robustly tackle impunity and hold
perpetrators to account when reprisals occur. And
that work begins right now, at this time, right here in
the Chamber.
The United Kingdom supports the work of the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
in tackling reprisals, in particular those committed
against Security Council briefers. That work includes a
specific focus on the gender dimensions of intimidation
and reprisals. After all, if we cannot protect the briefers
who come here to speak before the Security Council,
they are being undermined and the purpose of the
Security Council cannot be met. We must ensure that
their protection is prioritized.
We have already heard, and rightly so, that the
Afghanistan crisis has thrown a harsh light on the
challenges before us. I have had the honour, as have
many in the Chamber, to work directly with many
women from across Afghanistan. Now that the Taliban
is in control in that country, we must ensure that the
rights of women and girls are central to any discussions
with the Taliban. Women must be intrinsic to the
conversation — intrinsic to the nation’s future. And it

Finally, let me assure the Council that we, the
United Kingdom, commit to truly demonstrating the
leadership we claim on women and peace and security
and to ensure that that agenda, that priority, is a golden
thread throughout all of our work on resolving conflict,
building security and stability and, ultimately, for
peace across the world.
The President: I now call on the Minister of State
for Overseas Development Aid and Diaspora of the
Republic of Ireland.
Mr. Brophy (Ireland): I am delighted to join the
Security Council today under the Kenyan presidency
for the open debate on women and peace and security.
Given the agreement among Ireland, Mexico and
Kenya to form a trio of women and peace and security
presidencies, I am especially pleased to be giving
expression to our shared commitment to advancing
that agenda. My thanks also go to the SecretaryGeneral for his remarks and to the briefers, namely,
Executive Director Bahous, Special Envoy Diop and
Ms. Umenza Velasco, whose grass-roots perspective
was particularly enlightening.
Ireland’s statement this morning will focus on three
key things that we need to do to close the persistent
gap between rhetoric and reality on women and peace
and security. Put simply, we need to empower the right
people, raise up the right voices and spend money on
the right things.
First, we must focus on empowering the right
people. In order to fulfil the Security Council’s mandate
to maintain international peace and security, we must
recognize a fundamental principle, that is, that those
who make war cannot and should not have a monopoly
on the terms of peace. Peacebuilding efforts that take
account only, or chiefly, of the needs and wants of the
parties to a conflict are doomed to fail. For peace to

21-2984413/30

S/PV.8886

Women and peace and security

work — and, importantly, to be sustained — it must be
inclusive. We know that only too well from experience
on our own island. That means peace processes with
women at the table participating fully and equally.
There is no substitute for the direct participation
of women in peace talks. That is why we welcome the
emphasis Kenya has placed today on empowering local
women peacebuilders, and in particular on the role
that peacekeeping operations can play in supporting
women’s participation. That is all the more acute in the
context of transitions. We thank all Council members
for their joint work on the recent Irish-led resolution on
peacekeeping transitions (resolution 2594 (2021)). That
resolution importantly underlines that engagement by
peace operations and national Governments with local
communities and civil society, especially women, is
key to managing the inevitable obstacles and setbacks
on the long road to peace.
Peacekeeping needs to be gender responsive.
Increasing the numbers of women peacekeepers is
an important part of that, but it is also about deeper
cultural change in our militaries. We are actually
grappling with that challenge in Ireland, including
through the establishment of an independent review. In
that connection, I thank the Women of Honour group
and serving personnel who have spoken out on the need
for change.
We need only look to Afghanistan to understand
what happens when women are excluded from politics
and public life. The rights of women and girls should
never be the last item on the agenda, or something to
return to once everything else is agreed. The Council
must stand with Afghan women and girls, whose
erasure from public life can never be normalized.
That brings me to my second point, on raising up
the right voices. It is critical that the Council listen to
and heed women leaders, human rights defenders and
civil society. We need to hear the unvarnished truth if
we are to make good decisions grounded in evidence.
We also need to hear a diversity of perspectives, such
as that of Ms. Umenza Velasco who spoke so honestly
here today. Ireland placed women civil society briefers
at the heart of our presidency last month. In that
context, we understood starkly the grave risks faced by
women peacebuilders who raise up their voices, and in
particular the risks faced by civil society briefers who
speak to us around this table.
14/30

21/10/2021

Women peacebuilders must be able to participate
safely. It is incumbent upon us, as Council members, to
ensure that. We cannot allow women to be silenced by
the risk of reprisals against them or their loved ones.
While it is very welcome that virtual working methods
can facilitate the participation of grass-roots women in
the Council, we also need to see civil society physically
back in this Chamber and sitting around this horseshoe.
There are some important people missing here today.
There is a delegation of women from Afghanistan
visiting New York today. This debate is for them. It is
the reality they are living. And they should be here at
the table.
My final point is about spending money on
the right things. I want to commend the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2021/827), which spotlights
some uncomfortable realities on the choices that
Governments make between military and social
spending, prioritizing, as the report puts it, warfare over
welfare. It is shocking that, even at the height of a global
pandemic, military spending in much of the world was
greater than pandemic-related health spending.
The evidence clearly shows a strong correlation
between militarization and gender inequality. The world
would be a different and much better place if welfare
were privileged over warfare, especially by investing
in the welfare of women and girls. Doing so lifts whole
communities out of poverty and marginalization and
builds resilient, inclusive, peaceful societies.
To that end, Ireland recently made a five-year
pledge of $1.5 million to the Women’s Peace and
Humanitarian Fund to directly support grass-roots
women peacebuilders and women-led organizations.
We are also a long-standing contributor to the
Peacebuilding Fund, which leads the way by allocating
40 per cent of its investments to supporting gender
equality and women’s empowerment.
You have called on us, Madam President, to
pronounce our political commitment to greater
investment in women and peace and security and
women peacebuilders. Ireland is fully committed to
advancing the women and peace and security agenda
in its work here at the Council and in co-chairing
the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace
and Security, as a Board member of the Compact on
Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian Action
and in our development cooperation expenditure.
21-29844

21/10/2021

Women and peace and security

We are also committed to advancing the women
and peace and security agenda within our own country,
because that is not only a foreign policy concern
confined to countries on the Council’s agenda. The
women and peace and security agenda must not be
allowed to falter. As we seek to create a more equal and
peaceful world, we must commit to empowering the
right people, raising up the right voices and spending
money on the right things.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I would like to thank Kenya
for convening this open debate and to express our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his valuable
remarks. I thank Ms. Sima Sami Bahous and the
other briefers for their insightful presentations. I also
welcome the participation of the representatives of the
wider United Nations membership in our open debate
today and thank the Kenyan presidency for making
that happen.
In many situations, women are the victims of
conflict, but they are also active agents of peace. They
have a unique ability to bridge gaps among conflicting
groups in their communities and play an important role
in responding to emergencies. During the coronavirus
disease pandemic, the effectiveness of women’s
leadership has been clearly proven.
With regard to the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda, we share the SecretaryGeneral’s view that there has been promising progress.
However, much remains to be done. In some places,
women have been underrepresented in decision-making,
pushed out of the workforce and subjected to a
surge of violence. Their ability has been restricted.
Such marginalization hinders the prevention of, and
recovery from, crises, especially while impacting on
the maintenance of international peace and security,
in general. In that regard, we call for stronger efforts
to ensure women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation in peace and political processes in line
with the Secretary-General’s call to action on women
transforming peace and security. To that end, we wish
to highlight the following points.
First, we should value women’s experiences,
knowledge, understanding and expertise in all fields,
including peace and security. Moreover, we should
continue to remove persisting barriers and push for
radical shifts to ensure that women are fully involved as
equal partners from the earliest stage in each and every
peace and political process. Their rights, interests and

S/PV. 8886

needs should be guaranteed and promoted at all local,
national and international levels. At the same time,
women should be equipped with the relevant knowledge
and skills to participate meaningfully in all spheres of
political, social and economic life.
Secondly, the responsibility for implementing the
women and peace and security agenda rests with all
Member States. Therefore, all States should take further
concrete and bold actions to ensure that the roles of
women are mainstreamed in legal frameworks, policies,
strategies and initiatives at all national, regional and
international levels on peace and security. It also requires
a comprehensive and whole-of-society approach, as
it is a process in which everyone has a role to play
and contribution to make. Any action plan, therefore,
needs to involve all stakeholders — men, women,
developing and developed countries, representatives
from Governments, parliaments, judicial bodies,
law enforcement agencies, the private sector and
international organizations.
Thirdly, international cooperation, especially on
capacity-building and the sharing of best practices,
should be strengthened to enforce women’s participation
in United Nations-led processes. In that connection, we
call for universal compliance by the donor community
with a minimum of 15 per cent of official development
assistance dedicated to advancing gender equality in
conflict-affected countries.
Increasing the participation of women in every
sphere of life is a key priority for Viet Nam. We
acknowledge that women and their empowerment
are crucial to advancing the culture of peace, based
on their actual knowledge, wisdom, tolerance and
understanding. They can play a vital role in educating
young people to value peace, not war. Therefore, the
role of women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding has
been integrated into the legal frameworks and policies
of Viet Nam.
In their commitment to the noble United Nations
peacekeeping missions in the Central African Republic
and South Sudan, the number of Vietnamese women
currently account for 21 per cent of those serving in our
military contingents. Women in Viet Nam have always
played an indispensable role, be it at war or at peace,
in the defence or in the construction of the country.
Currently, the number of women in senior leadership
positions in ministerial agencies accounts for more
than 30 per cent.

21-2984415/30

S/PV.8886

Women and peace and security

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our
readiness and commitment to join efforts with the
international community to ensure full, equal and
meaningful women’s participation in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General,
Ms. Sima Sami Bahous, Ms. Bineta Diop and Ms. Celia
Umenza Velasco for their valuable briefings. On behalf
of Tunisia, I reiterate our sincere congratulations to
former Assistant Secretary-General Bahous on her
appointment as Executive Director of UN-Women. We
welcome her participation at today’s meeting and look
forward to working with her.
We are meeting for the second year in a row to
discuss the women and peace and security agenda as
we continue to deal with a global pandemic and are
more aware than ever of its disproportionate impact on
women and girls, especially in conflict-affected areas.
As the report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/827)
indicates, the progress achieved in the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) remains far from fulfilling
the commitments and promises that we made more than
two decades ago. Despite all our efforts, the percentage
of women in United Nations peacekeeping operations
is no more than 23 per cent, and they represent no more
than 5.2 per cent of military troops. Similarly, gender
perspectives have remained absent from mainstream
policies, in particular during crises. As illustrated
by the Secretary-General’s report, for example,
most measures that have been adopted to respond to
the coronavirus disease pandemic fail to take into
account gender dimensions. The same also applies to
humanitarian crises, which severely lack the necessary
funding to meet the needs of girls and women.
Achieving peace and building back better depend
upon our collective adoption of a comprehensive
approach based on gender equality, including achieving
the equal participation of women in peacebuilding
operations. That requires greater coordination and
concerted efforts among all actors at all levels and
phases of peacekeeping operations. We must no
longer view women as victims and vulnerable group
but rather as effective and full partners in peace and
decision-making.
Tunisia reiterates its commitment to implement the
women and peace and security agenda while seeking
full gender equality. We have worked to that end at the
16/30

21/10/2021

national and international levels. Through our national
efforts, Tunisian women have achieved high-level State
positions, including Prime Minister for the first time in
the history of our country and of the Arab world.
Tunisia continues to implement resolution 1325
(2000) and other relevant resolutions through our
national plan, which was adopted in 2018. In addition,
we have developed a number of sectoral plans to
promote the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda in its various political, security,
human rights and development aspects.
At the international level, Tunisia is working
to support and promote cooperation to achieve the
full, equal and effective participation of women in
peacekeeping operations and other leadership positions.
In that context, Tunisia welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which in
particular seeks to draw on women’s support for peace
processes and promote investment in the participation
of local women.
Last but not least, Tunisia is working to develop
innovative solutions to enable women and enhance
their full participation, including through the use of
modern technology. Accordingly, Tunisia has actively
participated in the Generation Equality Forum,
convened in France and Mexico, and we have led the
working group on technology and innovation for gender
equality. The working group has sought to close the
gender gap in the digital sphere and ensure safe access
for women and girls to modern technology.
Tunisia believes that the full and equal
participation of women must be realized at the highest
level of leadership and decision-making. However,
it is important for peace processes to adopt a wider
approach that involves all the different relevant
segments of society at local and national levels,
including women, civil society organizations, women’s
organizations, women journalists and women human
rights defenders. In this context, we reiterate our call
for a safe environment that allows all these parties to
freely and actively participate.
It is also worth mentioning that our goal in closing
the gender gap and achieving gender equality in
peace processes must not be isolated from our efforts
aimed at addressing the wider and deeper drivers
of discrimination and exclusion that prevent us from
reaching that goal. On this basis, Tunisia calls for more
efforts to address the legal, social and cultural barriers
21-29844

21/10/2021

Women and peace and security

to gender equality and prevent the full and equal
participation of women and girls at all levels.
In conclusion, we reiterate our determination
to continue to build real partnerships with various
stakeholders for the purpose of bringing about
international peace and security through an approach
that guarantees the equal, full and effective participation
of women in peace and decision-making processes.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): I would like
to begin by thanking the Secretary-General, Mr. António
Guterres; Ambassador Sima Sami Bahous, whom I
congratulate on her appointment as Executive Director
of UN-Women; Ms. Bineta Diop, Special Envoy of the
African Union, whose unwavering commitment and
fearlessness in action in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo I greatly appreciate; and Ms. Celia Umenza
Velasco, representative of civil society.
Twenty-one years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), it is clear that, despite the achievements
made, much remains to be done to achieve gender
equality and fully implement the women and peace and
security agenda. Indeed, very few women participate
meaningfully in peace processes, while most women
and girls continue to be the primary victims of
conflicts around the world. Women remain largely
underrepresented in decision-making circles, even
though it is clear that wherever women’s full and effective
involvement in peace processes has been achieved, the
agreements reached have been more relevant than when
they are excluded. Moreover, the lack of inclusiveness
only exacerbates women’s life conditions, which are
already affected by the multifaceted challenges that
beset them in conflict and post-conflict contexts.
Yet no society can hope to prosper in the twentyfirst century if it systematically excludes half of its
population. My delegation would like to stress that the
involvement of women in peace processes is simply a
question of justice: if peace is a collective issue, why
should it be discussed, consolidated and achieved
without women?
For a country like the Niger, located in a region
plagued by multiple crises, the women and peace and
security agenda is not just a concept; it is also critical to
maintaining peace and preventing conflict. The major
challenges affecting the Sahel, from insecurity and the
impact of climate change to economic development
issues, have a disproportionate impact on women and
girls and amplify existing inequalities.

S/PV. 8886

Paradoxically, while women and girls are the
main victims of conflict, only 22 per cent of peace
agreements signed between 1995 and 2019 contain
specific provisions on women. In terms of economic
development, women’s organizations in fragile and
conflict areas, although underfunded, as they receive
only 0.2 per cent of total bilateral aid, have played a vital
role in bringing about major changes in government
policies. They are simply the pulse of the informal
economy in the region. There is therefore a need to
allocate more funds to women’s organizations working
for peace, especially those working in communities at
the grass-roots level.
My country, the Niger, has initiated reforms to
positively change the trend for women’s participation
in decision-making processes at all levels by increasing
the quota of women in elected positions from 15 to
25 per cent and appointments to senior Government
positions from 25 to 30 per cent. When more women
are in leadership positions in the public sector, they
can fundamentally transform public policy in ways that
bring about structural change. In addition, like 30 other
African countries, the Niger has begun to implement
the national action plan for women’s peace and security,
which was drafted following a consultation process
involving women and men from all regions of the
country. In this regard, we welcome the development
of the African Union Continental Results Framework
for Monitoring and Reporting on the Implementation of
the Women, Peace and Security Agenda in Africa. This
Framework, which constitutes a major step towards
the implementation of this agenda in Africa, must be
supported and popularized.
For its part, the Niger, working together with the
African Union and the European Union, and with
the support of UN-Women, the Office of the Special
Coordinator for Development in the Sahel, and several
delegations present in this Chamber, has proceeded to
set up the United Nations Group of Friends of Women of
the Sahel, whose objectives are, inter alia, to establish
and strengthen this approach by taking into account
the gender dimension, which is an essential link in the
success of stabilization and development efforts.
Now that our commitment has enabled us to put
the normative framework in place, women must not
only be around the table but must have a voice in all
decision-making processes. Six years after the 2015
review of the women and peace and security agenda,
it is sad to note that only half of the recommendations

21-2984417/30

S/PV.8886

Women and peace and security

made for the agenda have been implemented. It
is therefore clear that there is a need for more
systematic follow-up and effective implementation of
these recommendations.
Accordingly, the Security Council must also do
more. Consultations with civil society organizations are
important and must be strengthened. The gap between
our ambition, our commitments and reality can only be
bridged if we adequately support the work of women
peacebuilders. Particular attention should be paid to
young women peacebuilders who face serious reprisals
for their vital work.
Also, with regard to the inclusion of women in peace
processes, the United Nations could develop strategies
for the inclusion of women and report regularly on
measures to be taken to fill the gaps. Involving national
actors would be essential to ensure context-specific
analyses, from the negotiation and mediation phases to
the implementation phase. Furthermore, the Niger, as
a troop-contributing country, calls for a more effective
participation of women in peace operations, especially
through the police component.
I will conclude by emphasizing that addressing
some of the structural inequalities and discrimination
against women and girls remains central to conflict
prevention. Access to education remains a fundamental
right, but also a pillar of conflict prevention and a
means to ensure that women acquire the capital to take
their rightful place in decision-making and leadership.
In short, to refuse to recognize and protect women’s
rights is to choose to fuel conflict and undermine the
foundations of development. This is not a choice that
we are able to make.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I welcome
you, Madam President, and thank you for presiding over
today’s open debate. I also thank Secretary-General
Guterres, Executive Director Bahous, Special Envoy
Diop and Ms. Umenza Velasco for their briefings.
As shown by the briefings of the Secretary-General
and the other speakers, protecting women in armed
conflict, promoting their political participation and
comprehensively advancing their rights and interests
remain formidable tasks. Against the backdrop of a
raging pandemic, the mounting turmoil and gains
already achieved at risk of reversal, the international
community should step up its efforts, coordinate actions
and give more prominence to the women and peace and
18/30

21/10/2021

security agenda. We should step up the protection of
women in armed conflict.
In Palestine, conflicts in Gaza in May killed 38
and injured 398 women. Palestinian women have long
lived under the shadow of occupation. In Afghanistan,
women have paid dearly for the 20-year war. They
face huge risks and challenges due to the recent hasty
withdrawal of foreign forces. In other conflict areas,
the trafficking of women and children and sexual
violence still occur from time to time. The coronavirus
disease pandemic has exacerbated the challenges faced
by women in conflict.
To strengthen the protection of women in conflict,
the international community should fully consider
their actual difficulties and needs and provide timely
humanitarian assistance. Robust comprehensive
measures are needed to combat violence against
women and girls, including sexual violence in conflict,
Particular attention should be given to ending abuses
and threats against women by terrorist and extremist
forces. In Syria and Iraq, a large number of female
family members of foreign terrorist fighters are still
detained. The relevant countries should shoulder their
responsibilities and speed up screening and repatriation.
Preventing and defusing conflicts offer the
ultimate protection of women. The Security Council
should strive to eliminate the root causes of conflicts,
find political settlements to hot-spot issues and resolve
disputes peacefully through dialogue, mediation and
consultation so that all women and children can enjoy,
and live in, peace.
We should support a greater role for women in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. United Nations
political and peacekeeping missions should fully
communicate and coordinate with the countries
concerned and, based on the local conditions, support the
participation of local women and women’s organizations
in peace processes and ensure women’s representation
and voices in peace talks and political arrangements.
Women’s participation in peacekeeping should have
our continued support. In the planning and deployment
of peacekeeping operations there should continue to be
equal opportunities for women’s education, training and
capacity-building and support for women’s assumption
of important leadership roles in such operations.
Of course, women’s participation in peacekeeping
is not for the sake of numerical indicators alone. More
21-29844

21/10/2021

Women and peace and security

importantly, women’s unique advantages in areas such
as the protection of vulnerable groups and community
outreach should be leveraged to tangibly improve the
overall performance of peacekeeping.
China actively champions and supports women’s
participation in peacekeeping. Over the past three
decades, we have sent more than 1,000 women to various
peacekeeping operations. In the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon, Chinese women peacekeepers are at
the front line of mine clearance. In the past year alone,
their engineering contingent detected and destroyed
more than 2,200 mines, creating new safe zones for the
Lebanese people.
In the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, a
team of 10 Chinese women peacekeepers guard the
security of a refugee camp, conduct long-distance
patrols, share knowledge on women’s rights and
interests with local people and even teach foreign
languages at an elementary school in the camp.
We should more vigorously advanced women’s
economic empowerment. The various barriers to
women in conflict basically represent development
gaps. The most important barrier is the development
gap. To elevate women politically, their economic
empowerment is essential. The international community
should actively help conflict areas to review increased
investment in women’s education and help them to
change their destiny through knowledge. Women’s
entrepreneurship should be encouraged and supported
so that women can break free from poverty through
their own efforts. Bodies such as the United Nations
Development Programme and UN-Women should
prioritize supporting women’s economic empowerment.
Mandates for United Nations political and
peacekeeping missions should include more support for
women’s development and economic empowerment. At
the international level, China has actively cooperated
on women’s issues to promote women’s advancement
globally. In recent years, in developing countries we
implemented 100 maternal- and child-health projects
and 100 Happy Schools projects. We trained 130,000
women professionals in various fields in developing
countries, thereby providing strong support for
women’s empowerment in those countries. In 2015,
China and the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization set up a prize for girls’ and
women’s education. We have so far awarded the prize
to 10 organizations from countries such as a Zimbabwe,

S/PV. 8886

Kenya and Jamaica to encourage more people to work
for girls’ and women’s education so as to join forces for
global gender equality in education.
Along with the international community, China
stands ready to work to expedite the realization of gender
equality and promote global women’s advancement in
order to build a community of a shared and better future
for all, including women.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Kenya for convening this open debate
on a priority issue for Mexico, namely, investing in
women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We also
thank Mr. António Guterres and Ms. Sami Bahous, to
whom Mexico wishes every success in her new post. We
thank as well Ms. Bineta Diop and Ms. Celia Umenza
Velasco for their briefings.
In line with our feminist foreign policy, we are fully
committed to the women and peace and security agenda
and respect for human rights and the empowerment
of women and girls in all their diversity. Their full,
equal and meaningful participation in the entire peace
continuum is fundamental to the maintenance of peace
and international security, as well as to ensuring
sustainable peace.
Gender inequality, which still reflects patriarchal
systems, misogyny and an unequal distribution of
power in the world, is one of the root causes of conflict.
For that reason, it is a priority to continue implementing
actions with a gender and intersectional approach that
takes into account the particular needs of women
and girls, especially those who belong to the most
excluded groups in society, such as indigenous women,
Afro-descendants, migrants, refugees, people with
disabilities and the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender
and intersex persons community.
It is true that we have a robust framework — 10
Security Council resolutions on women and peace and
security; our obligations under the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women; the Beijing Platform for Action; and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. However,
as Mexico has pointed out time and again, it is time
to make further progress in implementing all those
commitments, as progress has been extremely limited.
This year Mexico adopted its first national action
plan in follow-up to resolution 1325 (2000). As a
contributor of personnel to peace operations, we have

21-2984419/30

S/PV.8886

Women and peace and security

about 35 per cent of women in uniform among the
deployed personnel.
However, we are concerned that the participation of
women in peacekeeping operations remains low due to
the various barriers that they face at the different stages
of recruitment, training, selection, deployment and
operation. In that context, we commend Canada and
the Elsie Initiative Fund for supporting Governments,
such as ours, that want to break down those barriers
and increase the number of women in peace operations.
We know well that deployed women are key to
maintaining open communication and building trust
with local host communities. They are also key to
developing strategic partnerships with civil society.
Women contribute to amplifying the voices and demands
of women activists, mediators, peacebuilders, human
rights defenders and journalists, and they identify
existing gaps and exchange critical information that
can help establish early-warning systems and prevent
human rights violations. However, to enable greater
participation by women military and police in peace
operations, we need to invest in improving working
conditions and physical infrastructure.
Equally, if we are to ensure equal participation in
such operations, it is essential to guarantee women’s
physical safety and well-being, with a zero-tolerance
policy for all forms of discrimination or violence, be it
sexual harassment, exploitation or abuse.
That is why Mexico supports the SecretaryGeneral’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative and
encourages him to ensure that all stages of planning,
mandate implementation and mission review throughout
transition processes integrate a comprehensive gender
analysis. We also endorse his “Call to action: women
transforming peace and security”.

21/10/2021

and girls is disproportionate and well-documented.
Mexico emphatically calls on all States to refrain from
transferring weapons in certain situations, including
when there is a risk that they could be used for genderbased violence, and to curb the flow of small arms
and light weapons that enable violence against women
and girls.
It is equally important to invest more in ensuring that
local disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes actively involve women in rebuilding the
social fabric and reducing community violence,
thereby contributing to sustainable development. Their
inclusion in security sector reform is also essential for
institution-building in States in transition.
We call on all Member States to ensure that all
processes led by the Organization are inclusive and
ensure the full, equal and meaningful participation
of diverse women at the heart of peace-agreement
negotiations. As co-Chair, with Ireland, of the Council’s
Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security, Mexico will continue to work towards those
objectives. It will also pursue those goals through the
Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian Action
Compact, launched this year at the United Nations
Women’s Generation Equality Forum.
In conclusion, convinced that the future of their
country will only be successful with the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women, Mexico reiterates
its commitment to women and girls in Afghanistan
and condemns all violations of their human rights and
fundamental freedoms.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): Estonia aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union.

In addition, we urge this organ to continue to include
the voices of women briefers in our deliberations and
to take measures for their protection, and we condemn
the increasing reprisals, intimidation and violence
against them.

We thank the Secretary-General for his truly
substantial report (S/2021/827), and we thank the briefers
for their presentations. We welcome Ms. Bahous to her
first briefing to the Security Council and look forward
to a continued strong leadership by UN-Women on
women and peace and security. The Council’s annual
debate on women and peace and security is not the only
time in 12 months when we should focus on this topic.
We need to do address it throughout the year. Rather,
it is a time to take stock of where we have failed and
where we have made steps forward.

The effects of the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons and their ammunition on women

The situation in Afghanistan presents a clear
question on whether and how we, as the Council, are

The inclusion of local actors, such as women
peacebuilders and human rights defenders, is also
essential at all stages of peace and political processes
and is a prerequisite for national ownership, as well as
for a comprehensive post-pandemic recovery.

20/30

21-29844

21/10/2021

Women and peace and security

able and willing to stand up for women’s rights and their
participation in political and peace processes. There
can be no sustainable peace anywhere without women.
Reports of widespread conflict-related sexual
violence in Tigray, characterized by the SecretaryGeneral as “a horror of unknown scale but a familiar
pattern”, is but one example of the continuing sexual
violence against women and girls — most of it
going unreported and perpetrated with impunity, as
demonstrated by the United Nations listings.
Women have been attacked, tortured or detained
for participation in protests from Belarus to Myanmar.
Targeted killings of women judges, activists and human
rights defenders throughout 2020 and 2021 aimed to
silence women in Afghanistan. As the Council, we
cannot afford that silence.
The report presented by the Secretary-General is
a reflection of the gradual and, at times, slow progress
in the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda. In that connection, I would like to
stress several points.
United Nations leadership in encouraging and
supporting the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women remains essential — from Syria to Yemen,
from Libya to South Sudan. Our progress in that regard
remains slow, and the lack of gender provisions in
ceasefire agreements undermines women’s participation
in future peace processes. United Nations peacekeeping
and political missions can support that leadership.
Investing in women peacekeepers and mediators and
providing resources for gender and women protection
advisers provides a foundation.
The link between women and peace and security
was affirmed by the Council over 20 years ago, yet
it continues to be questioned in almost all of our
deliberations. We therefore welcome the women and
peace and security trio presidency and its aim to set
this topic at the very centre of each discussion we
have, including through country briefings dedicated to
women and peace and security; heightened visibility;
and the systematic integration of women and peace
and security language in Council decisions. We look
forward to the continuation of that tradition in the
Council in the years to come and pledge to continue to
support this work on our part.
The Security Council’s Informal Expert Group
on Women and Peace and Security plays a key role

S/PV. 8886

in supporting that link. We welcome its relevant and
timely meetings and recall that it is, first of all, up to
us to ensure that its analysis and recommendations are
taken forward in Council deliberations.
Threats and attacks against women activists
and civil society representatives cannot lead to their
exclusion or self-censorship. They need to be heard in
the Council and at the local level. We call on the United
Nations and others to enhance support frameworks
and resources in order to promote their participation
and safety. Estonia supports the Women’s Peace and
Humanitarian Fund. Support for women human rights
defenders is part of the activities foreseen in our action
plan on women and peace and security.
We need to break the pattern of impunity. The
inclusion of sexual violence and human rights-related
benchmarks, such as for the sanctions regime for South
Sudan and designating and using criteria related to
sexual violence, including against politically active
women, as by the Yemen Sanctions Committee, are a
welcome part of that effort.
Lastly and simply put, we need more political will
and resources. Women and peace and security remains
a priority in our daily work in the Security Council. As
a catalytic member of the Compact on Women, Peace
and Security and Humanitarian Action, Estonia will
continue to support UN-Women, UNICEF, the United
Nations Population Fund, the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict in their activities.
I can assure members that our work continues
beyond our term in the Council.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines thanks Kenya for convening
today’s annual open debate and for facilitating the
in-person participation of the wider membership.
We also welcome the participation of our briefers:
Secretary-General Guterres, Executive Director
Bahous, whom it is very nice to see in her new role,
Ms. Diop and Ms. Umenza Velasco.
We begin by paying tribute to women who continue
to contribute to peacekeeping and peacebuilding as
negotiators, mediators, heads of households, drivers of
economies, peacekeepers and community, civil society
and political leaders. We welcome the commitment

21-2984421/30

S/PV.8886

Women and peace and security

demonstrated to ensuring the equal and meaningful
participation of women in United Nations special
political missions, as well as in mediation support
teams. However, the consistent inclusion of gender
provisions in peace agreements and post-agreement
implementation remains urgent. The absence of such
provisions in all ceasefire agreements secured in the past
few years is of particular concern. Even with increased
efforts at the national, regional and multilateral levels,
women’s participation across the peace-securitydevelopment continuum still falls appallingly short.
It is against that backdrop that we wish to make the
following three points.
First, with a commitment to women, peace and
security cited as a core priority of the Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, we commend
the work of the Department of Peace Operations in
creating space for women leaders to influence peace
processes at the national level, including in the Darfur
Women’s Platform, their influence on the Juba Peace
Agreement in the Sudan and the support provided for
the protection and participation of women in elections
in the Central African Republic. However, the mandates
of United Nations peacekeeping and special political
missions must include operational elements to support
Governments’ quest for the equal and meaningful
participation of women in peace processes and across
development initiatives.
Indeed, there is need for greater representation of
women in disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and security sector reform. We welcome the commitment
of the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs
to the equal representation of women and men in all
activities, as well as her Office’s work in systematically
tracking gender data on disarmament and integrating
gender perspectives in preventing the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons. While those decisive
actions are necessary, still missing is a commitment to
consistent gender analysis at all levels of operation.
That brings us to our second point. We cannot
overstate the need to apply anti-colonial-intersectional
gender analysis as the standard in every aspect of
the work of the Security Council. The expertise for
conducting such analysis already resides within Member
States currently grappling with the ongoing effects of
histories of colonialism, conflict and economic and
ecological precarity, as well as the added burden of
navigating the pandemic.
22/30

21/10/2021

Only 36 per cent of 98 Member States with women
and peace and security national action plans have
budget allocations for implementation. In particular,
those action plans require budgetary support to fund
localization programmes led by women civil society.
Given the critical role of women civil society as
architects of the women and peace and security and the
overarching United Nations gender equality normative
agendas, their expertise and proposed actions must
feature in the solutions to end gender inequality.
The final point we wish to raise is that there is
no circumstance under which conflict-related sexual
and gender-based violence against women, girls
and children, including reprisals against women
peacebuilders and civil society, can be tolerated. We
must insist on prevention and accountability and on
transforming the conditions that produce that violence
in the first place.
The fundamental challenge we face in advancing
the women and peace and security agenda is the very
challenge that confronts us in securing gender equity and
justice globally. We must eliminate unequal relations
of power. That transformation is urgent for women.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, with a Permanent
Mission to the United Nations that comprises 85 per
cent women and an all-female leadership team, takes
this opportunity to honour the indomitable spirit of
women at all levels who demand change and work to
secure gender and social justice everywhere.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): We thank Kenya for
convening the open debate on this very important issue.
We thank the Secretary-General for his insights. I also
thank Executive Director Sima Bahous, African Union
Special Envoy Bineta Diop, and Ms. Celia Umenza
Velasco for their briefings.
One of the most important indicators for
strengthening the roots of democracy, pluralism and
fundamental rights is the extent to which women
are included in the institutions of governance.
Greater involvement by women in higher echelons of
decision-making considerably strengthens governance,
more so in post-conflict situations.
The very first woman to occupy the Office of
the President of the General Assembly was from
India — Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit. Along with her, several
other Indian women leaders contributed immensely to
the United Nations in its formative years, shaping the
discourse on human rights and gender equality. They
21-29844

21/10/2021

Women and peace and security

included Hansa Jivraj Mehta, Begum Shareefa Hamid
Ali and Lakshmi Menon.
As India was in the process of institution-building
at home, those women leaders brought their unique
experience and perspective to the process of global
norm-building at the United Nations. That tradition has
continued to this day, with stellar contributions being
made by Indian women to the United Nations. It is
also not a coincidence that all the women Presidents of
the General Assembly have been from the developing
world. The first woman Prime Minister in the world was
also from South Asia. Therefore, when we discuss the
role of women in decision-making bodies, particularly
in multilateral institutions, we should first understand
that this is a global issue and not just a matter for
developing countries alone.
India has moved from women’s development to
women-led development. The Constitution of India
ensures the participation of women in local selfgovernment by mandating the reservation of 33 per
cent of the total number of seats for women. To ensure
parity, 20 Indian states have made provisions for the
reservation of 50 per cent of the total number of seats
for women. Today in India, more than 1.3 million
elected women representatives lead in the formulation
and implementation of public policies at the grass-roots
level. We even have all women panchayats at the grassroots leadership level.
We need to look not only at the political
empowerment of women, but also at their
socioeconomic empowerment. That involves a complex
set of governance-related issues, which need to be
addressed in a holistic manner. For example, a growing
digital divide can potentially alienate women from the
mainstream. Keeping that in mind, India has not only
undertaken numerous citizen-centric digital initiatives,
but has also focused those services towards women to
minimize the gender divide in digital India. We have
opened online bank accounts for 430 million people,
of which more than 55 per cent account-holders are
women. During the coronavirus disease pandemic, that
initiative has helped in direct benefit transfers to nearly
200 million women.
India has been an active participant in the
deliberations on issues focusing on women’s
empowerment and gender mainstreaming at various
United Nations bodies. During the past two decades,
the normative frameworks on women and peace

S/PV. 8886

and security, including the Declaration of Shared
Commitments on Peacekeeping Operations and
the Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy, have been
considerably strengthened.
India fully supports the Secretary-General’s
zero-tolerance approach to sexual exploitation and
abuse. India was the first country to contribute to the
Secretary-General’s Trust Fund in Support of Victims
of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse, and also signed
the voluntary compact on preventing and addressing
sexual exploitation and abuse with the SecretaryGeneral in 2017. The Prime Minister of India himself
joined the circle of leadership on the prevention of and
response to sexual exploitation and abuse in United
Nations operations.
In 2007, India created history by deploying the firstever all-female formed police unit (FPU) for United
Nations peacekeeping in Liberia. That unit served in
Liberia for a decade, and through its work served as
an example of how the deployment of more female
uniformed personnel can help the United Nation in its
efforts to combat sexual exploitation and abuse. During
the farewell of the Indian FPU, the then President of
Liberia underlined the contribution of the force to
“inspiring Liberian women, imparting in them the
spirit of professionalism and encouraging them to
join operations that protect the nation”.
Today, a female engagement team from India is
deployed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
as part of the rapidly deployable battalion in the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We have
also pledged a women formed police unit under the
Peacekeeping Readiness Capability System.
Indian peacekeepers are playing an important
mentoring role to prevent conflict-related sexual
violence. Major Suman Gawani, an Indian woman
peacekeeper deployed earlier with the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan, mentored over 230 United
Nations military observers and ensured the presence of
women military observers in each of the Mission’s team
sites. She also trained the South Sudanese Government
forces and helped them launch their action plan to
prevent conflict-related sexual violence. In recognition
of her service, she was awarded the United Nations
Military Gender Advocate of the Year award for 2019.

21-2984423/30

S/PV.8886

Women and peace and security

It is important that the United Nations be actively
focused on issues related to the role of women in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. That is especially
important in the context of Afghanistan. As affirmed
in resolution 2593 (2021), we hope that women’s rights
will be fully protected and their voice duly reflected in
shaping Afghanistan’s future.
India stands ready to engage with all its partners to
work towards ensuring the meaningful participation of
women and the mainstreaming of women and peace and
security considerations for building inclusive, peaceful
and resilient societies.
Allow me to conclude by quoting an eminent
philosopher, Swami Vivekananda:
“There is no chance for the welfare of the world
unless the condition of women is improved. It is not
possible for a bird to fly on one wing.”
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Secretary-General António
Guterres for presenting his assessments of the
implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda. We listened most attentively to the
statements made by our guests: Under-SecretaryGeneral Bahous, Executive Director of UN Women;
the African Union Special Envoy for Women, Peace
and Security, Ms. Diop; and Ms. Umenza Velasco.
Today’s discussion confirms the relevance of
resolution 1325 (2001), which was adopted more than
20 years ago. An important task of the Security Council
in implementing that document is to ensure the full and
effective participation of women in peace processes
and in efforts to prevent and resolve conflicts.
Speaking at the third Eurasian Women’s Forum,
which was held earlier this month in St. Petersburg, the
President of the Russian Federation, Mr. Putin, said:
“Women’s active participation in seeking
solutions to global and local challenges, coupled
with their proactive participation in all spheres of
life, is in the public interest and helps to tap into
human potential to the greatest extent. Today,
that is undoubtedly a key factor in progress, in
moving forward and in bringing concrete changes
throughout the world, both within individual States
and around the globe.”
The report submitted to the Security Council by
the Secretary-General (S/2021/827) underscores the
24/30

21/10/2021

significant progress made in many areas in terms of
implementing the women and peace and security agenda.
At the same time, we consider it extremely important to
avoid duplication in the work of the different bodies of
our Organization. The General Assembly, the Human
Rights Council and the Peacebuilding Commission
are actively involved in work to promote the role of
women, protect their rights and ensure gender equality.
As for us in the Security Council, we should focus on
situations that pose an imminent threat to international
peace and security, in accordance with the prerogatives
of the Security Council.
Often during this discussion, the importance
of developing regional and national strategies and
plans, and of establishing national structures for the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda, has been stressed. We are convinced that
such measures must be adopted only when there is an
objective need arising from the existence of an armed
conflict or a post-conflict settlement situation. A routine
expansion of bureaucratic structures in the absence of
a conflict or situation vulnerable to conflict can hardly
be justified. All approaches should be tailored to the
specific situation and must not be one-size-fits-all. The
most important thing is the result, not the appearance
of work.
Women themselves must be effectively involved
in the search for a solution to existing problems.
In that regard, we express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his personal commitment to
improving women’s participation in peacekeeping
operations, peace negotiations and political processes.
At the same time, we call for additional measures
to increase the role of women in the social and
economic development of States in situations of
armed conflict or in the post-conflict recovery stage.
The use of coercive unilateral measures and politicized
economic sanctions is absolutely unacceptable, as the
victims of such sanctions are, first and foremost, women.
Measures are needed to strengthen women’s economic
capacity and to expand women’s access to financial and
material resources and modern technology.
Women’s empowerment, the elimination of poverty
and increasing opportunities in the area of education
are key priorities. Special attention should be paid to
protecting families, mothers and traditional family
values, which are the moral foundation of any society
and the key to the successful development of present
and future societies. Those and other issues should be at
21-29844

21/10/2021

Women and peace and security

the heart of the work of the Security Council’s Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security, the
Peacebuilding Commission and other United Nations
bodies, with a view to making a positive contribution
to the progressive development of the women and peace
and security agenda and to achieve genuine consensus
on that topic.
For its part, the Russian Federation wishes to
reaffirm its readiness to interact constructively with all
interested Member States to promote women’s issues
in the Security Council. At the same time, we advocate
an equal and mutually respectful dialogue, taking into
account alternative points of view in the spirit of the
democratic foundations of the United Nations and in
accordance with the principles of its Charter.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I want to thank Kenya for
convening today’s debate, in particular for facilitating
the participation of the broader membership. It is
vital to the Security Council’s work that we hear from
everyone. In that respect, allow me to thank SecretaryGeneral Guterres, Executive Director Bahous and
Special Envoy Diop for their briefings. I also extend a
special thanks to Ms. Umenza Velasco.
It is time to get serious about women’s participation.
This year’s report (S/2021/827) highlights the trend
of increasing global military spending. If achieving
peace and security is our aim, we should invest more in
women’s participation and protection, not as an end in
itself but as a prerequisite for peace and stability.
You asked us, Madam President, to bring
commitments today. Therefore, in our next national
action plan for women and peace and security, Norway
will quadruple the target for funding in this field.
Nevertheless, addressing the lack of funding alone is
not enough.
Norway is present in more than 50 countries
affected by conflict and crises, and we directly or
indirectly support a number of peace processes. In
every single one, we are deeply committed to women’s
full and substantive participation. We set the bar high,
but we can clear it only through close cooperation
with the United Nations, especially UN-Women, and
local communities.
Conflicts and peace processes are prone to abrupt
change, yet women peacebuilders always adapt, and we
are committed to adapting our approaches with them.
For example, when the informal talks in South Sudan

S/PV. 8886

turned into revitalized peace talks, South Sudanese
women demanded a seat at the table. That resulted in the
inclusion of gender provisions and quotas in the final
text of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. Today there
are several women in South Sudan in key political
positions. Our partners already had the capacity and
competency — what they needed was access and our
collective support to make it happen.
We particularly welcome Kenya’s emphasis today
on investing in women peacebuilders and peacekeepers.
They are truly key to advancing women’s direct
participation in all aspects of peace and security. We
remain committed to the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, which guides our collective aim of increasing
women’s participation in peace operations. It will also
make missions better reflect the populations they serve
and increase their effectiveness. That is not only a
matter of numbers, but a matter of ensuring that women
at all levels have direct and substantive influence on
implementation. We are equally committed to ensuring
women’s participation in all aspects of the protection
of civilians, which is critical to address the root causes
of conflict.
We should never sacrifice women’s right to
participate in the name of protection. On the contrary,
we should include them from the very start in the design
of security measures and responses. For example,
in Colombia, Norway has committed to support the
efforts of UN-Women and the Ombudsman’s Office
and to work directly with women’s organizations in
enhancing early-warning systems and ensuring a
gendered approach in implementing security measures.
That is vital for women peacebuilders who have been
risking their lives to defend the central commitments
of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
Even here in the Council, just a year ago, at this
very open debate, we heard Afghan civil society activist
Zarqa Yaftali echoing the calls of many before her for the
international community to ensure that women’s rights
and participation are not traded away for false promises
of peace (see S/2020/1084). A year later, many strong
female voices have had to flee in fear of the Taliban.
Sadly, Afghan women are not alone in that situation. The
same calls for protection and participation are clearly
heard from Myanmar, Yemen, Syria and Somalia, to
mention but a few places. Protection and participation

21-2984425/30

S/PV.8886

Women and peace and security

are interlinked and mutually reinforcing and require
the strong commitment of the international community.
There have been numerous calls for a dedicated
funding mechanism for women human rights defenders
working in crisis, conflict and post-conflict situations.
Norway is responding to that call. Today we are making
another commitment: to provide seed funding for a new
mechanism by the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian
Fund. That mechanism will provide flexible funding to
support women human rights defenders at risk for both
their participation and protection, not one at the cost of
the other. We hope all other members will join us.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
welcome Kenya’s commitment to the women and peace
and security agenda. I thank the new Director of UNWomen, to whom I express our full support, as well as
the other briefers for their presentations.
I wish to take this opportunity to pay tribute to all
the women peacebuilders around the world, sometimes
at the risk of their own lives. As has been said over and
over again, despite the progress made since the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), we are still a long way from
achieving the objectives that we all collectively set. It
is no longer a time for words but for action. Such action
requires, first and foremost, the increased participation
of women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding. It is not
simply a question of their recruitment.
In Mali, for example, women are committed to
the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. A woman General from the
French Gendarmerie has been appointed to take
command of the police component of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali. Those are just two examples of our
ability to take concrete action, but they also show that
we must go further.
Our attention this year has been particularly
focused on Afghanistan. Restrictions on the rights
of women and girls, as well as the complete absence
and sidelining of women at the political level, are
unacceptable. The Security Council must reaffirm
firmly and unambiguously that it will not accept the
trampling of the rights of women and girls, or the
erasure of the hard-won gains made by women and girls
in recent years.
France is working for the effective implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda as a
26/30

21/10/2021

priority and is promoting an ambitious feminist
diplomacy. We co-hosted the Generation Equality
Forum with Mexico and civil society members under
the auspices of UN-Women. The Forum enabled the
mobilization of $40 billion to be put towards gender
equality efforts. The Compact on Women, Peace and
Security and Humanitarian Action was also launched
on that occasion.
Moreover, France has finalized its third national
action plan for the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda for the period 2021 to 2025.
France provides financial support in the development
of training for gender military advisers and gender
focal points deployed in peacekeeping operations in
collaboration with the International Organization of
La Francophonie. We have substantially increased
our contribution to UN-Women, in particular to
strengthen the participation of female soldiers in
peacekeeping operations. Finally, France will also
contribute approximately €6 million to the Global
Survivors Fund, founded by Dr. Denis Mukwege and
Nadia Murad, for survivors of sexual violence.
Rest assured that the implementation of resolutions
on the women and peace and security agenda will remain
a major focus of France’s work in the Security Council.
The President: I wish to remind all remaining
speakers to limit their statements to no more than four
minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out its
work expeditiously. Flashing lights on the collars of
the microphones will prompt speakers to bring their
remarks to a close after four minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Canada.
Ms. O’Neill (Canada): I am grateful to deliver two
statements today, the second of which will be on behalf
of Canada. But first, I will speak on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Women, Peace and Security, an informal
network of 65 Member States representing all five
regional groups of the United Nations and the European
Union. We commend Kenya for its efforts to return to
the more open and inclusive format that characterized
open debates prior to the pandemic. Today the Group
would like to emphasize three main points.
First, we call for urgent action to implement
commitments to protect the full scope of women and
girls’ human rights and to achieve women’s full, equal
and meaningful participation in all political, peace
and security decision-making processes. There has
21-29844

21/10/2021

Women and peace and security

been progress over 21 years, but it has been too little,
including in political, security and peace processes
supported by the United Nations itself. The Group of
Friends strongly calls for all United Nations-supported
peace processes to require and ensure women’s full,
equal and meaningful participation. That must be made
a priority.
It is imperative that women participate in decisions
that affect their lives. Women cannot participate if
they are not safe. The prevention of, and the protection
from, violence against women and girls, including
by addressing gender inequality, cannot continue to
be ignored.
The Group expresses its unshakable solidarity with
Afghan women and girls, who face the prospect of
losing the gains for which they fought so hard for more
than 20 years. We unequivocally reject any violation
or limitation of their rights. We urge all parties, in
particular the Taliban, to prioritize women and girls’
rights and their full, equal and meaningful participation
in all decisions on Afghanistan’s future.
We also underscore the need to take all appropriate
measures to immediately ensure women’s and girls’
safe and equitable access to education, given the vital
role that education plays in reducing gender inequality
and building sustainable peace.
We call on the Security Council to systematically
include women in all its discussions and urge the
Council to fully integrate women and peace and
security commitments into all of its work and
outcomes, including on country-specific situations
and mission mandates. We encourage regional and
subregional organizations to redouble their efforts in
fully implementing this agenda.
We also encourage further progress on steps
taken by the United Nations under the SecretaryGeneral’s leadership to integrate women’s perspectives
in peace processes; integrate women’s participation
as negotiators; integrate women’s participation as
mediators in mediation support teams and in other
leadership positions in peace and security; address
barriers for, and increase the meaningful participation
of, uniformed women in United Nations peace
operations; and engage with local women peacebuilders
to implement United Nations peace efforts.
Secondly, the Group expresses its deep concern
that women peacebuilders, human rights defenders

S/PV. 8886

and advocates for gender equality and their family
members continue to face intimidation, threats and
violence. We are appalled that some who have briefed
the Council have faced reprisals for doing so. As set
out in resolution 2493 (2019), Member States must both
unequivocally condemn and decisively address threats,
harassment and violence against women peacebuilders
and human rights defenders. We also urge all Member
States, including Council members, to create a safe and
enabling environment for all who protect and promote
human rights and gender equality, fulfil their obligations
to protect them and hold perpetrators accountable.
We must recommit to comprehensive prevention and
responses to sexual and gender-based violence.
Lastly, the Group calls for increased, predictable,
sustained and flexible funding for local and grass-roots
women’s organizations and networks. As highlighted
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/827),
there is a concerning lack of support for local womenled organizations and women leaders in fragile and
conflict-affected countries, especially as compared to
the upward trajectory of military spending globally.
It is critical that the international community act
now to close the gaps between commitments to women
and peace and security and their realization.
I thank you, Sir, for allowing me now to briefly
address the Council on behalf of Canada.
More than ever, Canada is determined to reflect on
the past year and proceed with humility. We want to
talk about our successes but are also resolved to share
openly our challenges, recognizing that we all have
much to learn on this journey to true gender equality. A
major issue that has come into focus for Canadians this
year is sexual misconduct in our own armed forces. No
service and no level has been immune, including some
of our most senior leaders. We know that in order to
address the issue meaningfully, as we are determined
to do, we must examine every aspect of organizational
culture. We also know that, in that challenge, we are
not alone.
(spoke in French)
It is one of the many reasons for which we are
proud to have spearheaded the Elsie Initiative for
Women in Peace Operations. In addition to reaching
the quantitative targets set out in the Uniformed Gender
Parity Strategy, more important than statistics, it is a
matter of ensuring work space that supports women

21-2984427/30

S/PV.8886

Women and peace and security

and eradicates harmful practices and unacceptable
behaviours. We thank Australia, Finland, Germany, the
Netherlands, Norway and the United Kingdom for their
financial contribution. We also thank Jordan, Liberia,
Mexico, the Niger, Senegal, Sierra Leone and Togo for
the leadership that they have demonstrated as the first
Member States to implement activities under the aegis
of the Elsie Fund.
(spoke in English)
Earlier this year, Canada held a special meeting
on women and peace and security, bringing together
all 10 Ministers whose departments are partners of
our national action plan in addition to our Chief of
the Defence Staff, and the Commissioner of the Royal
Canadian Mounted Police. Of course, they began by
listening to women peacebuilders themselves — youth,
indigenous and other leaders in Canada and abroad.
A key takeaway was the importance of continuously
supporting the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women in all aspects of decision-making related to
peace and security and preventing and protecting them
from physical and online expressions of misogyny
aimed at stopping them from carrying out their
essential work.
Such support and engagement with women
peacebuilders remains in need of being fully
institutionalized within the United Nations system.
The achieved gender parity in senior management is a
welcome step. However, work remains to be done in
transforming norms and requiring real accountability
from United Nations global leadership, including from
Special Envoys, Special Representatives and Heads of
field operations.
The crisis in Afghanistan in particular is a litmus
test of all of our commitments to implementing
resolution 1325 (2000) and the subsequent resolutions
on women and peace and security. The meaningful
direct inclusion of diverse Afghan women in all political
processes is essential.
Lastly, indeed in Canada too, the women and peace
and security agenda is relevant. Indigenous women and
girls in particular, as well as gender and sexually diverse
peacebuilders in Canada, continue to face unacceptable
barriers to their full and effective participation in all
aspects of decision-making. That is something that we
are determined to change — once again, always with
humility. As civil society and other briefers have said
before the Council over the years, women do not need
28/30

21/10/2021

to be given a voice; they have voice; and we must listen
to them.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Ambassador for Gender and Diversity, European
External Action Service.
Ms. Ronner-Grubačić: I am truly honoured and
grateful to Kenya to be able to be in the Security
Council Chamber today to speak on behalf of the
European Union and its member States. The candidate
countries of the Republic of Northern Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania, the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine,
the Republic of Moldova and Georgia align themselves
with this statement.
Gender equality, the human rights of all women
and girls and their empowerment are core values and
political priorities for the European Union (EU). In
all peace and security efforts, we are guided by the
women and peace and security agenda. We must put the
leadership and full, equal and meaningful participation
of women in peace operations and peace processes at
the forefront. Women on the ground, civil society and
local and grass-roots organizations defending their
interests are important partners. We must ensure that
they are supported by speaking out and acting against
threats that endanger them in their work.
The EU commends the Secretary-General for
promoting the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda and supports his efforts aimed at
promoting gender equality. We also note the launch
of the Compact on Women, Peace and Security and
Humanitarian Action during the Generation Equality
Forum hosted by France and Mexico in Paris.
Let me also reaffirm the EU’s full support for
women and girls in Afghanistan. Free and equal
access to health services, employment and education
are essential, as is freedom of movement. The EU
expects full, equal and meaningful political, social and
economic leadership and participation of women in
Afghan society. Monitoring is key in this respect. We
welcome the adoption by the Human Rights Council of
the EU-led resolution appointing a special rapporteur
for Afghanistan and look forward to cooperating with
the rapporteur and with UN-Women, which I salute for
its continued presence in Afghanistan.
21-29844

21/10/2021

Women and peace and security

Peace processes must take into account gender
norms and roles and analyse the conflict through a
gender lens. This cannot be just an afterthought or a
side issue. It is not a question of simply adding women’s
interests around the edges of programmatic activities.
On the contrary, it is a question of rights.
Moreover, implementing women and peace and
security commitments requires funding. Peacekeeping
missions and civil society organizations need to receive
the necessary budgetary allocations. The responsibility
lies with Member States to adopt national action plans,
including adequate budgeting.
The EU would like to stress the importance of
gender-responsive leadership and gender training
and expects all the components of United Nations
peacekeeping missions to create a safe and non-hostile
environment for women and girls.
The protection of survivors and a survivorcentred approach, including in terms of justice and
reparations, is essential, particularly in fragile conflictaffected settings and when survivors face stigma and
discrimination. Ensuring full access to comprehensive
health services, including sexual and reproductive
health-care services, is a key priority.
We are concerned by the persistent impunity
for conflict-related sexual violence and call for
accountability to be enforced. Where such crimes are
perpetrated, we reiterate our support for the Security
Council incorporating and applying sexual violence
as a designation criterion in a systematic manner in
United Nations sanction regimes.
We reconfirm the EU’s full commitment to doing
its part on the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda. And we again thank the Kenyan
presidency for putting this issue on the agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Fifield (Australia): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the MIKTA Group of
countries — Mexico, Indonesia, the Republic of Korea,
Turkey and Australia — and then, in my national
capacity, a short statement on behalf of Australia.
Gender equality and the empowerment of all
women and girls are priorities for the MIKTA Group.
This prioritization calls for the full and effective
implementation of the women and peace and security

S/PV. 8886

agenda. Respecting, protecting and promoting the
rights, safety and dignity of women and girls are goals
in themselves and essential for the achievement of
sustainable peace.
Recent events in Afghanistan highlighted the
critical importance of the women and peace and security
agenda. Delivering life-saving and empowering
outcomes for peace and security is a collective
endeavour for Governments, civil society, women’s
rights organizations and women peacebuilders. We
must ensure that all women and girls in all conflicts and
crises are party to resolution efforts, have their basic
needs met and recourse to justice where their rights
are violated, and that they continue to have access such
essential services as quality education, employment and
health care, including sexual and reproductive health
services, and mental and psychosocial support. The full,
equal and meaningful participation of women in peace
processes, including at all levels of decision-making
and leadership, is central to our national action plans
and policies.
It is also essential to mainstream gender equality
and gender analysis, as acknowledged in our national
action plans and policies and the Security Council’s
women and peace and security resolutions. We will be
successful in implementing the women and peace and
security agenda if we address the root causes of gender
inequality and promote and defend the human rights
of women and girls. We recognize that the violence
inflicted on all women and girls, including sexual and
gender-based violence, reprisals, harmful practices
and trafficking is particularly pernicious and therefore
a priority for action. A survivor-centred approach is
key to restoring safety and dignity, ensuring access to
justice and accountability and ending impunity.
The MIKTA Group appreciates this year’s report of
the Secretary-General on women and peace and security
(S/2021/827). The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has
had a disproportionate negative impact on the lives
of women and girls, especially in conflict-affected
states. COVID-19 has also highlighted the continued
exclusion of women from decision-making processes
and leadership, as well as greater rates of violence.
As a matter of human rights and international
peace and security, the Secretary-General rightly
stresses the significance of women’s participation
and leadership in peace processes, peace operations,
political transitions and the security sector, as well as

21-2984429/30

S/PV.8886

Women and peace and security

gender provisions in ceasefires and peace agreements.
In this regard, investing in women in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, the theme of this year’s debate, is timely.
MIKTA strongly supports the meaningful engagement
and leadership of women of all backgrounds in all
aspects of peace processes. This includes, for example,
investments in the Elsie Initiative Fund, deployment
of women to United Nations peace operations, efforts
to increase women representation in the security
sector, assistance to grass-roots networks of women
peacemakers, and support for the Secretary-General’s
uniformed gender parity strategy, as clearly reflected
in resolution 2538 (2020). Women and girls everywhere
have the right to lives of safety, security and dignity.
The MIKTA Group recommits to promoting and
protecting the human rights of women and girls in
conflict and post-conflict situations. We will meet our
obligations under the women and peace and security
agenda. We look forward to working with other States
Members of the United Nations as we progress towards
our common goal of achieving gender equality and the
empowerment of all women and girls for international
peace and security and sustainable development.
I would now like to offer a short statement in my
national capacity on behalf of Australia.
Implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda requires inclusive and sustained action
at all levels, from the grass roots to global gatherings. It
is essential that we work with and support the leadership
of women civil-society actors, human rights defenders

30/30

21/10/2021

and peacebuilders. Their voices and legitimacy must
be projected and defended at all levels. For peace and
security to replace crisis and conflict, we need more
women in analysis and decision-making roles. We also
need men to take action on the women and peace and
security agenda.
In April, Australia launched its second national
action plan on women and peace and security, guiding
us to 2031. We will continue to contribute to the
protection and promotion of women’s and girls’ human
rights, the prevention and resolution of conflict and the
establishment of enduring peace. Women’s full, equal
and meaningful participation in peace and security
remains at the centre of our efforts. We will also focus
on reducing sexual and gender-based violence, and we
will support resilience, security and just responses to
crises and conflicts. Our leadership will be accountable.
Eliminating gender inequalities and all forms of
discrimination against women and girls is our shared
imperative. We must promote, protect and defend
the human rights of women and girls in all contexts.
Through you, Mr. President, let me again thank Kenya
for hosting this debate.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. Given
the lateness of the hour, with the concurrence of the
members of the Security Council, I intend to suspend
the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1 p.m.

21-29844
