S/PV.9184

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9184th meeting

Monday, 7 November 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Agyeman. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ghana)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Stastoli
Mr. Leite Novaes
Mr. Xing Jisheng
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Bongo
Mrs. Kamboj
Ms. Moran
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. González Jiménez
Ms. Syed
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Mohammad
Mr. Eckersley
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 2 November 2022 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2022/828)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-67682 (E)
*2267682*

S/PV.9184

The situation in the Middle East

As Council members were previously informed, the
OPCW Technical Secretariat has provided the Syrian
Arab Republic with the list of pending declarations
and other documents requested by the DAT since 2019,
with the aim of assisting the Syrian Arab Republic
in resolving the 20 outstanding issues. I have been
advised that the OPCW Technical Secretariat has not
yet received the requested information from the Syrian
Arab Republic.

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 2 November 2022 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2022/828)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Türkiye to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/828, which contains the text of a letter
dated 2 November 2022 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: I thank the members of the
Security Council for the opportunity to brief them
again on the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013),
on the elimination of the chemical weapons programme
of the Syrian Arab Republic.
In the brief time that has elapsed since the Council’s
previous consideration of this matter (see S/PV.9164),
and consistent with established practice, the Office for
Disarmament Affairs has been in regular contact with
its counterparts at the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) on its activities related
to this matter. Efforts by the OPCW Declaration
Assessment Team (DAT) to clarify all the outstanding
issues regarding the initial declaration and subsequent
declarations of the Syrian Arab Republic remain as
previously outlined. Unfortunately, all efforts by the
OPCW Technical Secretariat to organize the twentyfifth round of consultations between the DAT and the
Syrian National Authority continue to be unsuccessful.
2/14

07/11/2022

Full cooperation by the Syrian Arab Republic
with the OPCW Technical Secretariat is essential to
closing all outstanding issues. As has been stressed
on a monthly basis for many years now, due to the
identified gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies that
remain unresolved, the Technical Secretariat continues
to assess that, at this stage, the declaration submitted
by the Syrian Arab Republic cannot be considered
accurate and complete in accordance with the Chemical
Weapons Convention.
The OPCW Technical Secretariat has assured
me that it remains fully committed to ensuring the
complete implementation by the Syrian Arab Republic
of all its declaration requirements and to assisting
Syria in fulfilling its obligations under the Convention,
OPCW policy-making organs’ decisions and resolution
2118 (2013). I take this opportunity to reiterate my
support for the integrity, professionalism, impartiality,
objectivity and independence of the work of the OPCW.
I regret to inform the Council that the Syrian Arab
Republic has not yet provided sufficient technical
information or explanations that would enable the
OPCW Technical Secretariat to close the issue related
to the detection of a Schedule 2 chemical at the Barzah
facilities of the Scientific Studies and Research Centre
in November 2018. Neither has it received the requested
information from the Syrian Arab Republic regarding
the unauthorized movement of the two cylinders related
to the chemical weapon incident that took place in
Douma on 7 April 2018, which were destroyed in an
attack on a chemical weapons production facility. The
Syrian Arab Republic must respond with urgency to all
the OPCW Technical Secretariat’s requests.
With regard to the invitation extended by the
OPCW Director-General to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Expatriates of the Syrian Arab Republic to
an in-person meeting to identify ways to ensure that
the Syrian Arab Republic complies in the shortest time
possible with all of its obligations under the Convention,
22-67682

07/11/2022

The situation in the Middle East

I note that, while the OPCW Technical Secretariat
was still awaiting a response from the Syrian Arab
Republic on the latest version of the agenda submitted
in December 2021, the Syrian Arab Republic suggested
a preliminary meeting in Beirut. As Council members
were previously informed, since then, communication
between the focal points in charge of the preparations
for the meeting between the OPCW Director-General
and the Syrian Minister has been re-initiated by the
OPCW Technical Secretariat, and the Syrian Arab
Republic has responded.
Consistent with previous updates to the Council, the
OPCW Fact-Finding Mission remains in the process of
studying all available information related to allegations
of the use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab
Republic. I have been advised that the FFM continues
to engage with the Syrian Arab Republic and other
States parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention
with regard to a number of incidents and preparing for
upcoming deployments.
I understand that the Investigation and Identification
Team (IIT) continues its investigations into incidents in
which the FFM has determined that chemical weapons
were used or likely used in the Syrian Arab Republic.
The IIT will issue further reports in due course. On the
decision entitled “Addressing the Possession and Use
of Chemical Weapons by the Syrian Arab Republic”
(C-25/DEC.9), adopted on 21 April 2021, I have been
informed that, unfortunately, the Syrian Arab Republic
has not yet completed any of the measures stipulated in
paragraph 5 of decision EC-94/DEC.2. I therefore repeat
my call for the Syrian Arab Republic to cooperate fully
with the OPCW Technical Secretariat in that regard.
As always, I take this opportunity to strongly
reiterate Secretary-General Guterres’s message that
the use of chemical weapons is intolerable and that
impunity for their use is equally unacceptable. It is
imperative to identify and hold accountable all those
who used chemical weapons. The failure to do that
not only means a failure to bring about justice for the
victims of those inhumane weapons, but also continues
the steady erosion of the taboo against the use of
chemical weapons and sets a dangerous precedent. Only
by attributing responsibility and holding perpetrators
accountable can the taboo against such weapons be
fully restored. It is my sincere hope that the members
of the Council will unite on that issue. The Office for
Disarmament Affairs stands ready to provide whatever
support and assistance it can.

S/PV.9184

The President: I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The previous meeting on the implementation
of resolution 2118 (2013) (see S/PV.9164) was held
on 25 October, that is, less than two weeks ago.
There are no subjects within the Security Council’s
mandate-reporting cycle that have been considered
with such frequency. Given that, in the case of the
Syrian chemical file, there has been no development of
the situation at all on the ground, this is simply absurd.
The latest report of the Director-General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) (see S/2022/828, annex) differs from the
previous one (see S/2022/727, annex) in exactly two
sentences. What is the point of convening a separate
meeting of the Security Council for the sake of
discussing them? It seems that today we are holding a
meeting for the sake of a meeting and are convening
only so that some Western capitals can tick a box and
report that we are maintaining the same frequency
of meetings on the Syrian chemical weapons issue
as before. Such an approach devalues the
​​ discussion
on the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013) and
undermines the authority of the Council, which could
have discussed far more urgent and fast-moving
situations instead of wasting time.
But since we are all gathered today anyway, I
will touch on a topic that is becoming increasingly
outrageous. We are grateful to the Ghanaian presidency
for inviting OPCW Director-General Fernando Arias
to brief the Security Council. His latest refusal was
predictable. It has already become clear that he is
terrified of publicly holding the OPCW Technical
Secretariat, headed by him, accountable for flagrant
violations in its work. That is very unfortunate because,
without the requisite work on mistakes, the decline in the
OPCW’s international credibility will be irreversible.
On the two occasions that Mr. Arias finally dared to
address the Security Council in person, we asked him a
number of specific questions about the irregularities in
the work of the Technical Secretariat (see S/2020/1202
and S/PV.8785). In December 2020, they were
transmitted to the Director-General in writing, as well
as being distributed among the members of the Council.
For the past almost two years, we have not received any

22-676823/14

S/PV.9184

The situation in the Middle East

substantive response. Neither have we received any
response from the Office for Disarmament Affairs,
the presence of whose representative, according to
Mr. Arias’s strange logic, allegedly relieves him of the
need to address the Security Council in person. Let me
recall the main points that remain unclear.
First, of course, is the infamous report of the FactFinding Mission related to the incident in Douma in
April 2018. As confirmed by various sources, including
former inspectors of the OPCW itself who were directly
involved in the investigation of that case, its final version
was radically edited as compared to the original one
under pressure from some delegations. In fact, that was
a forgery. Attempts by the inspectors to get the OPCW
leadership to investigate what had happened came to
nothing. Moreover, they were harassed for their pursuit of
the truth. The Director-General and his representatives
never provided us with a reasonable explanation for that
unacceptable and outrageous situation.
Secondly, there is Syria’s initial declaration under
the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC). We asked
for an explanation of the differences in approach on that
issue between Damascus and, for example, Libya and
other countries that experienced similar problems but
were not subjected to the same barrage of criticism as
Syria. Why are the reports of the Technical Secretariat
on the issue invariably one-sided and do not take into
account any positive developments? In addition, it was
not limited to criticism, and unprecedented restrictive
measures were imposed on Syria for no reason.
Thirdly, we remain thoroughly dissatisfied with the
working methods of the OPCW Technical Secretariat,
which in its investigations relies on information from
biased sources opposed to the Syrian Government,
collects their statements remotely and draws “highly
likely” conclusions based on them, claiming all that
fiction as irrefutable evidence. In addition to being
unconvincing, such methods are in direct violation of
the CWC, which has a chain-of-custody requirement to
ensure that evidence is preserved. At the very least, all
that is a dramatic, inexplicable and unjustified change
in the basis of the organization’s work. Moreover, a
former OPCW spokesman, Mr. Luhan, said in 2013 that
the organization would never examine samples that had
not been collected by its inspectors in the field. What
factors have contributed to the fact that the Technical
Secretariat now allows itself to openly violate its own
declared principles and does not hesitate to admit it in
4/14

07/11/2022

its reports? Who, if not the Director-General, should
deal with this unacceptable situation?
Another related issue is the double standards of the
Technical Secretariat in selecting sources of evidence.
We see how the OPCW inspection teams readily seize on
any, even the weakest and most inconclusive, material
from the infamous White Helmets, while evidence of
the involvement of the opposition in the organization
of provocations using chemical weapons provided by
professionals — the Syrian authorities and the Russian
military — is blatantly ignored, as well as the numerous
confirmations of local eyewitnesses, that is, living
eyewitnesses, of the staged nature of those incidents.
The Investigation and Identification Team (IIT), so
cherished by our former Western partners, is, as they
say, as crooked as a corkscrew. Given the fact that it
itself is illegitimate, that is, its establishment was
pushed through by Western countries in violation of
the CWC, it is not surprising that all its products are
an example of the lowest grade of politically ordered
pseudoanalysis. Let us take last year’s report on the
incident in Saraqib in February 2018. It shows that
the IIT never went to the scene of the incident. All the
physical evidence was collected by representatives
of the infamous White Helmets non-governmental
organization. At the same time, half of the witnesses
interviewed were White Helmets themselves, and their
testimony was examined by anonymous so-called
authoritative experts and scientific institutions. The
report is full of fantastic details, such as helicopters
flying at low altitude at night with their lights on,
which, in principle, is unacceptable when carrying out
combat missions, and a cylinder that somehow became
corroded in less than 12 hours after hitting the ground.
No national court in the world would accept such crude
disinformation as evidence. But the OPCW Technical
Secretariat does not hesitate to bring it to the attention
of States Members of the United Nations and the OPCW,
and it even announces new IIT products.
In principle, we are very concerned about the
Technical Secretariat’s practice of retrospective
investigations. What eyewitness accounts can be found
five years after the incident, particularly given the
military and political instability in the country? What
material evidence? It is clear that, in principle, there
can be no question of any objective investigation in
such a case.
22-67682

07/11/2022

The situation in the Middle East

But the leadership of the OPCW’s Technical
Secretariat does not seem to need that. Speaking to the
Council in June last year, Mr. Arias did not answer any
of the questions that we raised about irregularities in
the work of the Technical Secretariat, and, in fact, he
refused to take any action to rectify them. Moreover, he
openly bragged that he had violated the methodology
required by the CWC for preserving evidence, which
was allegedly obsolete. I would like to hear how he is
able to support that position, which is diametrically
opposed to his mandate.
It is also telling that Mr. Arias has never visited
Syria or seen with his own eyes the sites about whose
inspections he reports on to the Security Council every
month. That approach is in stark contrast to the policy
of Rafael Grossi, the Director-General of another
specialized international organization, the International
Atomic Energy Agency. Mr. Grossi has made shuttle
diplomacy a hallmark of his work as Director-General.
However busy his schedule is, he always finds time to
brief the Council. Once he even did so when he was
on an aeroplane. What is stopping Mr. Arias from
doing the same? Is it because he is indifferent to his
responsibilities, or because he is afraid of displeasing the
Western delegations that are attempting to monopolize
the platform at The Hague and bend the OPCW
leadership entirely to their will? Does he understand
the potential consequences for the organization he
heads? It is clear that with such an approach there is
no point in hoping for a meaningful discussion in the
Security Council on the implementation of resolution
2118 (2013).
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I want to
thank the High Representative for her briefing. The
United States greatly values the work of the Office for
Disarmament Affairs on this file, in coordination with
the commendable efforts of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), to provide
independent, thoroughly researched and detailed
information about Syria’s progress, or lack thereof,
towards the complete and verifiable elimination of its
chemical-weapon programme. Let me be clear in the
light of what we just heard. The international community
must continue to work to hold the Al-Assad regime
accountable for its use of chemical weapons against its
own people through the efforts of the Security Council
and in other international forums.
As long as the discrepancies in Syria’s
chemical-weapon statement remain, this monthly

S/PV.9184

meeting remains necessary and fully appropriate.
The United States welcomed the adoption in the First
Committee of draft resolution A/C.1/77/L.55, on the
implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention
(CWC), put forward by our Polish colleagues. The
resolution categorically condemns the use of chemical
weapons by anyone, under any circumstances,
including the independently verified, repeated use of
those horrific weapons by the Al-Assad regime. The
international community’s overwhelming support
for the resolution, which received 156 votes in favour
and just six against, makes it clear that there can be
no impunity for those who choose to use chemical
weapons. Those who voted against it choose to turn a
blind eye to recent uses of chemical weapons, including
the numerous instances of their use by the Al-Assad
regime against innocent Syrian civilians.
The United States continues to promote
accountability for the use of chemical weapons. Last
month, the United States imposed visa restrictions on
three Syrian military officials for their involvement in
gross violations of human rights, owing to their role
in the deadly August 2013 chemical-weapon attack on
Ghouta. As a result of our action, the three officials, as
well as their immediate family members, are ineligible
for entry into the United States. As Council members
will recall, the 2013 attack, using the nerve agent sarin,
was on civilians in Ghouta and killed at least 1,400
people, many of them children.
Collectively and separately, the OPCW and the
United Nations have independently confirmed the
Syrian regime’s use of chemical weapons on eight
occasions, and we anticipate future OPCW reporting in
that regard. The United States assesses that the Al-Assad
regime has used chemical weapons at least 50 times
since acceding to the Chemical Weapons Convention
in 2013. We will continue to promote accountability
for the attacks on Ghouta and elsewhere. Despite our
collective demands, the Al-Assad regime, backed by
Russia, continues to obfuscate and delay and has failed
to completely declare and destroy its chemical-weapon
stockpiles, in violation of its obligations under resolution
2118 (2013) and the Chemical Weapons Convention.
The Al-Assad regime continues to prevent the
deployment of the OPCW Declaration Assessment Team
to Syria, in a clear violation of its obligations under
resolution 2118 (2013), which requires Syria to accept
OPCW personnel and provide them with immediate
and unfettered access to any and all sites. The United

22-676825/14

S/PV.9184

The situation in the Middle East

States once again calls on Syria to immediately and
without preconditions allow the OPCW team back
into Syria so that it can resume its important work of
verifying the complete declaration and destruction of
Syria’s chemical-weapon programme. These failures
by the Al-Assad regime, which continues to enjoy the
full support of Russia, a permanent member of the
Council, are an affront to the OPCW, the Council and
the international community. Its failure to declare and
destroy its chemical-weapon stores meanwhile is a
threat to the Syrian people and the wider region. Taken
together, those behaviours undermine our collective
security and make the world less safe. We call on the
regime to end its intransigence and simply meet its
obligations under both resolution 2118 (2013) and the
CWC as quickly as possible. Doing so would be a
positive step towards enhancing our collective security
and would help to ensure that we never again witness
the horrific scenes that we have seen in Syria over the
past nine years.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): I too would like to thank
High Representative Nakamitsu for her update.
The Security Council held a meeting on this topic
just a few days ago (see S/PV.9164). Going forward,
we believe that discussions on Syria and chemical
weapons should reflect progress on the ground, which
has unfortunately remained at a standstill for several
months. As a result, we often repeat well-known
stated positions.
That being said, throughout our current term on
the Council, we have encouraged sustained engagement
between Syria and the Technical Secretariat of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
to resolve all outstanding issues. We therefore appreciate
the recent communication between the focal points
of Syria and the Technical Secretariat concerning a
possible future meeting.
I also want to add that India attaches high
importance to the Chemical Weapons Convention and
stands for its full, effective and non-discriminatory
implementation. India is against the use of chemical
weapons by anybody, anywhere, at any time and in
any circumstances. We have consistently maintained
that any investigation into the use of chemical weapons
must be impartial, credible and objective. We have
repeatedly cautioned against the possibility of terrorist
entities and individuals gaining access to chemical
weapons, including in the region under discussion.
6/14

07/11/2022

Any allegations of the use of chemical weapons should
therefore be addressed with thorough attention.
In conclusion, India continues to believe that
progress on other tracks would also help to facilitate the
overall political peace process in Syria, as advocated in
resolution 2254 (2015).
Mr. Xing Jisheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank High Representative Izumi Nakamitsu for her
briefing and deeply regret the fact that Mr. Arias has
once again declined the Security Council’s invitation
to address it.
China firmly opposes the use of chemical weapons
by any country, organization or individual in any
circumstances and for any purpose, and sincerely
hopes that the world will be free of all threats posed
by chemical weapons as soon as possible. China notes
that the Council’s two latest discussions of the Syrian
chemical-weapon issue have taken place within 10
working days of each other (see S/PV.9164). There
has been no new report by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and no new
developments on the ground. China strongly appeals to
the Council to reduce the frequency of deliberations on
the Syrian issue or consider combining Syria-related
issues in our discussions in order to economize on
meeting resources and improve the Council’s efficiency.
China’s position on the Syrian chemical-weapon
issue remains unchanged, which is that the only way
to address it is through dialogue and consultations.
We welcome the consultations between the Syrian
Government and the OPCW Technical Secretariat
through correspondence on the declaration assessment,
and we encourage the Syrian Government and the
Technical Secretariat to continue their communications
on scheduling a meeting between the OPCW DirectorGeneral and Syria’s Foreign Minister, based on mutual
respect and equal-footed cooperation. We also call on
the Technical Secretariat to take effective measures to
respond to the concerns of the relevant countries about
the visa issue and remove obstacles to holding the
twenty-fifth round of technical consultations.
The OPCW investigation into, and attribution of,
the alleged use of chemical weapons should be strictly
limited to the framework of the Chemical Weapons
Convention and should be based on compliance with
procedures, reliable evidence and credible conclusions.
We hope that the Director-General and the Technical
22-67682

07/11/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Secretariat will take practical measures to maintain the
technical standards of the OPCW.
Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): I thank the High
Representative for her very helpful briefing.
Syria has had nine years to come into compliance
with the Chemical Weapons Convention. But since
its accession, it has repeatedly and categorically
failed to provide the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) with a complete
account of its chemical weapons programme. And as
we know, the Syrian regime has been independently
found responsible for at least eight chemical-weapon
attacks by United Nations and OPCW independent
investigations — attacks on its own people.
Syria has failed to assure the OPCW or the Security
Council that it abides today by its commitments under
resolution 2118 (2013) and as a State party to the
Chemical Weapons Convention
There is understandable frustration in the Security
Council about the lack of progress, but we must see that
for what it is. The problem is not how many meetings
the Council holds; the problem is the behaviour of the
Syrian regime in breach of core international norms,
including resolutions of the Security Council. And the
problem is systematic disinformation from Syria and
Russia in an effort to obscure that behaviour and to
avoid accountability, including deeply irresponsible
attempts to attack the OPCW.
We heard from the High Representative today the
risks of the erosion of the taboo against using chemical
weapons. The OPCW is responsible for preventing the
spread of chemical weapons. It is an expert and highly
professional organization, and it is in all our interests
to prevent it from being degraded by disinformation.
Until Syria gives proper assurances to the
international community, we must assume that Syria
continues to hold chemical weapons. And given its
track record, we must assume that the regime remains
willing to use them. Therefore, it is up to the members
of the Council to maintain the pressure to resolve that
ongoing threat to international peace and security.
Ms. Mohammad (United Arab Emirate) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank you, Mr. President, and I also thank
Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing.
We meet today only 13 days after our most recent
meeting (see S/PV.9164) on the Syrian chemical

S/PV.9184

weapons dossier, in the absence of any developments
on that important track. The October report, like those
before it, did not include any new developments that
warrant the holding of today’s meeting. Yet these
meetings are unfortunately still scheduled on the
Security Council agenda every month, without regard
for their usefulness.
Therefore, I would like to stress the importance of
using the time and resources of the Security Council
wisely, especially at a time when the Council and its
subsidiary bodies seek to discuss urgent matters in the
light of current global developments. To ensure their
efficiency, we have a shared responsibility to reconsider
the meetings that the Council holds on the chemical
weapons in Syria dossier. My country will support the
convening of a meeting on that dossier following the
occurrence of any relevant developments.
With that in mind, I would like to reiterate the
unwavering position of the United Arab Emirates on
that dossier.
First, my country reiterates that the development,
transfer and use of chemical weapons by anyone and
under any circumstances are strictly prohibited under
international law, whether in Syria or elsewhere.
That would constitute a serious threat to regional and
international security and stability. In particular, we
stress the need to ensure that such weapons do not fall
into the hands of terrorist groups, which would not
hesitate to use them for their own dangerous purposes.
Secondly, my country stresses the importance of
maintaining a constructive and continuous dialogue
between the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons and the Syrian Arab Republic in
order to address all outstanding issues. Consultations
cannot be replaced by written correspondence, which
will not lead to the achievement of the desired outcomes.
Mr. González Jiménez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank High Representative Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
As we mentioned just two weeks ago (see S/PV.9164),
the lack of progress on this dossier is regrettable. It goes
without saying that the outstanding issues have not yet
been resolved for the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Technical Secretariat
to consider the initial Syrian declaration that was
concluded. Unfortunately, it is also not possible to
establish that Syria has complied with its obligations

22-676827/14

S/PV.9184

The situation in the Middle East

under the Chemical Weapons Convention, to which it
acceded in September 2013. Therefore, we reiterate the
call, in accordance with resolution 2118 (2013), for the
Syrian authorities to cooperate fully and in good faith
with both the OPCW and its investigative teams.
In addition, we note that the tripartite agreement
signed by the United Nations Office for Project
Services, the OPCW and Syria expires on 31 December.
We call for the renewal of that agreement on an annual
basis in order to facilitate the planning and budgetary
programming necessary for the Technical Secretariat’s
fulfilment of its mandate in Syria.
My delegation also continues to follow the
developments concerning the organization of a
preliminary meeting to be held in Beirut and the
progress towards confirming the date and agenda of
the meeting to be held between Director-General Arias
and Foreign Minister Mekdad. As Council members
will recall, the Technical Secretariat sent an invitation
to hold that meeting as early as June 2021.
The International Day of Remembrance for all
Victims of Chemical Warfare is held annually on
30 November. That occasion is an opportunity to honour
the victims of such atrocities and at the same time to
reaffirm the commitment to the total elimination of
chemical weapons.
In that regard, despite initial progress in the 2016
elimination of Syria’s declared chemical weapons
stockpile, it is alarming that evidence gathered by the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic shows that of a total of 38
confirmed attacks, 25 were in fact perpetrated after
2016. Moreover, they resulted in the deaths of hundreds
of civilians and in thousands of casualties, as well as
the displacement of entire communities.
Although resolution 2118 (2013) expresses the
need to bring those responsible for the use of chemical
weapons to justice, progress on that matter still leaves
much to be desired.
In the absence of consensus in the Security Council
to refer the case of Syria to the International Criminal
Court, we encourage Member States to continue to
support and finance the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism; the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic;
the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission; and the Investigation
and Identification Team. Maintaining and strengthening
8/14

07/11/2022

those avenues for accountability is the minimum that
the victims of the chemical weapons attacks and their
families deserve.
My delegation once again expresses its support
for the OPCW Technical Secretariat and its technical
teams, which, despite countless obstacles, carry out
their work in a professional, independent and impartial
manner, while adhering to international standards.
In conclusion, I stress once again Mexico’s
unequivocal condemnation of the use of chemical
weapons by any actor and under any circumstances.
Ms. Syed (Norway): I thank High Representative
Nakamitsu for her briefing on the progress on the
elimination of Syria’s chemical weapons programme.
Norway reaffirms its full confidence in the work
of Director-General Arias and the Technical Secretariat
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW).
It is regrettable that the Council is meeting again
with no new positive developments in the Syrian
dossier. Let me be clear in saying that this trend is
simply unsustainable.
The international prohibition against the use of
chemical weapons must remain a top priority. The
lack of accountability and the deterioration of trust
reminds us of the urgency of this issue. The Council
cannot be silent in such a prolonged stasis. We call on
Syria to fulfil its obligations in accordance with the
Chemical Weapons Convention and resolution 2118
(2013). We reiterate our strong condemnation of any
use of chemical weapons, anytime, by anyone. Syria
must give immediate attention to full cooperation with
the OPCW and the resolution of the 20 outstanding
issues. We urge Syria to provide sufficient technical
information or explanations to reconcile the identified
gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies. Similarly, it is
critical that Syria complete the necessary measures to
lift the suspension of its rights and privileges as a State
party to the Chemical Weapons Convention.
Let me conclude by reiterating our full support for
all necessary preparations to be made for a meeting
between Director-General Arias and Minister Mekdad
at the earliest convenience. Cooperation and dialogue
are key to invigorating the process.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
22-67682

07/11/2022

The situation in the Middle East

In August 2013, the Syrian regime murdered more
than a thousand civilians in the outskirts of Damascus,
using weapons banned under international law. No one
has questioned the reality of the attack. In the wake
of that massacre, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2118 (2013). Month after month, we
can only lament the lack of progress on that matter.
After six refusals by the regime, the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
Technical Secretariat had to give up on deploying the
Declaration Assessment Team on the ground to assess
Syria’s initial declaration.
Syria must come clean on its entire stockpile.
It must comply with its international obligations if it
wants its rights and privileges restored. We urge Syria
to respond in writing to the questions that the Technical
Secretariat had regarding its initial declaration and to
take the necessary steps to ensure that the meeting
in Beirut between the two parties can take place.
France will pay very close attention to the conclusions
of the forthcoming reports of the Investigation and
Identification Team on the Douma and Marea attacks.
Despite the obstacles, the OPCW Technical
Secretariat has continued its investigative work with
tenacity, independence and professionalism, and I want
to commend them once again. The smear campaigns
against them are unacceptable.
The fight against impunity continues to be our
priority and is the foundation of the effectiveness
and credibility of the prohibition regime. That
is why we continue to stand up in support of the
international partnership against impunity for the use
of chemical weapons.
Mr. Leite Novaes (Brazil): I thank High
Representative Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing. I
would also like to welcome the representatives of the
Syrian Arab Republic, Türkiye and the Islamic Republic
of Iran to today’s meeting.
Less than two weeks ago, we met in this Chamber
to discuss the same issues (see S/PV.9164). The latest
report of the Director-General of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
(S/2022/828, annex) had just been published on that
very same day. We therefore do not even have a new
report to discuss today.
Brazil follows closely the progress in the elimination
of the Syrian chemical weapons programme, but

S/PV.9184

we do not believe that holding successive Security
Council meetings when there are little or no relevant
developments on the ground is efficient in terms of
time or resources, as noted today by the representatives
of the Russian Federation, India, China and the United
Arab Emirates.
Owing to the absence of new developments in the
Syrian chemical weapons file, allow me to once again
reaffirm our traditional position on the matter. Chemical
weapons are utterly incompatible with international
humanitarian law and therefore must have no place in
the practices and doctrines of today’s world. The use
of such weapons violates international agreements and
poses a serious threat to international peace and security.
Such incidents must be addressed with transparency
and be subject to thorough and impartial investigations,
in accordance with the Chemical Weapons Convention.
Mr. Stastoli (Albania): I would like to extend our
appreciation and gratitude to Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu
for her patience and periodic briefings to the
Security Council.
Two weeks after the previous meeting of the
Security Council on this issue (see S/PV.9164), we are
faced with a situation of perfect stagnation. In meeting
after meeting of the Council, we raise with concern
the issue of this absurd stagnation, which speaks
louder than our statements on the refusal of the Syrian
regime to cooperate with the international community
to verify the destruction of Syria’s chemical weapons,
as claimed by the regime and its allies. No report of
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) corroborates what the Syrian regime
claims. Only a handful of Al-Assad allies do so, and
they constantly try to turn this lack of progress into an
argument for less monitoring, fewer meetings and fewer
possibilities for accountability for the Al-Assad regime.
If Syria and its allies are asking for fewer meetings
on Syria’s chemical weapons programme, they could
start by answering the list of 20 questions put forward
by the report of the Declaration Assessment Team,
which remain unanswered by Syria. We deeply regret
Syria’s deliberate lack of cooperation. That refusal
is unacceptable.
Again and again, the OPCW monthly report has
clearly stated that, given the gaps, inconsistencies
and discrepancies identified that remain unresolved,
the Technical Secretariat considers that the statement
submitted by Syria cannot be considered accurate and

22-676829/14

S/PV.9184

The situation in the Middle East

complete in accordance with the Chemical Weapons
Convention and resolution 2118 (2013). This is a mockery
of the international community and international law,
which we have built global institutions to safeguard.
Albania reiterates its full support for the objective,
impartial and professional work of the teams of the
OPCW Technical Secretariat.
The Al-Assad regime has repeatedly used chemical
weapons against its own people, in flagrant violation of
international obligations and international humanitarian
law. Those are facts that have been confirmed by the
OPCW Investigation and Identification Team, which
has attributed at least four separate chemical weapons
attacks to the Al-Assad regime. Impunity for those
committing such crimes is not an option. We owe
it to the victims and their families to ensure justice,
accountability and reparation. We owe it to the Syrian
people, but we also owe it to all of humankind.
In that context, we commend the Fact-Finding
Mission and the Investigation and Identification
Team for their ongoing activities in identifying all the
perpetrators and the chain of command for the use of
chemicals as weapons against civilians in Syria. We
look forward to the publication of attribution reports
regarding the chemical weapons attacks against
the citizens of Douma in April 2018 and Marea in
September 2015. We await with equal interest the
report of the ninth round of inspections of the Barzah
and Jamrayah facilities conducted by the Technical
Secretariat in September.
It is regrettable that some States in the Council try
to minimize the consequences of the use of chemical
weapons, or even worse, claim that they were never
used, with the aim of whitewashing those responsible in
order to serve their own narrow political interests. By
doing so, they are only normalizing the use of chemical
weapons and severely undermining international
law and the credibility of international institutions,
including the Council.
Despite all of those attempts, Albania will never
tire of condemning in the strongest terms any use of
chemical weapons by State or non-State actors. We will
never tire of calling for accountability and justice for
the victims. This is the minimum we can do in support
of the Syrian people, who continue to suffer after all
these years.
Ms. Moran (Ireland): I thank High Representative
Nakamitsu for her briefing this morning.
10/14

07/11/2022

In 2013, the Security Council adopted resolution
2118 (2013). It did so in the wake of the chemical-weapon
attack in Ghouta that killed and injured more than
a thousand Syrian civilians in the most horrific of
circumstances. I want to highlight two key decisions
reflected in resolution 2118 (2013): first, that Syria
shall not use, develop, produce, acquire, stockpile or
retain chemical weapons; and secondly, that Syria shall
cooperate fully with the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the United Nations
by accepting personnel designated by the OPCW or
the United Nations, by providing these personnel with
immediate and unfettered access to any and all sites,
and, in discharging their functions, the right to inspect
these sites. The resolution also expresses the Council’s
strong conviction that those individuals responsible
for the use of chemical weapons in Syria should be
held accountable.
Despite the OPCW’s work with Syria to destroy all
declared chemical-weapon stocks, we have, since 2013,
seen eight chemical weapon attacks attributed by the
OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
and the OPCW Investigation and Identification Team
to the Syrian authorities. Further attacks remain under
investigation by the OPCW, and many more have
been reported.
Over the same period, we have seen the issues with
Syria’s declarations to the OPCW increase from 5 to 20.
These are not mere technical issues, as Syria has argued.
They are issues of real concern, from undeclared or
erroneously declared chemical-weapon production
facilities to chemical munitions and chemical warfare
agents that are unaccounted for. These issues go to the
heart of the question the Council needs to face, namely,
whether Syria continues to use, produce or retain
chemical weapons.
Regrettably, Syria’s response has been to reduce
its cooperation with the OPCW until it now stands at
almost nothing. Syria makes its cooperation with the
Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) conditional,
dictating the composition of the DAT team, in defiance
of resolution 2118 (2013). It is deeply worrying that the
last round of consultations with the DAT was as far back
as February 2021, despite the Secretariat’s best efforts
to push this agenda item forward. We see Syria continue
a similar pattern of non-cooperation in relation to the
proposed meeting between Director-General Arias and
Foreign Minister Mekdad. At the same time, Syria,
22-67682

07/11/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9184

with Russia, actively seeks to undermine the OPCW’s
authority and independence, to mask Syria’s culpability.

attention and resources on the other existing challenges
facing the Syrian people.

Let us therefore be clear: the Council must uphold
its decisions embodied in resolution 2118 (2013) by
holding Syria to its obligations under that resolution
and the Chemical Weapons Convention. Syria must
engage urgently in a serious and meaningful way with
the Technical Secretariat to resolve the 20 outstanding
issues with its initial declaration. The Council must
uphold the international norm against chemical
weapons, including through clear and unequivocal
backing for the OPCW in fulfilling its mandated task.

As we reiterate our support for Security Council
resolution 2118 (2013), we note with regret that there
continue to be significant divergences between the
positions of the OPCW and the Syrian authorities
regarding the outstanding gaps, inconsistencies and
discrepancies related to the destruction of the country’s
chemical weapons. It bears repeating that aside being a
clear and egregious violation of international law, the
use of chemical weapons poses serious danger to the
health of civilians and a grave threat to international
peace and security. In this regard, failure by the
international community to fully and verifiably destroy
all chemical weapons of the Syrian Arab Republic will
be setting a bad precedent as far as the production and
use of chemical weapons are concerned. Furthermore,
the international community must assume responsibility
for a definite closure of the matter to help curtail
the likelihood of the production and possible use of
chemical weapons anywhere by anyone, under any
circumstances, including by rogue elements.

It is Syria’s actions, not its words, that are important
to closing this file. It is only through Syria’s genuine
engagement that the OPCW will be able to provide the
necessary assurance that Syria’s chemical-weapons
programme is verifiably and definitively a thing of the
past. Until then, the Security Council cannot simply
shrug its shoulders; regular discussion by the Council
is needed to show Syria that its lack of cooperation
will not go unanswered, and that there can be no
impunity for those who would use these illegal and
abhorrent weapons.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ghana.
I have the honour to deliver this joint statement on
behalf of the three African members of the Security
Council, namely, Gabon, Kenya and my own country,
Ghana.
We thank the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, for her briefing
and welcome the participation in this meeting of the
representatives of the Syrian Arab Republic, the Islamic
Republic of Iran and Türkiye.
We welcome the 109th report of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and
the submission of the 107th monthly report by the Syrian
national authorities on the country’s chemical-weapons
programme. However, we remain concerned that the
stakeholders have not made tangible progress in their
attempts to fully address the issue in accordance with
the Chemical Weapons Convention. This calls into
question the propriety of the frequency with which
the Council meets on the Syria chemical-weapons
file, when little to no updated progress is reported on
the issue. We join other members of the Council in
calling for a review of the status quo to enable us focus

On a positive note, we welcome the re-initiation
of communication between the focal points of the
Syrian Arab Republic and the OPCW as a step in the
right direction. It is our considered view that such
cooperation between the Syrian national authority
and the Secretariat of the OPCW will facilitate
and conclusively resolve the outstanding issues,
including, the organization of the twenty-fifth round of
consultations with the Declaration Assessment Team.
We therefore call on the two sides to expedite action on
the modalities for convening the high-level in-person
meeting between the Syrian Foreign Minister and the
Director-General of the OPCW, to help give the needed
impetus to the efforts towards satisfactory resolution of
all outstanding issues.
In concluding, we call for increased cooperation
between the OPCW Secretariat and the authorities of
the Syrian Arab Republic in order to make tangible
progress on the issue.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of Brazil has asked for the floor
to make a further statement.
Mr. Leite Novaes (Brazil): I will be very brief.
I am sorry to take the floor again. I would just like

22-6768211/14

S/PV.9184

The situation in the Middle East

to ask the representative of Albania to refrain from
assuming who is and who is not Brazil’s ally. Our
position on readdressing the frequency of meetings on
this agenda item has nothing to do with alliances, but
with the efficiency of the Security Council’s work, as
recognized by the majority of Council members today,
namely, the Russian Federation, India, China, the
United Arab Emirates and the three African members,
Gabon, Ghana and Kenya, as just stated by the President
of the Council.
The President: The representative of Albania has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Stastoli (Albania): I am sorry that the
representative of Brazil appears to have not very well
understood what I said. I can repeat it, but I have also
said it in my e-statement, where we make it very clear
that we see a total lack of progress on implementing
the prohibition on the use of chemical weapons, and the
support for this lack of progress often takes the form of
the call for fewer meetings on the topic in the Security
Council. It has nothing to do with what my colleague
from Brazil has just said.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your country’s assumption of the
Security Council this month. I would also like to thank
your predecessor, His Excellency the Ambassador of
Gabon, for his efforts during Gabon’s presidency of the
Security Council last month.
My delegation joins the members who expressed
surprise that the Council is discussing this issue twice
in the space of less than two weeks in the absence of
any developments that require it, which is a waste of
the Organization’s time and resources. Why do a few
countries insist on ignoring the calls of a majority of
Council members to rationalize the Council’s time
and resources? Would it not have been more useful to
hold a meeting on the negative effects of the unilateral
coercive measures imposed by the United States
and the European Union on the Syrian people? That
would highlight the inhumane consequences of such
measures, which have disastrous effects on the daily
lives of Syrians and their basic needs. Should we not
hold those countries accountable for the crimes they
have been committing against the Syrian people ever
since 2011?
12/14

07/11/2022

Western countries continue to insist on the
Council holding these debates only to repeat the
same accusatory narratives against Syria, which is
irresponsible, unacceptable and incompatible with their
obligation under the Charter of the United Nations to
maintain international peace and security. Their false
accusations against Syria have no legal or professional
basis. They should be entirely rejected and considered
merely part of the hostile political campaign that these
countries have been waging against my country since
2011, as I said. Their goal is to undermine security and
stability in Syria and destroy its capabilities.
My delegation also deplores the pervasive
politicization of the work of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW),
which has reached a point that allows the provisions
of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) to be
fundamentally distorted. In that context, we reiterate
the Syrian Arab Republic’s position on the illegality of
the establishment of the OPCW’s so-called Investigation
and Identification Team, and our total refusal to
recognize it and its erroneous and unprofessional
methods of work, which will ultimately lead to invalid
conclusions. Ever since it acceded voluntarily to the
CWC, the Syrian Arab Republic has implemented its
obligations, starting even before the Convention’s entry
into force, and has cooperated in full transparency
and openness with the OPCW in destroying all of its
stockpiles of chemical weapons and their production
facilities. In that context, I would like to point to some
aspects of the cooperation between the Syrian National
Authority and the OPCW’s Technical Secretariat.
First, the Syrian National Authority has continued
to submit its monthly reports to the Technical Secretariat
on time on activities related to the destruction of
chemical weapons and their production facilities, with
the 107th monthly report being the most recent.
Secondly, the Syrian National Authority has agreed
to continue to extend the tripartite agreement between
the Authority, the United Nations Office for Project
Services and the OPCW to ensure the facilitation of the
organization’s work in Syria. The last extension of that
agreement was for a period of six months, and it expires
at the end of this year.
Thirdly, the Syrian National Authority facilitated
nine rounds of inspection at Syria’s Scientific Studies
and Research Centre. The most recent report on the
eighth round confirmed that no activity prohibited
22-67682

07/11/2022

The situation in the Middle East

under the Convention took place. It also praised the
significant cooperation and facilitation provided by
Syria to the Inspection Team during that round.
Fourthly, over the past nine years, the Syrian
National Authority has granted more than 500 entry
visas to employees of the Technical Secretariat of the
OPCW, including all of its teams working in Syria. It
has also facilitated 24 rounds of consultations with the
Declaration Assessment Team and welcomed the holding
of the twenty-fifth round of consultations. It also agreed
to all the options proposed by the Technical Secretariat
for facilitating the holding of those rounds, while
maintaining its principled position on the reservations
we have about the participation of one expert who,
based on experience, has proved to be unprofessional.
The Syrian National Authority has repeatedly called on
the Technical Secretariat not to disrupt the important
work of the Declaration Assessment Team or hold it
hostage because of the non-issuance of an entry visa to
one expert whose behaviour we have reservations about.
The OPCW has many more experts that it can deploy.
Fifthly, the head of the Syrian National Authority
held two rounds of high-level consultations with the
Director-General of the OPCW and coordination is now
under way to hold another high-level meeting, according
to an agenda that will be agreed on by the two parties.
We look forward to those high-level consultations as
soon as possible.
Sixthly, the Syrian National Authority has spent a
lot of time and effort with the Technical Secretariat to
jointly review and discuss certain issues. Regrettably,
however, the Technical Secretariat continues to insist
that those issues are still outstanding. Discussions on
them are ongoing and there is no final agreement on
the outcome. It is therefore reprehensible that some
continue to level accusations against Syria. Every
aspect of the cooperation between Syria and the
OPCW’s Technical Secretariat that I have referred
to must be acknowledged. That ongoing good-faith
cooperation is a demonstration of Syria’s responsible
behaviour, as a country that fulfils its obligations and
with nothing to hide. As for the ingratitude, scepticism
and denial of certain countries for well-known political
purposes, they deserve nothing but denunciation
and condemnation.
Before concluding my statement, I would like to
note the following. The United States of America and
its Western allies believe that, by repeating the same

S/PV.9184

accusations and lies against Syria, they will convince
people to believe them. I would like to say to them
that the truth will not be obscured by their misleading
statements and overt policies of exerting pressure and
extortion on the Technical Secretariat of the OPCW and
Member States.
For example, I would like to note that the United
States, France and Britain obstructed the deployment
of the Fact-Finding Mission in Douma in 2018 so that
those three countries could wage joint and unjust
aggression against Syria. They come to the Council
and make statements to convince us that they are not
interfering in the work of the OPCW. There are many
other examples of such behaviour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Türkiye.
Mr. Keçeli (Türkiye): We would like to thank High
Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing and commend
the impartiality, independence and professionalism of
the Technical Secretariat of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW).
I would also like to note that, as a country
neighbouring Syria, Türkiye believes in the importance
and need for these monthly meetings. Every month, the
Security Council dedicates days to open debates on topics
on which the mandate of the Council is questionable.
As a country neighbouring Syria, Türkiye therefore
believes that the Council can spare approximately 80
minutes every month to discuss a topic that is directly
related to the maintenance of international peace and
security. It has been said that there has been no progress
on this file. Perhaps the lack of any progress calls for
more, and not fewer, regular meetings.
The previous report of the OPCW DirectorGeneral (see S/2022/727, annex) demonstrates that
the outstanding issues related to the Syrian regime’s
initial and subsequent declarations persist. The gaps,
discrepancies and inconsistencies in the chemical
weapons declaration of the Al-Assad regime continue.
Therefore, the OPCW cannot consider the declaration
as accurate or complete. The regime is obstructing the
work of the Investigation and Identification Team (ITT)
by not issuing visas.
Furthermore, the OPCW Technical Secretariat
still awaits a response to its inquiries on the regime’s
chemical weapons production facilities and the
chlorine cylinders used in the attack in Douma in

22-6768213/14

S/PV.9184

The situation in the Middle East

2018. We call on the Syrian regime to fully cooperate
with the OPCW Technical Secretariat and provide the
necessary information, as required under the Chemical
Weapons Convention.
The current investigations by the Fact-Finding
Mission and the IIT are important to establish the truth
about the use of chemical weapons in Syria. We look
forward to the completion of ongoing investigations,
in particular the next IIT report on the 2018 attack
in Douma.
It is our collective responsibility to ensure
accountability for the use of chemical weapons in
Syria. Ending impunity is also imperative to honouring
the hundreds of innocent lives lost as a result of the
chemical-weapon attacks perpetrated during the
conflict in Syria. Genuine political reconciliation in
the country will be possible only through justice and
accountability. We cannot change the past, but we have
the power to change the course of the future for the
people of Syria. We cannot look away now — and we
must continue to hold monthly meetings on this file.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Jalil Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
would like to congratulate Ghana on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for November. I
also congratulate Gabon for successfully completing
its presidency for the month of October.
Iran once again strongly condemns the use of
chemical weapons, by anyone, anywhere and under any
circumstances, as a flagrant violation of international
law. We underscore once again that any investigation
into the use of chemical weapons must be impartial,
professional, credible and objective, and must fully
comply with the requirements and procedures of the
Chemical Weapons Convention.
Equally crucial, the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) must be able to perform
its duties in an impartial, professional and objective
manner in order to establish the facts and develop
evidence-based conclusions. We reiterate our call for
the Chemical Weapons Convention to be implemented
fully, effectively and without discrimination. We believe

14/14

07/11/2022

that politicizing the Convention’s implementation and
exploiting the OPCW for political reasons endangers
both the organization and the Convention’s credibility.
Syria voluntarily joined the Convention in 2013
and dismantled its weapons arsenal, as well as the
facilities used to manufacture such weapons. While
encouraging dialogue and consultations between the
parties, we believe that the collaboration of the Syrian
Arab Republic with the OPCW should be recognized.
We further commend the Syrian Arab Republic for
providing monthly reports to the OPCW DirectorGeneral, detailing activities on its territory related
to the destruction of chemical weapons and their
production facilities.
A high-level meeting between Syria’s Foreign
Minister and the Director-General of the OPCW, which
we hope will be held, has the potential to pave the way
for the parties to resolve the outstanding issues. The
Syrian National Authority requested the Technical
Secretariat to convene a coordination meeting of the
two parties in Beirut to agree on the agenda for the
high-level meeting, which the Technical Secretariat
responded to on 3 October.
The previous Council meeting on the Syrian
chemical file was held on 25 October (see S/PV.9164)
and today we meet on the same topic for the second
time in less than two weeks, during which time there
have been no new developments. Therefore, it is clear
that there is no point for today’s discussion other than
to repeat claims against the Syrian Arab Republic. We
agree with the view that convening monthly meetings
on this subject is costly, not only in terms of United
Nations resources but also in terms of the Security
Council’s time.
Moreover, while the Syrian Arab Republic has
met the requirements of the Convention and continues
to cooperate constructively with the OPCW, handling
this file in a political and double-standards manner
will only divert discussion away from its technical
substance. We support the discussion of this matter on
its own technical track within the OPCW in order to
foster positive dialogue between Syria and the OPCW
and resolve the outstanding issues.
The meeting rose at 11.20 a.m.

22-67682
