Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Seeond Committee

Centre for Economic and Social Information of the
Office of Public Information:~n
(a) Successful information programmes in support
of development may require the use of modern techniques, mass media and specialized personnel, in many
cases will have to be unprecedented in approach, scope,
diversity and initiative, and must encourage full understanding of the relevance, complexity and urgency, as
well as the long-term nature, of the problems and processes of development;
(b) The mobilization of public opinion has to be
the responsibility mainly of national bodies;
( c) The formulation of concrete aims by the competent authorities can make a significant contribution
to the mobilization of public opinion;
(d) The role of the organizations of the United
Nations system will be to assist the national information media and meet their varying needs, in particular
by supplying adequate and appropriate basic information from which those media may draw both substance
and inspiration for their work;
(e) Information from international sources will have
to be aimed primarily at strengthening the sense of
interdependence and partnership implicit in the concept
of the Second United Nations Development Decade;
2. Further endorses in general the activities now
being undertaken in support of the aims of the Second
United Nations Development Decade, and notes with
interest the proposals for future action outlined in the
report of the Centre for Economic and Social Information of the Office of Public Information;
3. Recommends to the Secretary-General, in order
to further the aims of Economic and Social Council
resolution 1357 (XLV), that appropriate consultations
at the technical level be pursued as soon as possible
with representatives of the specialized agencies and
other organizations dealing with the preparation and
dissemination of information material, in order to explore the best means of co-ordinating and focusing the
activities in support of the aims of the Second United
Nations Development Decade;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to consult with
appropriate non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, in
categories I and II and on the Roster, as to how those
organizations could support the economic and social
goals of the Second United Nations Development
Decade, particularly through the mobilization of public
opinion;
5. Urges Governments to give consideration, in the
light of their individual circumstances, to the establishment of new national bodies designed to mobilize
public opinion, or to the strengthening of existing ones,
and, as a long-term measure, to give increasing development orientation to educational curricula.
1832nd plenary meeting,
13 December 1969.

2568 (XXIV). Proposed amendment to the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly
The General Assembly
Defers sine die consideration of the proposed amendment to the rules of procedure of the General Assembly
29 A/ AC.141/L.l l.

recommended by the Economic and Social Council in
resolution 1374 (XLV) of 2 August I %8.
1832nd plenary 11/('Ctini.
13 Decemhn / 969.

2569 (XXIV). Spcei:11 mea;.;11rc•s in fmour of the
lancJ-loeked dev-..loping <·oun!i·it·-.
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2086 (XX) of 20 December

1965 on the transit trade of land-locked count riL'S,
Recalling further resolution I I ( 11) of 23 March
1968, adopted by the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development at its second session, concerning the special problems of the land-lncknl countries, 30
Taking note of resolution 50 (Vlll) of 4 February
1969, adopted by the Trade and Development Board
at its eighth session,~ 1 hy which the Secretary-General
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development was invited to convene a group or experts to
carry out a comprehensive examination of the special
problems involved in the promotion of the trade and
economic development of the land-locked developing
countries,
1. Welcomes the agreement reached in the Trade
and Development Board whereby specific measures in
favour of land-locked developing countries will he
elaborated in the context of the contribution of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Dc-vc-lopment
to the international development strategy;
2. Requests the Board to consider. on the basis,
inter alia, of the report to be submitted by the group
of experts, the adoption of practical measures for the
implementation of all the provisions of resolution 11
(II) of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development;
3. Urges all States Members of the United Nations.
particularly the developed countries. to make an active
contribution to the elaboration of those specific measures;
4. Further urges all Member States which wrre
invited to become parties to the 1965 Convention on
Transit Trade of Land-locked States~~ that have not
yet done so to investigate the possibilities of ratifying
or acceding to that Convention and to make it effective
at the earliest possible date.
JR32nd plenary 1111','ting.
13 Dece111her 1969
2570 (XXIV).

United

Nation~

(~onff'n•nf'P

ou

Trade and Developmn1t
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2402 (XXIII) of 13 December 1968, in which it drew the attcntio11 of the
States members of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development to the tasks which rem;iined
ao Proceedings uf the United Nations Co11ferc11ce on
Trade and Dcl'clopment, Second Session, voL i and Corr.1
and 3 and Add.I and 2, Report and Anu.1,·s (U:1it<-d Nations
publication, Sales No.: E.68.ILD.14), p. ,O
31 Official Records of the General
Assemb/1', Twrnty.
fourth Session, Supplement No. 16 (A/7616), p_ 7~.
32 United Nations, Treaty 'Series, , , ,,. VJ r 1. l "f• , , ; _ 86; L
0

40

General Assembly-Twenty-fourth Session

unfinished and to the large number of important issues
remitted by the Conference to its continuing machinery
for further consideration and action, and urged the
Trade and Development Board at its forthcoming sessions, in considering the issues remitted to it by the
Conference, to seek the widest possible measure
of agreement on concrete and practical action or recommendations, as appropriate,
Recalling further that at its twenty-third session the
General Assembly requested the Trade and Development Board to continue its efforts to reach the maximum
degree of agreement on the issues which were remitted
to it by the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development at its second session and which were
of basic importance for the elaboration of the international development strategy for the 1970s, 33
Expressing its concern that most of the issues remitted to the continuing machinery of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development after
its second session are still outstanding, and that this
has contributed to the delay in the completion of the
work of the Conference relating to the preparations
for the Second United Nations Development Decade,
Bearing in mind the recommendation made by the
Conference to its member States at the second session
to devise and explore earnestly ways and means of
assisting the continuing machinery of the Conference
to discharge the responsibility placed upon it after its
second session,
Recalling the improvements brought about in the
institutional machinery and methods of work of the
Conference in terms of decision 45 (VII), adopted by
the Trade and Development Board on 21 September
1968.34 and as further elaborated in paragraphs 4
and 5 of General Assembly resolution 2402 (XXIII),
Having considered the report of the Trade and
Development Board for the period from 24 September
1968 to 23 September 1969, 35
1. Takes note of the report of the Trade and Development Board for the period from 24 September 1968
to 23 September 1969;
2. Requests the Trade and Development Board to
seek to resolve the outstanding issues remitted to it by
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at the second session in the fields of commodities,
manufactures and semi-manufactures, financing and
invisibles, including the question of international legislation on shipping;
3. Further requests the Trade and Development
Board to accelerate in particular the work already
undertaken in the specific fields which determine the
participation of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development in the international development strategy, so that it may make a timely and significant contribution to the preparations for the Second
United Nations Development Decade;
4. Suggests to the Trade and Development Board
that the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development at its third session should consider ways
and means of implementing the measures agreed upon
within the continuing machinery and seek new areas of
agreement in the dynamic context of the Second United
Nations Development Decade;
83 See

resolution 2411 (XXIIl).
34 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentythird Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/7214), p. 93.
8~ lbid.,
Twenty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 16
(A/1616).

5. Urges the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to
expedite his consultations with interested Governments
with a view to reconvening the United Nations Cocoa
Conference in order to conclude an international
agreement on this commodity as early as ~ossible in
1970;
6. Notes with satisfaction that some of the improvements introduced in the institutional machinery and
methods of work of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development have been utilized, particularly by means of the decisions of the Trade and
Development Board, to hold a special session on
preferences:16 and to call an intergovernmental group
on trade expansion, economic co-operation and regional
integration among developing countries;37
7. Considers that the Trade and Development
Board, while making a fuller and more effective utilization of the improved machinery and methods of work
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, in accordance with decision 45 (VII) of
the Board and General Assembly resolution 2402
(XXIII), should at the same time keep the question
of further improvements in the institutional machinery
of the Conference constantly under review and from
time to time make such suggestions as may enable the
continuing machinery to discharge the responsibilities
entrusted to it.
l 832nd plenary meeting,
J 3 December 1969.
2571 (XXIV). International development strategy

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2218 B (XXI) of 19 December 1966 and 2305 (XXII) of 13 December 1967
by which it initiated measures for proclaiming the
1970s as the Second United Nations Development
Decade,
Further recalling its resolution 2411 (XXIII) of
17 December 1968 whereby it established the Preparatory Committee for the Second United Nations Development Decade. charged with the responsibility of
preparing a draft of an international development
strategy for the 1970s, and requested it to submit to
the General Assembly at its twenty-fourth session a
preliminary draft of the strategy,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1447 (XLVII) of 5 August 1969 regarding the
work done so far on the formulation of an international
development strategy,
Recalling the Charter of Algiers, 38 in particular part
two entitled "Programme of action", regarded by the
developing countries as constituting important elements
of the strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade,
Taking into account the results achieved by the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
at its second session and the task referred to the continuing machinery of the Conference in connexion with
measures which the international community should
take in the field of trade and development,
36 Ibid .. resolution 61 (IX), p. 209.
37 Ibid., resolution 53 (VIII), p. 73.
38 Proceedings of the
United Nations

Conference on
Trade and Development, Second Session, vol. I and Corr.I
and 1 and Add.1 and 2. Report and Annexes (United Nations
publication, Sales No.: E.68.IJ.D.14), p. 431.
