S/2019/454

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 May 2019
Original: English

Situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 2423 (2018), the Security Council extended the mandate of the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA) until 30 June 2019 and requested me to report on a quarterly basis on
its implementation, focusing on progress in taking forward the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali and the efforts of MINUSMA to support it.
2.
In the statement by the President of the Security Council dated 3 April 2019
(S/PRST/2019/2), the Council requested me to include in the present report
recommendations on concrete measures in three priority areas, including the
completion of a constitutional reform following an inclusive and collaborative
process, the adoption of a comprehensive plan for the effective redeployment of
reconstituted and reformed Malian defence and security forces to northern Mali and
the establishment of the northern economic development zone, to be fulfilled by the
Malian parties during the course of the upcoming mandate of MINUSMA, as well as
recommendations on ways to enhance Mission support in central M ali. It also
requested me to provide options for a potential significant adaptation of MINUSMA,
with a view to enhancing its effectiveness to support the implementation of the
Agreement through a greater focus on priority tasks, without jeopardizing the st ability
of Mali and the Sahel region, its central role in supporting the implementation of the
Agreement and its capacity to interact with other security presences that have the
potential to be mutually beneficial instruments to restore peace and stability in Mali
and the Sahel region, as recognized in Council resolution 2423 (2018).
3.
The present report contains updates on major developments in Mali since my
previous report (S/2019/262). It also includes recommendations for concrete
measures and ways to enhance MINUSMA support in central Mali, as well as options
for a potential adaptation of MINUSMA.

19-08351 (E)

040619

*1908351*

S/2019/454

II. Major developments and recommendations for
concrete measures
A.

Major political developments
Major developments
4.
On 5 April, an estimated 15,000 people demonstrated in Bamako against the
alleged mismanagement by the Government of Mali of the country ’s affairs and the
escalating violence in central Mali. The demonstration took place at the initiative of
religious leaders, political opposition parties and civil society organizations
representing civil servants and teachers who had been on strike over their working
conditions. On 16 April, the President, Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, addressed the nation
in an effort to defuse tensions. He announced the payment of teachers ’ salaries and
the deployment of additional national security forces to central Mali, and pledged
assistance to the victims of the violence.
5.
On 17 April, the president of the parliamentary group of the ruling party, the
Rassemblement pour le Mali, together with political opposition parties, presented a
non-confidence motion against the Government. On 18 April, in view of a vote on the
motion, the Prime Minister, Soumeylou Boubèye Maïga, tendered his resignation and
that of his Government to President Keita.
6.
On 22 April, President Keita appointed Boubou Cissé, former Minister of
Economy and Finance, as his new Prime Minister and tasked him with forming a new,
inclusive Government, following consultations with both the ruling coalition and
opposition parties. On 2 May, Prime Minister Cissé signed a political agreement with
representatives of several opposition parties. The agree ment sets out the parameters
for the participation of the opposition parties and civil society groups in the new
Cabinet. It contains calls for the holding of an inclusive political dialogue to discuss,
among other issues, the revision of the Constitution and a reaffirmation of its
signatories’ commitment to implementing the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali. Soumaïla Cissé, the leader of the opposition, chose not to sign the political
agreement.
7.
On 5 May, the spokesperson for President Keita announced the formation of a
new Government, which comprises 38 ministers, including 9 women. The previous
Cabinet was composed of 32 ministers, including 11 women. A total of 18 ministers
are from the presidential majority, 3 from the political oppositio n, 7 from civil society
groups and 10 are technocrats. The announcement of the Government prompted
mixed reactions. The ruling majority and the Coordination des mouvements de
l’Azawad welcomed its formation, while opposition leader Cissé criticized the lar ge
number of ministers, arguing that this would add an unnecessary burden to public
finances. Women leaders deplored the decrease in women’s representation.
Implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
8.
Political developments during the reporting period, notably the resignation of
the Government, slowed down the implementation of the Agreement. The Agreement
Monitoring Committee held two sessions, on 18 March and 15 April. Little progress
was made on enhancing women’s participation in the peace process.
Extension of State authority
9.
Since my previous report, the percentage of civil administrators present at their
duty stations in northern and central Mali increased marginally, from 29 to 31 per
cent, notwithstanding the issuance, on 2 April, of an executive order by the Prime

2/20

19-08351

S/2019/454

Minister instructing civil servants appointed to the North and the Centre to redeploy
to their relevant duty stations by 30 April.
10. The number of national security forces deployed to the Centre and the North of
Mali increased from 3,122 to 3,207. In Mopti region, their presence increased by
50 national guards. In addition, 35 additional police personnel were deployed to Gao
region.
11. Regarding the operationalization of district-level interim administrations, a total
of $1.2 million was allocated to the 21 councils installed to support the development
of their priority action plans. On 27 March, President Keita signed a decree defining
the modalities for the progressive transfer of competencies, in cluding human and
financial resources, to regional, cercle and municipal councils. This is expected to
help to meet the allocation of 30 per cent of the State’s budgetary revenue to the
territorial collectivities, as stipulated in the Agreement.
Recommendations for concrete measures: constitutional review
12. With regard to the constitutional review, the committee of experts concluded its
work and submitted the draft proposal for amendments to the Constitution to
President Keita on 1 April. The creation of the committee and a national consultative
framework in January provided for both the technical expertise and capacity to
analyse previous texts and to ensure that the provisions of the Agreement would be
taken into account in the revised draft, as well as a for a forum in which to consult
with a broad range of stakeholders and to ensure the inclusivity of the constitutional
review process. The Government also heeded calls by major opposition leaders and
decided to restructure the framework to include all 280 political parties in Mali.
Various opposition groups, however, continued to boycott consultations.
13. In separate meetings with political parties and civil society organizations,
President Keita discussed the proposed amendments, which include the creation of a
senate and a court of auditors. The Front pour la sauvegarde de la démocratie, a
coalition led by opposition leader Cissé, and the Coalition des forces patriotiques
boycotted the meeting with the President.
14. On 16 April, President Keita announced that, in response to calls for a more
in-depth debate on the constitutional reform process, national consultations with
political and social stakeholders would be held from 23 to 28 April. The
recommendations emanating from those consultations wo uld be reflected in the draft
proposal for submission to the National Assembly. Following the resignation of the
Government on 18 April, the Presidency announced the postponement of the national
consultations until further notice.
15. The political agreement signed between key political stakeholders on 2 May sets
the framework for an inclusive consultative process on the new Constitution. The
completion of the constitutional review should be the immediate priority of the
Government, with a view to submitting a consulted draft proposal to the National
Assembly as soon as feasible. This will also require an extension of legislators ’
current mandate, which expires on 30 June.
16. The Government of Mali, the signatory armed groups, the political opposition
and civil society should be urged to take concrete measures referenced in the road
map for priority benchmarks to be attained, in order to:
• Complete the constitutional reform through the holding of a nationwide
referendum and the promulgation of a revised Constitution reflecting the
institutional reforms envisioned in the Agreement following an inclusive
consultation process, with the full involvement of the Government,
signatory armed groups, the political opposition and civil society.
19-08351

3/20

S/2019/454

B.

Major security developments
17. The security situation remained volatile in northern Mali and continued to
deteriorate in central Mali and the Koulikoro region.
18. In the Centre, violence across community lines escalated, and clashes between
the Dogon and Fulani communities, exacerbated by the presence of extremist groups,
resulted in the death of a large number of civilians, including at least 157 who were
killed during the massacre of 23 March in Ogossagou, Mopti region.
19. In the North, the security situation in Gao and Ménaka regions was marked by
violent incidents targeting local communities, increased acts of banditry, targeted
assassinations of signatory and non-signatory armed group members, and attacks on
Malian defence and security forces and MINUSMA. On 4 May, tensions between
members of the Dawsahak community affiliated with the Mouvement pour le salut de
l’Azawad and the Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad in Talataye, Gao
region, degenerated into violent confrontations. The number of casualties could not
be confirmed because both groups issued conflicting statements. The Mission used
its good offices to prevent a further escalation. Hostilities resumed between the armed
movements on 12 May in Ouellene, outside Talataye, leading to the Coordination des
mouvements de l’Azawad taking control of parts of Talataye.
Asymmetric and other attacks
20. During the period under review, northern Mali recorded the highest number of
asymmetric attacks by terrorist groups (34 of 59), but the most lethal attacks to ok
place in the Centre.
21. In the North, attacks took place throughout the regions, including in Gao (15),
Timbuktu (11), Ménaka (4) and Kidal (4). By contrast, in the Centre, asymmetric
attacks were concentrated in Mopti region (24).
22. Malian defence and security forces remained the primary targets and victims of
attacks by terrorist groups. During the period under review, they were the target of
35 attacks, in which 67 soldiers were killed and 51 injured, an increase compared with
37 killed and 47 injured during the previous reporting period. Attacks against the
Malian defence and security forces were heavily concentrated in Mopti (20), followed
by Timbuktu (8), Gao (4), Ménaka (2) and Koulikoro (1). The complex attack of
17 March against Malian armed forces in Dioura, Mopti region, was the deadliest,
with 26 soldiers killed. In an attack against a Malian defence and security forces
outpost in Guiré, Koulikoro region, on 21 April, 11 soldiers lost their lives. A total of
12 attacks targeted MINUSMA, 11 targeted signatory armed groups and 1 targeted
international forces.
23. During the reporting period, 4 peacekeepers died and 12 were injured, compared
with 17 killed and 40 injured during the previous reporting period. In Gao and
Ménaka, 43 signatory armed group members were killed and 17 injured.
24. A total of 49 incidents involving the use of improvised explosive devices were
recorded, of which 36 incidents (73 per cent) occurred in central Mali. Explosive
threat mitigation training for MINUSMA peacekeepers has continued to mitigate the
threat, in line with the action plan to improve the security of peacekeepers. (An update
on explosive threat mitigation training for MINUSMA personnel is provided in
paragraph 62.)
25. In response to the rapidly evolving threat environment, the Mission reprioritized
assets, freeing resources for patrolling and enhancing the Mission force ’s mobility,
adaptability and reactivity. The Mission increased the number of patrols by 129 per

4/20

19-08351

S/2019/454

cent between October 2018 and February 2019, compared with between October 2017
and February 2018. Only 25 to 30 per cent of the MINUSMA force was assigned to
units conducting force protection. The combat convoy companies (totalling 1,000
personnel) are not counted as part of force protection pe rsonnel, although these units
are focused on escorting and securing MINUSMA convoys.
26. MINUSMA further enhanced efforts to prepare for, respond to and repel attacks
on its bases and convoys. As outlined in my previous report ( S/2019/262) and as
demonstrated during a complex attack on its camp in Aguelhok on 20 January,
MINUSMA has significantly increased its capacity to robustly repel attackers, who,
in this case, greatly outnumbered MINUSMA peacekeepers. Important efforts were
undertaken to address equipment shortfalls (see para. 67) and to enhance coordination
with other security presences operating in Mali.
Situation in the Centre/protection of civilians
27. The central region of Mali, where an estimated 30 per cent of the country’s
20 million population lives, continued to record the highest number of attacks against
civilians and civilian casualties, owing to a further increase in intercommunal clashes
and violence, as well as attacks by terrorist groups and self-defence militias. Violence
across community lines occurred primarily in Koro and Bankass districts, Mopti
region, between the Dogon and Fulani communities, and in Djenne district, Mopti
region, between Fulani and Bambara communities.
28. Northern Mali also recorded a deterioration of security, owing mainly to
banditry and the activities of terrorist groups and signatory armed groups, mostly in
the districts of Gourma-Rharous, Ansongo and Ménaka, in Timbuktu, Gao and
Ménaka regions, respectively.
29. Overall, there were 245 incidents in which 333 civilians were killed and 175
injured, as well as 145 reported abductions of civilians, compared with the previous
period, which registered 267 incidents, 225 civilian fatalities and 149 injuries. Du ring
the reporting period, 10 explosive incidents killed 11 civilians and injured 26 others
in the central regions.
30. The raid of 23 March on Ogossagou village, Bankass district, Mopti region, was
the deadliest incident since 2012. A group of armed men, allegedly mainly composed
of traditional hunters known as Dozos, killed at least 157 members of the Fulani
community, including 46 children, injured 65 other civilians and burned 95 per cent
of the village. MINUSMA, in coordination with the national armed forces to stabilize
the security situation, immediately responded, resulting in the launch of Operation
Oryx (see para. 33). On 24 March, President Keita convened an extraordinary session
of the Council of Ministers, which issued a decree announcing the di smissal of the
army Chief of Staff and the dissolution of the Dozo self-defence group Dan Na
Ambassagou, presumed to be connected to the attack. The group refused to disband,
citing the ongoing insecurity, while others called for the dissolution of all mil itia and
self-defence groups in the region. The prosecutor of Mopti opened an investigation
into the incident, which is being carried out with MINUSMA support.
31. On 2 May, the Mission presented the conclusions of its special human rights
investigation in Ogossagou to the Minister of Justice, who reported on the arrest of
10 suspects and the opening of a criminal investigation before the Specialized Judicial
Unit to Combat Terrorism and Transnational Organized Crime. MINUSMA provided
technical support to the criminal chain entities throughout the country, including on
issues specific to violence across community lines in Mopti region.
32. On 30 March, the Government launched Operation Kapigdou, which is aimed
at restoring stability and deterring violence in the Bankass and Koro districts of Mopti
19-08351

5/20

S/2019/454

region, which includes joint cross-border operations with armed forces from Burkina
Faso. On 11 April, Burkinabé counter-terrorist units and Malian defence and security
forces apprehended 24 presumed terrorists. Malian armed forces and international
forces conducted a joint operation in the Liptako-Gourma region from 11 to 16 April,
with the objective of maintaining pressure on armed terrorist groups. From 7 March
to 12 April, Malian defence and security forces, Op eration Barkhane and the armed
forces of Burkina Faso conducted a joint operation in Gao region, with the purpose
of detecting and neutralizing terrorist groups and their bases.
33. In response to the deteriorating security situation in the Centre, on 30 M arch,
MINUSMA launched Operation Oryx to provide a deterrent presence in Mopti region,
which included Mission force and United Nations police activities carried out in
coordination with Operation Kapigdou. MINUSMA is focusing on Bankass,
Bandiagara and Koro districts, allowing Malian armed forces to concentrate resources
closer to the border area.
Combating impunity for crimes that risk destabilizing the peace process
34. MINUSMA intensified its support for government efforts to combat impunity.
It initiated an assessment of the judicial response to violence across community lines
since 2017 in the Centre, with a view to formulating recommendations for a
prosecutorial strategy aimed at increasing criminal accountability. MINUSMA also
continued to support the integrated justice and reconciliation project launched in July
2018 in Koro district, Mopti region.
35. Together with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Mission
continued to provide technical assistance to the Specialized Judicial Unit against
Terrorism and Transnational Organized Crime, including through training and
mentoring for both magistrates and investigators and support for key investigations.
A total of 460 cases are being investigated by the Unit, including 207 on terrorism,
47 on transnational organized crime and 206 on general criminal matters.
36. Notwithstanding the volatile security situation that has led to absenteeism and
the relocation of some staff, there have been increased efforts to appoint and deploy
judicial and prison officials to northern and central Mali, including the regional
director of prison administration in Taoudenni.
Measures to support the redeployment of reconstituted and reformed Malian
defence and security forces
37. In the light of the complex security situation, the effective redeployment of the
reconstituted and reformed Malian defence and security forces to northern Mali is a
prerequisite for the establishment and restoration of State authority. Their effective
redeployment will serve as a deterrent to the proliferation of terrorist activity and
organized crime and the efforts to combat impunity, but it will also facilitate the return
of civilian representatives of the Malian State and consequently increase access to
basic social services and access to justice.
38. The accelerated disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and integration
process that commenced in Gao, Kidal and Timbuktu in late 2018 constitutes a first
step towards the redeployment of the Malian defence and security forces. The process
resulted in the registration of 1,423 combatants who now stand to officially join the
ranks of the Malian armed forces and, upon the completion of a three -month training
exercise, to redeploy to the North. In recent weeks, the process was stall ed by
disagreements over medical clearances and the fragmentation of the Plateforme armed
group, which suspended some of its participation in the catch -up phase of the
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and integration process until political
reconciliation is achieved.
6/20

19-08351

S/2019/454

39. From 20 to 30 April, a catch-up phase of the accelerated disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and integration process targeting an additional caseload
of some 417 combatants of the Operational Coordination Mechanism occurred in Gao
and Timbuktu. To date, 90 and 234 combatants in Gao and Timbuktu, respectively,
have been screened and registered, bringing the total to 324 elements. In addition,
400 elements of the Mechanism, who participated in the process in November 2018
but were initially considered medically unfit, began a re-examination exercise in
Kidal. A total of 315 elements were registered.
40. In total, 1,662 Operational Coordination Mechanism combatants from the
Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad, Plateforme and other compliant armed
groups, along with 600 Malian soldiers, are now ready to participate in the three month training exercise supported by the European Union military mission to
contribute to the training of the Malian armed forces in national training centres in
southern Mali. On completion of the training, their redeployment to the North as part
of reconstituted Malian armed forces units is envisaged, with the primary task of
providing security for phase two of the accelerated disarmament, demobilizat ion,
reintegration and integration process. The training has not yet commenced, owing in
part to disagreements over who should provide the transport for the Mechanism
elements to the South.
41. Since January, 539 former Malian defence and security forces personnel who
had deserted have been registered and transferred to three training centres, in Bamako,
Markala and Séguéla, to undergo 45 days of training, supported by the European
Union military mission, and to formally reintegrate into the Malian defence and
security forces.
42. Further steps were taken to address outstanding issues related to army
integration and the broader security sector reform process. On 8 April, the
Government and signatory armed movements held a high-level meeting to discuss the
draft decree defining the modalities of rank allocation, reclassification and command
and control for the former combatants of the signatory movements to be integrated
into the Malian armed forces and other security institutions. The Coordination des
mouvements de l’Azawad refused to sign the draft over disagreement with regard to
benefits for the families of deserters who had died before reintegration. Several other
outstanding issues will need to be clarified, including the overall numbers of former
combatants to be integrated into the Malian security and defence forces; the role and
composition of the specialized units to combat terrorism; the establishment of a
border guard and the territorial police; and the voluntary disarmament process in the
Centre, following its suspension after the resignation of the previous Government.
43. In order to move this critical process forward, I propose the measures outlined
below, which can be completed within the next year. While MINUSMA and the
United Nations as a whole stand ready to provide support, the Government of Mali
must assume its share of responsibility, including providing transport to former
combatants to training locations. Progress can be made only if all the signatory parties
honour their commitments under the Agreement to:
• Resolve outstanding issues related to the integration and redeployment of
at least 2,000 members of the signatory armed groups in the Malian defence
and security forces, including through the adoption of a decree defining the
harmonization of ranks and quotas and addressing other outstanding
integration criteria following an inclusive consultative process with the full
engagement and consensus of the Government, signatory armed groups and
other relevant stakeholders.
• Develop a comprehensive plan for the progressive redeployment of
reconstituted and reformed Malian defence and security forces to central
19-08351

7/20

S/2019/454

and northern Mali in a transparent manner, with the full engagement and
consensus of the Government, signatory armed groups and other relevant
stakeholders as part of a broader national vision for security sector reform,
the related action plan and in line with the forthcoming national defence
and security policy.

C.

Northern economic development zone
44. Ensuring the lasting stabilization of northern Mali is possible only if the return
of State authority is coupled with the provision of basic social services and if the local
population can benefit from income-generation activities and economic and
employment opportunities. The establishment of a northern economic development
zone is an important vehicle to accelerate the delivery of peace dividends to
disenfranchised and isolated populations in the North. In order to be effective, it must
include, among other things, an interregional governance mechanism based on a
development strategy and be financed through a specific trust fund or funding
vehicle – a sustainable development fund – to which both the Government and the
international community would contribute. The establishment of such a zone must be
linked to the decentralization and regionalization processes, given that local
authorities and regional development agencies would be tasked with overseeing and
implementing development programmes in the North. It would also be impor tant to
expedite the design of a subnational taxation model to raise revenue at the subnational
level to fund social and pro-poor spending.
45. Although progress has been slow in the area of economic development in
northern Mali since the signing of the Agreement, in its meeting held on March with
the Agreement Monitoring Committee, the Ministry of Planning presented draft
legislation for the creation of the northern economic development zone and the
sustainable development fund. Agreement was reached with the signatory groups on
both texts, which are aligned with other strategy documents, such as the strategic
framework for economic recovery and Vision 2040 of the Government, the
Sustainable Development Goals and decentralization reform. The draft bill and the
decree for the zone have been prepared for submission to the Council of Ministers. I
propose the following measures to advance the establishment of the zone:
• The creation of the northern economic development zone through the
adoption of requisite legislation, the operationalization of the sustainable
development fund and related inclusive management mechanisms and the
implementation of a pilot project to be jointly designed by the Government,
signatory armed groups and civil society, with a view to swiftly delivering
peace dividends to the population of northern Mali.

III. Human rights situation
46. The human rights situation remains of serious concern, especially in the Centre
and along the borders with Burkina Faso and the Niger. Grave human r ights abuses
and violations were reported in the context of violence across communal lines,
activities by terrorist groups and national counter-terrorist operations.
47. During the reporting period, there were 74 cases of serious human rights
violations and abuses involving at least 410 victims, including at least 30 women and
36 children, compared with the 79 cases and 422 victims reported during the previous
period. A total of 58 cases occurred in Mopti region, 6 in Gao region, 4 each in
Timbuktu and Ségou regions and 2 in Ménaka region.

8/20

19-08351

S/2019/454

48. Community self-defence groups active in the Centre were responsible for the
highest number of cases of human rights abuses (44). In addition, the Group for the
Support of Islam and Muslims and other terrorist groups claimed responsibility for
15 cases. In Gao, Timbuktu and Ménaka regions, signatory armed groups were
responsible for six cases of abuses and the Operational Coordination Mechanism and
Mouvement pour le salut de l’Azawad for one each.
49. The Malian defence and security forces were responsible for six cases of human
rights violations, including of the extrajudicial execution of three civilians in
Intahaka, Gao region, on 24 April, all in the context of counter-terrorism operations
in the Gourma area.
50. MINUSMA continued to support the work of the Truth, Justice and
Reconciliation Commission, which, to date, has received almost 12,000 testimonies.
The Commission’s national investigation team, which became operational on
19 March, has commenced investigations throughout the country.
51. On 22 March, the Ministry for the Promotion of Women, Children and Family
adopted the third national action plan for the period 2019–2023 on women and peace
and security to promote women’s participation in the peace process and governance.
MINUSMA supported the establishment of a citizens’ observatory in Ségou, Mopti,
Gao, Ménaka, Timbuktu and Kidal regions to monitor the implementation of the
Agreement.
52. The national task force on monitoring and reporting verified 145 gr ave
violations against 92 children in Mali. Approximately 96 per cent of those violations
occurred in Mopti region (84), followed by Kidal (22), Gao (17), Timbuktu (15),
Ménaka (4), Bamako (2) and Ségou (1).

IV. Humanitarian situation
53. The operating environment in Mali is becoming increasingly complex and
challenging for humanitarian actors, owing to a combination of increasing violence
across community lines, crime, denial of humanitarian access involving abductions
and threats to humanitarian personnel, restriction of movement, with the presence of
improvised of explosive devices placed along access routes, and the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons.
54. According to the harmonization framework of March 2019, 3.8 million people
will be food insecure during the 2019 lean season (June–August) in Ménaka, Gao,
Timbuktu and Mopti regions. Approximately 660,000 children will be at risk of global
acute malnutrition in 2019 throughout the country. This situation is further
compounded by the serious lack of access to safe water (43 per cent) in the areas
affected, representing up to 1.3 million people in need of humanitarian assistance.
55. As at 7 May, 106,164 people were displaced inside Mali, 58 per cent of whom
are children in need of protection. The largest source of displacement is the Centre,
with more than 60,000 internally displaced persons in Mopti (45,660) and Ségou
(15,201) regions. Mali is also host to 26,567 refugees, including 8,457 from Burkina
Faso and 1,024 from the Niger. Spontaneous and facilitated returns have increased
from Mbera camp in Mauritania.
56. School closures affect nearly one third of the 421 communes throughout the
country. More than 953 schools are closed in the North and Centre, with more than
60 per cent of closed schools in Mopti region. Consequently, more than 250,000
children do not have access to education in the affected regions. As a result of
insecurity, 25 per cent of health facilities are not operational in the North.

19-08351

9/20

S/2019/454

57. The 2019 Humanitarian Response Plan for Mali received only $52.5million of
the $296.5 million requested (17.7 per cent funded).

V. Economic situation
58. The macroeconomic outlook remains broadly positive. Real gross domestic
product (GDP) growth has rebounded to 5 per cent in 20 19. Absent supply shocks,
inflation should remain below the West African Economic and Monetary Union
threshold. The implementation of tax policy and administrative measures would
sustain an annual increase in tax revenue by 0.4 percentage points of GDP to help to
stabilize the overall fiscal deficit at 3 per cent of GDP. The current account deficit is
projected to improve in 2019, notwithstanding a decline in gold export volume and
prices, before gradually narrowing to approximately 7 per cent of GDP over t he
medium term. The poverty rate, however, remains very high, at 47.2 per cent.

VI. Capacities of the Mission
Military
59. As at 15 May, 12,935 military personnel, including 37 military observers, 448
staff officers and 12,450 contingent personnel, were deployed of an authorized 13,289
personnel, including 40 military observers, 486 staff officers and 12,763 contingent
personnel. Women accounted for 3.3 per cent of military personnel. With the full
deployment of all manoeuvre units, the quick reaction force in Mopti, the special
forces company in Timbuktu and all combat convoy companies in Gao and Mopti,
MINUSMA is nearing full operational capacity. The Mission, however, is still missing
some critical enablers, such as helicopter units, but efforts are ongoing to fill these
shortfalls.
Police
60. As at 15 May, 1,738 police personnel were deployed, including 307 individual
police officers (18 per cent women), and 1,431 formed police unit personnel (10 per
cent women), of an authorized 1,920 police personnel. Efforts are under way to select
additional individual police officers with expertise in the areas of forensics,
investigations, criminal intelligence, database management and counter-terrorism and
serious organized crime.
Civilian personnel
61. As at 15 May, 88 per cent of all MINUSMA civilian staff had been deployed,
including 91 per cent of international staff, 84 per cent of United Nations Volunteers
and 86 per cent of national staff. Women held 26 per cent of the international posts,
36 per cent of United Nations Volunteer positions and 19 per cent of national staff
posts.
Efforts to optimize performance
62. A total of 13 units (of a total of 45) were evaluated on military performance
during the period under review. The units evaluated were four infantry units, two
force protection units, one intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance unit, two
aviation units, two medical units and one engineering unit. All units were assessed to
have performed satisfactorily, with the need for man oeuvre units to continue to
improve improvised explosive device awareness. With the support of the light
coordination mechanism, two Member States deployed a mobile training team each
10/20

19-08351

S/2019/454

to five MINUSMA troop-contributing countries to train trainers on operating in an
improvised explosive device environment, in line with Mine Action Service
standards. In addition, from November 2018 to April 2019, three mobile training
teams deployed to Sectors North, East and West to provide additional training on
improvised explosive device threat mitigation, first aid, casualty evacuation, medical
evacuations and additional topics requested by the troop -contributing countries. In
parallel, since the adoption of Security Council resolution 2423 (2018), the
Secretariat has conducted four enhanced pre-deployment visits to validate individual
and collective military skills.
Conduct and discipline
63. One allegation of sexual exploitation and abuse was recorded from the
beginning of the reporting period to 8 May. MINUSMA continued to implement the
strategy to address sexual exploitation and abuse.
64. MINUSMA forces were responsible for one human rights violation case that led
to the death of one man. Nine others (one woman, one boy and seven men) were
arbitrarily arrested and detained. All nine persons were later released.
Safety and security of United Nations personnel
65. The reinforcement of the security of the 12 MINUSMA camps outside Bamako
continued with the installation of counter-rocket/artillery/mortar alert systems.
Closed-circuit surveillance systems became operational in Timbuktu camp on 8 April
and in Gao camp on 30 May. The construction of the overhead protected
accommodation modules in Kidal, Gao, Tessalit, Ménaka and Timbuktu is
progressing, with projected completion in all locations by February 2020.
66. A total of 148 MINUSMA personnel have died as a result of malicious acts since
the establishment of the Mission in 2013, including four during the p eriod under
review. No individual has yet to be convicted in relation to these acts.
67. Chad, Guinea and Togo increased efforts to bridge critical equipment shortfalls
and to deploy the outstanding mine-protected vehicles and/or armoured personnel
carriers for contingents, which will greatly increase operational effectiveness.
Financial aspects
68. The budget proposal for the maintenance of MINUSMA for the period 1 July
2019 to 30 June 2020 amounting to $1,149.8 million gross is currently under review
and consideration by the relevant committees. Should the Security Council decide to
extend the mandate of the Mission beyond 30 June 2019, the cost for maintaining
MINUSMA until 30 June 2020 would be limited to the amounts approved by the
General Assembly.

VII. Options for a potential significant adaptation of the Mission
and recommendations to enhance its support in the Centre
of Mali
69. As requested by the Security Council, an evaluation of the current prioritization
of the objectives of MINUSMA was carried out and options were developed for the
adaptation of MINUSMA, with a view to enhancing its effectiveness to support the
implementation of the Agreement through a greater focus on priority tasks. The
options factor in the dire security situation, including in central Mali, the threat from
terrorist groups and the safety and security of United Nations personnel.

19-08351

11/20

S/2019/454

70. With regard to the prioritization of the Mission’s objectives, MINUSMA support
for the implementation of the Agreement remains paramount and should remain the
Mission’s most important priority. The good offices of MINUSMA and its presence
in northern Mali remain essential in preserving the gains made since the signing of
the Agreement. Its full implementation is indispensable to stabilizi ng the situation in
the country and the Sahel region and to achieving the redeployment of reconstituted
and reformed Malian defence and security forces to northern Mali, which will be a
fundamental pillar of the Mission’s exit strategy.
71. More effective mandate implementation is contingent upon several critical
factors, including the political will of the Government and the signatory armed
movements, as well as performance and adequate resources.
72. Any major reduction in the current capacity of MINUSM A would affect its
ability to continue to play its critical role in support of the implementation of the
Agreement in a highly complex threat environment. A significant reduction in or
withdrawal of the Mission’s presence would not only jeopardize the peace process,
but also have serious consequences for the overall security situation in Mali and the
subregion. It would impede the capacity of MINUSMA to interact with other security
presences and have an impact on access to marginalized populations in the No rth and
the Centre. For these reasons, no major changes with regard to the nature of the
MINUSMA mandate or the Mission’s overall strength are recommended. This,
however, does not mean maintaining the status quo. The options to adjust the
Mission’s footprint and operational and structural measures presented below will
contribute to enhancing MINUSMA effectiveness in supporting the implementation
of the Agreement.

A.

Options for a potential significant adaptation of the Mission
73. While taking into consideration the highly complex and challenging context of
Mali, the evaluation of the current prioritization of the objectives of MINUSMA was
guided by the principles of avoiding substitution of the functions of the Malian State
and increasingly using conditional support as leverage.
74. The potential for adaptation was identified with regard to the MINUSMA task
to contribute to the creation of a secure environment through projects. The use of
small-scale, low-cost quick-impact projects planned and implemented within a short
time frame remains an important tool. Their use should be limited to projects in direct
support of the implementation of the Agreement in the North and/or in response to
specific needs in the Centre, while keeping in mind the distinct c haracter and
confidence-building objective of such projects. The Mission will continue to review
the use of its funding mechanism, including the trust fund in support of peace and
security in Mali, to ensure coherence of action and the alignment of resourc es.
Stabilization projects in support of the Malian authorities should be financed through
other funding sources, including the trust fund.
75. Continued support will be required for the Malian defence and security forces
to ensure the safer management of stockpiles of weapons and ammunition in northern
and central Mali. Going forward, it is recommended that the country team provide
this support instead of MINUSMA. Bilateral donor support is envisaged to fund Mine
Action Service weapons and ammunition management activities beginning in the
2020–2021 budget year. Additional relevant tasks will be identified that partners,
including the country team, will assume on the basis of their mandates and
comparative advantages as part of a transition plan, a mapping o f capabilities and
gaps, and a resource mobilization strategy. MINUSMA will also review its gender

12/20

19-08351

S/2019/454

advisory capacity, with a view to consolidating and streamlining this critical function
across all pillars and components.
76. MINUSMA support for the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel will
remain essential and should continue to go hand in hand with the establishment of the
human rights and international humanitarian law compliance framework. The creation
of a dedicated support cell within the Mission, which will include representatives of
relevant sections, including the human rights due diligence policy task force, should
enable MINUSMA to more effectively coordinate support to the Joint Force, in close
collaboration with other security presences in Mali.
77. As outlined in paragraph 25 and 26 above, the MINUSMA force has made
significant progress in enhancing its posture and performance, changing mindsets and
improving preparedness. It also ameliorated its operational tempo and effectiveness
over the past months, with the frequency, duration and scale of operations increasing.
There has also been an increase in foot patrols, both by day and by night. A
reprioritization of resources allowed the Mission to free up additional units previously
used for force protection. Important equipment and capability shortfalls, notably in
terms of armoured personnel carriers, have been addressed. The more mobile
approach and posture have allowed MINUSMA to increase its ability to prevent
armed groups from assembling in large numbers and launch targeted attacks, to
project force and security into remote areas and to create a conducive environment
for the return of State authority.
78. It is recommended that the Force further increase its effectiveness and effici ency
through increased protected mobility, flexibility, agility and a proactive posture across
its areas of deployment. Doing so will require the reconfiguration of some of its
existing units and the deployment of additional capacities. In an effort to adj ust the
MINUSMA footprint in the Centre, taking into account the main protection needs in
the population centres of Douentza and Mopti, the MINUSMA camp in Diabaly
should be handed over to Malian armed forces by early 2020. This would reduce the
force’s physical footprint and related logistics/sustainment and protection
requirements. The 650 personnel, who would be freed up, should be used for
reinforcement in other sensitive areas, including in Mopti region. Further camps
should be identified for a gradual and conditional handover as part of the
comprehensive plan for the effective redeployment of the reconstituted and reformed
Malian defence and security forces to northern Mali.
79. Increasing the Mission’s mobility will be a critical factor to augment its ability
to cope with the dynamic operational environment, in particular in central Mali, and
reduce its reaction time. This realignment will enable the enhancement of the mobile
operations capacity of MINUSMA through the creation of a mission quick reacti on
capability, which will combine realigned infantry units as the primary manoeuvre
elements, with enablers and other mission components, when required. The mobility
of this capability would be enhanced and supported by the deployment of utility and
attack helicopters. While the infantry battalions would retain their mechanized and
motorized vehicle requirements, helicopters would be used to rapidly move small
elements of the task force for the conduct of limited -scale operations or initiate
operations of a longer duration. The quick reaction capability would also be supported
by existing surveillance and intelligence capacity.
80. It is recommended that the deployment of the two formed police units, which
are currently deployed in Bamako, be revised through redeploying one of the two
units to reinforce the MINUSMA presence in the Centre. This would allow
MINUSMA to conduct more coordinated operations in this highly volatile area, while
intensifying its support to the national security forces and facilitate humanitarian
access, as required.
19-08351

13/20

S/2019/454

81. The formed police units in Bamako, one of which relies on an embedded Special
Intervention Team, are currently contributing to the security framework for United
Nations staff and installations, in addition to a 250 -strong mechanized force
protection company. It is recommended that the Secretariat and MINUSMA conduct
a review of the security arrangements in Bamako, with a view to identifying measures
to improve security control and support, including through narrowing th e residential
zones for United Nations personnel and taking into account the integration of the
existing infrastructure with the move to the integrated Mission headquarters in
Bamako. The review should also be aimed at determining an adequate and specializ ed
capacity to replace the current deployment with possible host Government
participation to ensure the safety and security of United Nations personnel and
installations.
82. In an effort to leverage the Mission’s partnership with the European Union, it is
recommended that MINUSMA review its police training platform in Bamako and
repurpose the use of at least 20 individual police officers who are currently employed
for training activities in Bamako. Some of these training activities could instead be
covered by EUCAP Sahel Mali. The redeployment of individual police officers to
northern Mali should be conditional on ensuring that it goes hand in hand with the
deployment of additional national police personnel.

B.

Recommendations to enhance Mission support in the Centre
83. In keeping with Security Council resolution 2423 (2018), the Mission made
significant efforts to reconfigure its posture in order to optimize and rebalance the
uniformed and civilian presences in central Mali without impeding its ability to
pursue its strategic priority in the North. Part of these efforts include the development
of an integrated strategy for the Centre and the generation and deployment to Mopti
region of an additional formed police unit to be completed before the end of 2019.
Against the backdrop of the surge of violence across community lines, MINUSMA
has conducted coordinated operations in Koro and Bankass cercles with the national
security forces, making full use of available Mission quick reaction capacity and air
surveillance assets and technology. The operations enabled increased movement for
MINUSMA civilian personnel and investigating teams.
84. In central Mali, MINUSMA should continue to prioritize efforts to facilitate the
return of State administration, including through supporting the redeployment of the
Malian defence and security forces in the Centre of Mali and the protection of
civilians. Dialogue and political advocacy, support for the rule of law a nd
reconciliation and the mediation and resolution of local conflicts with the
participation of women and young people will be critical to enhance the protection of
civilians. This should be combined with engaging in proactive robust measures to
dissuade and, if necessary, engage potential attackers and help to create a secure
environment for the delivery of humanitarian access.
85. It is recommended that MINUSMA enhance its support to the authorities to
combat impunity in central Mali and further increase its cooperation with partners,
including the European Union. The Mission will also enhance communication efforts
towards opinion leaders and public opinion at large for the effective management of
expectations regarding its role and ability to protect civilians, while underscoring the
role and responsibilities of the Malian authorities. The revision of the Plan de
sécurisation intégrée des régions du Centre, currently carried out by the Government,
may provide additional entry points for MINUSMA efforts in the Centre.

14/20

19-08351

S/2019/454

VIII. Observations
86. The signing of a political agreement between the Government and the
opposition parties, which renewed the commitment to implementing the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, was an encouraging development following a
short period of political uncertainty. A more inclusive Government is now in place
with ambitious plans for the people of Mali. I commend President Keita for his
consultative approach in addressing the situation and the contribution of oppositi on
parties and other stakeholders in this regard. I urge the Government and all Malian
stakeholders, including signatory parties to the Agreement, to redouble their efforts
to address the many pressing challenges that the country faces through accelerating
the full implementation of the Agreement and completing the constitutional review
process, while stepping up efforts to stem the violence in central Mali. This is the
time for all Malians to stand together, persevere and show determination to overcome
the multiple challenges before them and lay a solid foundation for a more peaceful
and stable Mali.
87. The revision of the Constitution is not only one of the main tenets of the
Agreement, but also its implementation and the outcome of the peace process hin ge
upon the completion of the constitutional review process. Institutional and political
reforms envisaged under the Agreement will need to be anchored to the Constitution,
in particular those aimed at ensuring a greater and more equitable representation o f
the Malian population in State institutions. The process to finalize the constitutional
review must therefore be as consultative, inclusive and collaborative as possible and
ensure the buy-in of all key stakeholders representing the diverse Malian societ y. I
call upon all Malian stakeholders, including the Government, the political opposition,
signatory armed movements and civil society, to make a concerted effort to include
underrepresented demographic groups such as women and young people. The role of
Malian women must evolve from one of mere representation into one of more active
engagement, consultation and inclusion.
88. The Agreement remains the only valid framework to move forward the peace
and reconciliation process and the multiple reforms indisp ensable to resolve the
country’s multiple and interlinked crises. I call upon all signatories to finalize the
revised implementation road map without delay and deliver on their commitments.
The full and unconditional respect for the implementation is the o nly way forward,
and it is non-negotiable. The completion of the constitutional review, the integration
of the first caseload of former combatants into the army and their redeployment to
northern Mali, and the operationalization of the northern economic de velopment zone
are concrete and timely measures that can be achieved in the coming 12 months. They
will also assure Malians that there is strong resolve to see a conclusion to this process.
89. The security situation in Mali remains of grave concern. Terro rist groups
continue to evolve and spread across borders affecting Burkina Faso and the Niger,
as well as countries in the region previously unaffected by terrorism. The situation
remains highly complex and is rapidly changing. Security challenges in north ern and
central Mali are distinct and have different drivers. The absence of an effective State
presence, however, remains a key factor, allowing armed groups and para -State
structures to proliferate. Against this backdrop, the MINUSMA presence remains
essential for the stabilization of Mali, acting as a bulwark against the spread of
insecurity in many locations. Coordinated efforts by the national security forces, the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel and the French forces to combat
terrorism in the Sahel remain critical. MINUSMA and its partners have greatly
increased efforts to coordinate their operations, acting in complementarity and
creating mutually beneficial environments and enabling them to better focus on their
relevant mandate implementation, in line with the human rights due diligence policy.
19-08351

15/20

S/2019/454

I am deeply appreciative of their important efforts and the sacrifices of their brave
soldiers, who operate in a hostile and dangerous environment. I highly appreciate the
recent Operation Barkhane and operations led by the Joint Force. The Security
Council is aware of my view on what is needed to make the Joint Force operational
at full strength. I condemn in the strongest terms the attacks against national and
international security forces. I am saddened by the heavy losses that the Malian
defence and security forces suffered in attacks in Dioura and Guiré and the death of
four MINUSMA peacekeepers as a result of a malicious act. I recall that attacks
targeting United Nations peacekeepers may constitute war crimes under international
law and reiterate my call upon the Malian authorities to spare no effort in identifying
the perpetrators of all the attacks against peacekeepers so that they can be brought to
justice.
90. I am appalled by the recent upsurge in violence in central Mali, which
increasingly affects civilians. I call upon the authorities to step up their concerted
efforts to protect civilians. The attack in the village of Ogossagou in the Mopti region,
where 157 civilians were killed, was the worst of its kind. The perpetrators must be
brought to justice. Impunity fuels violence. I therefore reiterate my call upon the
Malian authorities to step up efforts to end impunity. Addressing the situation in
central Mali will require a clear commitment from the Government to strengthening
its response and addressing extremist movements, communal tensions, the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and the arming of ethnically based
self-defence groups. If these concerns are not addressed, there is a high risk of further
escalation that could lead to the commission of atrocity crimes. For its part, the
international community must take stock of what more it can do to support the
authorities. MINUSMA has taken measures to step up its support t o the authorities in
addressing the situation in the Centre and stands ready to further take further measures
in this regard.
91. I stress once again that the Agreement remains the only valid and viable
framework for the peace process in Mali. Its full implementation, including
development aspects, is indispensable to stabilize the situation in the country and
achieve the redeployment of reconstituted and reformed national defence and security
forces to northern Mali. The action taken by my Special Represe ntative and the entire
Mission in support of the parties to advance the peace process and stem the violence
in the Centre, including through adopting a more proactive and mobile posture of the
military and police components, deserves to be acknowledged. The peace process is
at a critical juncture, and the presence and political and security roles of MINUSMA
will remain paramount over the coming 12 months to enable further progress. In that
regard, I recommend that the mandate of MINUSMA be extended for anot her year,
until 30 June 2020, with a configuration as proposed and outlined in my
recommendation above. MINUSMA is operating at its maximum capacity. Should the
role that the Mission is expected to play in central Mali go beyond the support that I
recommended in paragraphs 83 and 84 above, MINUSMA would be required to
request additional capacities and resources on the basis of a thorough assessment on
the ground.
92. Preventing increased violence and instability will require addressing the root
causes of the crisis, including poverty, underdevelopment, a lack of opportunities for
young people and climate change, through a more integrated approach. I call upon all
national, regional and international actors to step up efforts to address the multiple
threats facing Mali and the entire Sahel region through humanitarian assistance and
sustainable development, in line with the United Nations integrated strategy for the
Sahel and its Support Plan. The situation in Mali is a test of the international
community’s ability to mobilize in support of peace and stability. Security in Mali
has an impact on the entire Sahel, which in turn affects global stability. I call upon
16/20

19-08351

S/2019/454

the international community to urgently mobilize the outstanding funds requested by
the humanitarian appeal for Mali so that critical relief can be provided to those in
need and to disburse funding for the Group of Five for the Sahel priority investment
programme in order to implement Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
93. I am grateful to my Special Representative, Mahamat Saleh Annadif, for his
unwavering dedication and leadership. I am immensely grateful to the resolute
commitment of the personnel of MINUSMA, the United Nations country team and
the troop- and police-contributing countries, often in extreme and challenging
conditions. I commend the members of the international mediation team, led by
Algeria, the African Union, the Economic Community of West African States, the
European Union and other regional organizations, multilateral and bilateral partners,
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, non-governmental organizations
and all other partners for their steadfast commitment to and invaluable support for
peace in Mali.

19-08351

17/20

S/2019/454

Annex I
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali: military and police strength as at
15 May 2019
Military

Police

Experts on Mission,
staff officers and units

Individual police officers

Country

Men

Men

Armenia

1

Austria

2

1

3

1 284

17

1 301

Bangladesh

Women

Total

Women

Formed police units

Total

Total police

Men

Women

Total

Men

Women

Total

236

44

280

236

44

280

137

153

2

155

140

141

16

157

1

Belgium

80

11

91

Benin

245

14

259

Bhutan

4

Bosnia and
Herzegovina

1

1

2

Burkina Faso

16

2

18

137

10

7

17

131

3

10

4

14

10

4

14

4

1 654

54

1 708

Burundi

1

1

2

Cambodia

285

18

303

Cameroon

3

Canada

124

18

142

1

3

4

1

3

4

Chad

1 433

18

1 451

17

2

19

17

2

19

China

386

17

403

Côte d’Ivoire

160

3

163

16

5

21

16

5

21

Czechia

5

2

7

Denmark

1

1

1 077

1 077

4

0

4

1

2

1

15

14

Egypt
El Salvador

279

24

4

4

Ethiopia

1

1

Finland

4

4

1

France

25

25

15

Gambia

3

1

4

Germany

352

20

372

Ghana

131

19

150

Guinea

2
853

140

144

144

303

Estonia

Guatemala

140

9

1

2
14

9

3

12

9

3

12

9

7

16

9

7

16

2
16

869

Hungary
Indonesia

12

Italy

12
1

1

2

2

2

2

67

11

11

11

11

Jordan

67

Kenya

11

1

12

Latvia

8

1

9

Liberia

106

10

116

18/20

19-08351

S/2019/454
Military

Police

Experts on Mission,
staff officers and units

Individual police officers

Country

Men

Women

Total

Men

Lithuania

35

2

37

Madagascar
Mauritania

Women

2
7

Formed police units

Total

Men

Women

Total police

Total

2

Men

Women

2

Total

2

7

Mexico

2

1

3

Nepal

196

3

199

Netherlands

245

17

262

7

3

10

7

3

10

Niger

856

13

869

31

7

38

31

7

38

Nigeria

66

17

83

2

5

7

102

45

147

Norway

13

1

14

Pakistan

5

5

Portugal

2

2

1

2

1

3

2

Senegal

1 246

32

1 278

22

1

23

Sierra Leone

18

1

19

Spain

1

1

Sri Lanka

205

205

Sweden

237

261

3

2

4

3

24

4

3

2

5

3

3

1

20

Tunisia

79

3

82

35

1

7

2

9

12 740

415

13 155

Total

19-08351

249

259

31

20

280

2

5

19

United States of
America

2

303

938

2

1
32

30

2

1
271

908

United Kingdom of
Great Britain and
Northern Ireland

140

2

Togo
Turkey

40

1

Romania

Switzerland

100

279

3

278

21

299

36

35

1

36

2

2

2

2

253

54

307

1 289

143

1 432

1 540

198

1 738

19/20

S/2019/454

Map
20/20

Annex II

19-08351
