A /77/PV.85*

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

85th plenary meeting

Thursday, 29 June 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 13 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/77/L.79)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg to introduce draft
resolution A/77/L.79.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to introduce, on behalf of 57 sponsors, draft
resolution A/77/L.79, entitled “Independent Institution
on Missing Persons in the Syrian Arab Republic”.
The draft resolution was drawn up by an interregional
group of Member States, including Albania, Belgium,
Cabo Verde, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic,
North Macedonia and my own country, Luxembourg.
We would like to thank all our partners for their
contributions, support and outreach efforts. The
number of sponsors of the draft resolution testifies to
the importance of this subject.
The draft resolution before the Assembly today
seeks to establish, under the auspices of the United
Nations, an independent institution to address the issue
of missing persons in the Syrian Arab Republic. Before
presenting the draft resolution in greater detail, allow
me to outline the context in which it is set.

For over a decade, families in all parts of the Syrian
Arab Republic have been desperately seeking to know
the fate and whereabouts of their loved ones. Every
day, families, especially women, face administrative
and legal difficulties, financial uncertainties and deep
trauma as they continue to search for their missing
loved ones.
Official figures point to at least 100,000 missing
persons in the Syrian Arab Republic. The real number
is probably much higher, as the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights pointed out during the
interactive dialogue of the General Assembly that was
held in this Hall three months ago, on 28 March.
Given the complexity and magnitude of the issue of
missing persons in the Syrian Arab Republic, existing
actors do not have the capacity to respond. For that
reason, the Secretary-General recommended in his
report of 2 August 2022 (A/76/890) that Member States
consider establishing, through the General Assembly,
a new international institution to clarify the fate and
whereabouts of missing persons in the Syrian Arab
Republic and to provide adequate support to victims,
survivors and the families of those missing persons.
The Secretary-General’s report identified two main
gaps in current efforts, which justify the creation of a
new institution. First, there is insufficient coordination
among relevant actors, which results in lists of missing
persons that remain partial and are distributed between
multiple actors. That leads to the fragmentation
and the underutilization of available information.
Secondly, the absence of a one-stop shop has created

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-18606 (E)

*2318606*
*Reissued for technical reasons 16 January 2024

A/77/PV.85

uncertainty for families. Not knowing where to submit
relevant information, families often have to report the
disappearance of their loved ones to multiple actors,
which contributes to confusion regarding lists and
further traumatizes families.
The new institution recommended by the SecretaryGeneral is designed to fill those gaps, while working
in cooperation with other actors. The institution will
reinforce complementarity and avoid duplication.
It will serve as a single point of entry for collecting
and comparing data. It will ensure coordination
and communication with all relevant actors and
ongoing initiatives.
To complete the context, I would like to pay tribute
to the strength and courage of the Syrian families and
their representatives. They include Fadwa Mahmoud,
Yasmen Almashan, Mariam Alhallak, Khalil al-Haj
Saleh and Ahmad Helmi. My colleagues and I had
the honour of getting to know them, and I know that
many members of the Assembly have been in contact
with Syrian families. The families’ tireless advocacy
and struggle to assert their right to know and clarify
the fate of their missing loved ones is the driving force
behind this initiative. It was the families who called
on the United Nations for help. And it was in response
to the families’ appeal and the Secretary-General’s
recommendation that Luxembourg announced, on
28 March, that it would submit a draft resolution with
an interregional group of Member States. That draft
resolution is before the Assembly today.
The draft resolution is the result of an inclusive and
transparent process. A first draft resolution was shared
with all Member States on 18 May. On 26 May, we held
informal consultations, open to all Member States, on
that first draft resolution. On 9 June, we shared a revised
version of the draft resolution, which was prepared on
the basis of the comments received. The final version of
the draft resolution was published on 20 June.
By adopting the draft resolution, the General
Assembly will decide to establish, under the auspices
of the United Nations, the independent institution on
missing persons in the Syrian Arab Republic. The draft
resolution specifies that the task of the independent
institution will be to clarify the fate and whereabouts of
all missing persons in the Syrian Arab Republic — and
I stress all missing persons — and to provide adequate
2/30

29/06/2023

support to victims, survivors and the families of those
missing, in close cooperation and complementarity
with all relevant actors.
The draft resolution stipulates that the independent
institution shall have a structural element that
ensures the full and meaningful participation and
representation of victims, survivors and the families
of missing persons in the Syrian Arab Republic in its
operationalization and work and that it shall engage
with women’s organizations and other civil society
organizations in a regular and sustained manner.
The draft resolution provides that the institution
shall apply a victim- and survivor-centred approach,
shall be inclusive of families and shall be guided by
the principles and fundamental features of gender
inclusivity, non-discrimination, “do no harm”,
independence, impartiality, transparency and the
confidentiality of sources and information.
Given that it will be created under the auspices of
the United Nations, the independent institution will be
funded from the regular budget of the United Nations.
That will ensure its viability and independence.
It is proposed that the Secretary-General, with
the support of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, and in consultation
with all other relevant actors, including with the full
and meaningful participation of victims, survivors
and families, develop, within 80 working days of the
adoption of the present resolution, the terms of reference
of the independent institution. Allow me to emphasize
that all Member States will have the opportunity,
if they so wish, to contribute by drawing on lessons
learned from their own experience. The door has been
open since the process began, and it will remain open.
The draft resolution calls upon all States as well as
all parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic to
cooperate fully with the independent institution, in line
with their obligations under international law. It also
calls upon other relevant actors, including international
institutions and civil society organizations, in particular
Syrian civil society organizations, to cooperate with
the independent institution, and it requests the United
Nations system as a whole to cooperate fully with the
independent institution. Lastly, it requests the SecretaryGeneral to report on the implementation of the draft
resolution within 100 working days of its adoption, and
further to report on the activities of the independent
23-18606

29/06/2023

A/77/PV.85

institution on an annual basis, thereby enabling the
General Assembly to follow up the implementation of
the independent institution’s mandate.
Allow me to stress that the draft resolution does
not single out anyone. Its aims are solely humanitarian,
namely, to improve the plight of Syrian families
who do not know what has become of their siblings,
children, parents, spouses or other relatives, and to
alleviate the suffering of those victims and families
by providing them with the support they need and the
response to which they are entitled under international
humanitarian law. We hope that the work of the
international institution will contribute to efforts to
achieve national reconciliation and a lasting peace. The
families of missing persons in the Syrian Arab Republic
have not given up, despite the ordeal they have endured
for years. We owe it to them to act decisively and to
act now.
I thank all Member States that have sponsored
the draft resolution and all those that have offered
their support for this humanitarian initiative. We
call on all Member States to support Syrian families
by voting in favour of the draft resolution. A vote in
favour sends a message of hope and solidarity to the
families. By adopting the draft resolution, we will be
telling them that we feel their suffering and have heard
their appeal. By adopting the draft resolution, we will
be demonstrating that the international community is
standing with Syrian families to uphold their right to
know the fate of their missing loved ones and to offer
them appropriate support.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/77/L.79.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano: (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of draft resolution A/77/L.79,
and in addition to the delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of the
draft resolution: Andorra, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Cyprus, Fiji, Hungary, Kiribati, Monaco, the Republic
of Korea, San Marino and the United Kingdom.
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote before the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to

10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Once again, the General Assembly is invited to
consider another politicized draft resolution targeting
the Syrian Arab Republic, clearly reflecting blatant
interference in its internal affairs and providing further
evidence of the persistently hostile approach of certain
Western States to Syria, foremost among them the
United States of America, which prompted a small
group of States that have no understanding of the actual
reality in the Syrian Arab Republic to submit draft
resolution A/77/L.79 to us today.
As all are aware, the United States of America has
been submitting a resolution within the framework
of the Third Committee entitled “Situation of human
rights in the Syrian Arab Republic”. The draft resolution
is emblematic of the country-specific resolutions that
target certain countries under the pretext of protecting
human rights of their citizens. Reference is made
therein to the issue of missing persons in Syria in order
to further target us through the establishment of a new
politicized mechanism.
The report of the Secretariat on the issue of missing
people in Syria (A/76/890) and the discussions that
followed were based on a selective approach to the
issue, as those discussions fundamentally ignored
Syrian national ownership and the need to consult and
engage with Syria and to obtain its formal consent
to launch the process of discussing the issue. The
countries sponsoring the draft resolution have violated
those fundamental bases. They have moved to establish
a strange and vaguely defined mechanism that does
not provide a specific definition of the term “missing”
and that lacks a defined time frame, geographical
boundaries, terms of reference, an organizational
structure, working methods and partners. Worse
still, its funding has yet to be defined, although
those countries are known for setting the precedent
of imposing on Member States the obligation to fund
such mechanisms from the regular budget of the United
Nations. The foregoing confirms beyond any doubt
the dangerous intentions of those seeking to establish
the mechanism, which will be used to cover up their
interference in Syria’s internal affairs and as a tool to
exert more pressure on Syria and its people.

23-186063/30

A/77/PV.85

The Syrian Arab Republic has not hesitated to
address the issue of missing Syrians, on the basis that it
is a national Syrian matter. It has handled all registered
requests submitted to the law enforcement authorities
on missing persons. In accordance with Syrian laws and
regulations, it has conducted independent investigations
based on available information and relevant capabilities.
The Syrian Arab Republic has also formed specialized
medical teams to deal with the issue of mass graves.
In cooperation with the International Committee of
the Red Cross, it has trained Syrian forensic doctors
to carry out the task of exhuming human remains
and cooperated within the framework of the Astana
format to uncover the fate of missing people held by
terrorist groups.
The Syrian Arab Republic is committed to
addressing that humanitarian issue. However, we reject
the politicized approach that has been adopted in that
regard. We underscore that humanitarian issues are
indivisible. It is impossible to address them selectively.
There are thousands of missing people who are victims
of the military aggression launched by the United
States of America. What will be done for those people?
There are also thousands of missing persons kidnapped
and detained by armed terrorist groups and separatist
militias that are agents for the United States forces
illegally present in north-eastern Syria.
We are fully aware that the States seeking to create
that institution will not allow it to consider the issue
of persons who have gone missing as a result of those
crimes. On the contrary, it will divert the attention of
the international community from the true perpetrators
of those crimes, which have resulted in thousands of
missing persons. That confirms once again the double
standards approach that is being adopted.
Certain Western States have carried out systematic
campaigns on the issue of missing persons in Syria,
such as by organizing side events to launch fabricated
and false allegations and circulating inflated figures
without documentation. They have also attempted to
mislead us by saying that the Syrian Arab Republic
took part in consultations on the draft resolution. That
is a major concern of a large number of delegations
that participated in the discussions. In that regard,
Syria affirms that it did not take part in any of those
discussions, as it was not invited, nor was it consulted
on the establishment of that alleged institution. We
4/30

29/06/2023

indicated that in a number of letters, notes and other
communications that we submitted to the Member
States in recent months.
Based on that, the Syrian Arab Republic categorically
rejects the full contents of the draft resolution. We
condemn attempts to mislead public opinion and falsify
our position, making others believe that we took part
in the consultations in a desperate attempt to garner
support from other States for this devastating initiative.
Syria warns against the risks of establishing such a
politicized mechanism, which could be considered a
precedent to target any United Nations Member State
in the future, especially developing countries.
The Syrian Arab Republic calls on Member States
that are keen to uphold the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations to oppose such attempts to interfere in
the internal affairs of Syria. We call on them to support
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Syria and to reject selectivity and double
standards in dealing with human rights issues. We call
on them to oppose any politicized mechanisms created
to serve the narrow political agendas of certain States.
The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic, while
requesting a vote on the draft resolution, urges all
Member States to vote against it in order to preserve
the credibility of the General Assembly. Voting against
it will mean respecting the fundamentals and principles
upon which the United Nations was founded, and which
are enshrined in the United Nations Charter.
Ms. Skoglund (Sweden): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
The draft resolution that is before us today will
establish an independent institution that will help
clarify the fate and whereabouts of all missing people in
the Syrian Arab Republic and provide adequate support
to victims, survivors and the families of those missing.
The right of families to know the fate and whereabouts
of their missing relatives is enshrined in international
humanitarian law. Therefore, this concerns a purely
humanitarian issue that must be dealt with as a matter
of urgency.
It is indeed crucial to highlight the clear humanitarian
objective of this draft resolution. The proposed victimand survivor-centred approach and the principles and
fundamental features of non-discrimination, do no
harm, independence, impartiality, transparency and
23-18606

29/06/2023

confidentiality of sources and information, as well as
gender inclusivity, are important to the sustainability
and effectiveness of the new institution.
The draft resolution sets out an 80-working-dayperiod plan in order to prepare the terms of reference
of the institution, with the support of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
It allows for the involvement of victims, survivors
and the families of those missing and the design,
establishment and operation of the institution. It also
includes the regular and sustained engagement of
women’s and civil society organizations.
The draft resolution is a step towards ensuring that
the relatives and the missing obtain the answers they
have been seeking for so long. The European Union
recognizes the work that has already been carried out by
various organizations in order to keep records of those
who have gone missing in the Syrian Arab Republic. It
is necessary that the new institution brings together and
consolidates the extensive work that has already been
carried out with a view to ensuring complementarity
and avoiding duplication.
As a matter of principle, the EU supports all
efforts aiming to determine the fate and whereabouts
of missing persons, including that of all those missing
in the Syrian Arab Republic. That is the spirit of the
draft resolution that we are about to adopt today. We
hope that this new humanitarian institution can help
heal some of the wounds of 12 years of conflict and,
in doing so, will play an important role in contributing
to efforts towards reconciliation and sustainable peace.

A/77/PV.85

a prerequisite for making global peace and sustainable
development a reality for all peoples of the world. In
this context, we take this opportunity to reiterate both
our grave concern over the growing threats to the
Charter of the United Nations and the urgent need to
reaffirm and defend its purposes and principles as a
guarantee of peace, balance in the international order
based on a spirit of inclusiveness, respect for diversity,
national sovereignty, the legal equality of States,
the peaceful settlement of disputes, and as a motor
for social development and the fulfilment of human
rights — all within the framework of revitalized,
effective and inclusive multilateralism.
The States members of our Group of Friends attach
the utmost importance to the promotion and protection
of all human rights, both individual and collective,
without distinction in terms of level or category. We
also consider that the promotion and protection of
these rights is strengthened through dialogue and
cooperation, in accordance with the principles of
impartiality, objectivity, transparency, non-selectivity,
non-politicization and non-confrontation. We reiterate
our concern over the growing politicization of human
rights and their instrumentalization against States,
including some members of our Group, for the purposes
of meddling in their internal affairs and promoting
agendas of a dubious nature, a practice that does not
correspond to the true spirit of human rights.

Mr. Poveda Brito (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela has the honour to take the floor on behalf
of the Group of Friends in Defence of the Charter of the
United Nations, which, from the very outset, stresses
that its participation in today’s meeting should in no
way be construed as willingness to cooperate with the
so-called institution, bearing in mind that resolution
77/230 was neither adopted by consensus, nor does it
adhere to the purposes and principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations.

In that regard, we stress our serious concern at the
continued proliferation of unilateral mechanisms in
country-specific situations that purport to carry out a
supposedly impartial assessment of the human rights
situation in certain States when the true intention
behind them is to use human rights to attack sovereign
States and national Governments for the purpose of,
inter alia, meddling in their internal affairs. Such
mechanisms, we must say, neither correspond to the
true spirit of human rights, nor do they have the consent
of the States concerned. These country-specific reports
and resolutions are selective, politically motivated
and divisive, and they weaken human rights bodies
and institutions. That is why we call for an end to
such approaches.

It is important for us to make that clear from the
very beginning, taking into account the fact that, since
its establishment almost two years ago, our Group of
Friends has been insisting on the pressing need to ensure
compliance with, and strict adherence to, the tenets of
the United Nations Charter, in both letter and spirit, as

The States members of the Group of Friends could
not fail to note the state of ambiguity surrounding the
various aspects of the text of draft resolution A/77/L.79,
which is aimed at creating a dubious institution on
missing persons in the Syrian Arab Republic, whether
it be in terms of the parameters of its mandate and

23-186065/30

A/77/PV.85

powers, its working methods or the agendas of its
partners, not to mention the lack of specifics on the
source of its funding, which raises serious doubts about
the true intentions of those who intend to create it and
contradicts their claims that they wish to assist Syria
and promote human rights.
In the light of this reality, we insist on dialogue and
cooperation, engagement and national ownership in any
process whose real objective is to strengthen human
rights, both domestically and internationally. We also
consider the issue of missing persons to be purely
humanitarian in character and that any relevant cases
or concerns should be dealt with through the competent
national legal and judicial frameworks.
In the context of the Syrian Arab Republic, if there
really was a genuine interest in addressing the issue of
the human rights of the Syrian people, we should then
first address the root problem, which is that, for the
past 40 years, the Syrian people as a whole have been
subjected to the illegal imposition of a set of unilateral
coercive measures that were even expanded during the
worst part of the coronavirus disease pandemic. These
measures violated and continue today to massively
violate all the Syrian people’s human rights, causing
great suffering and untold pain, as widely reported by
various independent United Nations experts, among
others. The immediate, complete and unconditional
lifting of these cruel and illegal measures would be
a first step in the right direction to remediate human
rights in Syria, improve the humanitarian situation in
the country and alleviate the prolonged suffering of the
Syrian people.
Despite all those challenges and obstacles, we
note the efforts of the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic in this important area — and in many
others — aimed at always ensuring the well-being of its
people. We call for the continuation of these efforts and
affirm the need to ensure proper national ownership of
these efforts, while stressing the central role of the Syrian
Government and its institutions in all these matters.
For all the foregoing reasons, the States members
of our Group of Friends reject the establishment of
any mechanism or institution that does not serve the
best interests of the Syrian people without the consent
of the Syrian Government or in a manner that goes
beyond national ownership. That will only result in
extending the politicization to which this issue has
been and continues to be exposed, through the reports
6/30

29/06/2023

of agencies and mechanisms that have sought to take
it out of the humanitarian dimension and turn it into a
way of pressuring the Syrian Government.
In conclusion, the Group of Friends calls for an end
to the politicization of human rights and their use to
attack a sovereign State or promote petty agendas and
interests, as well as an end to any practice of double
standards that undermines human rights and prevents a
harmonious environment and real progress in the field,
while stressing that the continuation of such approaches
and practices constitutes a flagrant violation of the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, through which our nations have committed to
promoting respect for and assistance in the realization
of human rights and fundamental freedoms for all.
Allow me now in my national capacity to briefly
reiterate Venezuela’s position that the General
Assembly should not be instrumentalized for political
purposes and without due regard for the basic
principles of cooperation, constructive dialogue,
universality, impartiality, objectivity, non-selectivity,
non-confrontation and non-politicization; these should
always govern the way in which we approach human
rights. The creation of mechanisms designed without
the consent of the State, in this case the Syrian Arab
Republic, guarantees that it will fail to achieve its
supposed objective, since without a transparent
dialogue and cooperation with the Government, any
result emanating from it would lack a sustainable basis,
and, far from contributing to peace, it will fuel conflict
and division, which will lead to consequences for the
population and the institutional credibility of the United
Nations. Moreover, it has been shown that these are being
used in a mercenary way by their promoters to continue
fomenting and prolonging war as a business venture.
The process of dialogue and constructive
cooperation that the Syrian Arab Republic has sustained
with the rest of the countries of the Middle East is proof
of the will, not only of the Syrian Government but of
the entire region, to advance peace above and beyond
all foreign interests that are promoting conflict and war,
whose bureaucratic and politicized structures are simply
boycotting the political efforts made towards peace.
Venezuela once again recognizes the efforts of the
brotherly Syrian people and their Government in the
promotion and protection of human rights, economic
development and peace for the population, despite the
relentless efforts of several countries that are today
23-18606

29/06/2023

promoting the draft resolution to generate pain and
suffering for the Syrian people through their inhumane
and cruel coercive and unilateral measures. We therefore
invite responsible members of the international
community to vote against draft resolution A/77/L.79.
Ms. Rodriguez Mancia (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank the interregional core group that
introduced draft resolution A/77/L.79 for conducting an
inclusive and transparent process.
Guatemala will vote in favour of draft resolution
L.79 entitled “Independent Institution on Missing
Persons in the Syrian Arab Republic”, in line with
the support we have expressed for the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011 since its creation. The Mechanism allows for
the investigation of the experiences of the victims
and civilian population most affected in the conflict
in the Syrian Arab Republic, a conflict of alarming
violence that has been going on for 12 years, which
unfortunately has not come to an end. The draft
resolution presented today will contribute to effectively
ensuring accountability for the sake of the survivors
and their families.
In conclusion, we call on delegations to vote
in favour of the draft resolution. The international
community cannot remain indifferent to the serious
humanitarian crisis facing the Syrian population. We
must act collectively in supporting the draft resolution.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): We
thank Luxembourg, the core group and all the sponsors
for this important initiative.
More than 12 years ago, the Syrian people peacefully
rose up to demand their freedom and dignity, calling on
Damascus to respect their inalienable rights and to stop
human rights violations. Yet the conflict continues, with
devastating consequences for the Syrian people. The
conflict has also led to one of the largest displacement
crises since the Second World War, with millions of
Syrians displaced from their homes inside Syria or
seeking refuge in neighbouring countries or around
the globe. There are estimates today that more than
155,000 Syrians are missing, many of them unjustly
detained or disappeared by parties to the conflict in
Syria. They include individuals believed to be missing
at the hands of Daesh and other terrorist groups. Nearly

A/77/PV.85

every Syrian family is affected by that issue. Despite
concerted efforts and significant diplomacy over the
past 12 years, there has been limited progress on that
protracted issue.
Confirming the fate and whereabouts of the
missing, securing their release and returning the
remains of those who have perished to their families is
a moral and humanitarian imperative. People deserve
to know the truth about their missing loved ones. That
is essential to promoting lasting stability, durable
peace and a sustainable political solution to the Syrian
conflict. Syrian family associations and victims’ groups
have been calling on the international community
to act. That is why the Secretary-General and many
others have endorsed the new institution proposed
in draft resolution A/77/L.79. It rightly addresses an
urgent unmet need that has haunted Syrian families
and survivors for years. A brave representative of one
of the Syrian victim and survivor associations once
shared with us that “the cost of waiting is unmatched
and unimaginable”.
Ahead of today’s vote, many Syrians have asked
us to remember who the institution seeks to defend,
namely, the humans missing and detained with a
full life yet to live. They are not statistics. They are
spouses, children, siblings, parents, friends and
colleagues. As their harrowing testimonies show, we
must deliver long-overdue answers to the victims and
their families, who deserve our support. The draft
resolution is humanitarian in nature. It is focused on
all missing Syrians, regardless of ethnicity, religion
or political affiliation. The core group and the United
Nations sought to engage with Damascus on the effort,
and they were rebuffed. We hope all parties to the
conflict will cooperate with the institution and release
all unjustly detained people, clarify the fate of those
who are missing and return the remains of those who
have perished to their families. The core group led an
inclusive and transparent negotiation and sought to
engage all United Nations Member States, including
Syria. They tried to engage Damascus on the effort
several times and at different levels, and Damascus
chose not to engage.
Even with limited or no initial cooperation from
Damascus, we believe that the institution will make
meaningful progress. But until that happens, for all
Syrian victims, survivors and families, we must do
everything in our power to advance the right to truth.
That is why the United States strongly supports the

23-186067/30

A/77/PV.85

draft resolution. We urge Member States to stand with
the many Syrian victims and their families and support
the draft resolution by voting in favour of it.
Mr. Amorín (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay is grateful for the work done by the core group
of countries that introduced draft resolution A/77/L.79,
which seeks to create an independent institution on
missing persons in the Syrian Arab Republic
The search for missing persons is an issue of the
utmost importance in the area of human rights. It
must be addressed with urgency and a comprehensive
approach that seeks truth, justice and reparation for the
victims and their families. In that regard, we believe
that the establishment of an independent institution
dedicated exclusively to the search for missing persons
in Syria is a crucial step towards achieving those goals.
To that end, Uruguay will support the draft resolution.
We in Uruguay had our own painful experience not
that many years ago. From 1973 to 1985, we endured
a military dictatorship under which many people were
victims of enforced disappearances. Our country
established specialized institutions, in particular the
Human Rights Secretariat for the Recent Past. In broad
terms, we understand the importance of being able to
rely on an independent institution dedicated exclusively
to the search for missing persons. Such an entity can play
a key role in gathering information, the investigation of
cases and the identification of remains. It should serve
as a self-explanatory, easily accessible, victim-centred
support gateway for survivors and families. Such a clear
pathway would be an important step towards regaining
the trust of victims and survivors.
In order ensure the reliability of the independent
institution dedicated exclusively to finding missing
persons, its work must be based on humanitarian
principles, completely divorced from all circumstantial
political considerations and focused on victims’
needs and assistance to their families. Likewise, for
Uruguay, its work must not overlap with that of existing
mechanisms in the Organization that deal with the
Syrian Arab Republic.
In that regard, we understand that the institute
to be established under the draft resolution can
expect to receive information from the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Those Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
8/30

29/06/2023

2011 (IIIM), which will be useful in the search for missing
persons. However, the terms of reference concerning
the confidentiality with which such information will
be handled must be unambiguous in order to ensure
informants’ trust and that the information is effectively
passed on, in line with humanitarian goals. The
information stream must flow from the IIIM to the
institution, not in the other direction, as that would only
undermine the humanitarian activities related to the
search for missing persons and politicize the process.
Finally, experience has taught us that in order
to make progress in the search for missing persons,
the support of all parties involved in the conflict
is imperative. For that reason, we call on both the
institute and the delegations that have spearheaded its
establishment to make every possible diplomatic effort
to secure the cooperation of the Syrian Government, as
search efforts will be inadequate without its support.
We understand that many elements, including
complementarity with other existing mechanisms
and its potential to work with the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic, will be made clearer in the terms
of reference that the Secretariat, in cooperation with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, will draft in the coming days. For
that reason, the provisions of paragraph 10, in which
the Secretary-General is requested to report on the
implementation of the draft resolution within 100
working days of its adoption, will be key. We underscore
that the report must be presented within the framework
of a broad consultation process in which the views of all
Member States are taken into account.
Mr. Kim Song (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea maintains its consistent principled
position rejecting all politically motivated initiatives in
the field of human rights aimed at targeting individual
countries and interfering in the internal affairs of
sovereign States. Draft resolution A/77/L.79, submitted
by Western countries, is nothing but another example
of politicization, selectivity and double standards with
respect to human rights, which constitutes a clear
violation of the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. The draft resolution is nothing
but the outcome of a politicized agenda pursued by
Western countries that seek the change and overthrow
of legitimate Governments of sovereign States under
the pretext of human rights.
23-18606

29/06/2023

In that context, we reject such a politicized and
unilateral manoeuvre as the possible establishment
through the General Assembly of a so-called
independent institution on missing persons in the
Syrian Arab Republic without the consent of the
State concerned, as it is clear that it would be used as
another political weapon and means of pressure on the
Government of Syria. It is certain that if the politicized
mechanism against Syria is forcibly established, it will
yield another negative and harmful result of creating
confrontation and distrust, rather than facilitating and
promoting the process of finding a political solution to
the Syrian issue.
My delegation therefore rejects the initiative
to establish a new mechanism against the Syrian
Arab Republic, and we will vote against draft
resolution A/77/L.79.
Mr. Guo Jiakun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
supports the statement made by the representative of
Venezuela on behalf of the Group of Friends in Defence
of the Charter of the United Nations.
On human rights and humanitarian issues, China
has always maintained that the principles of objectivity
and impartiality should be upheld and opposes the
politicization of human rights and humanitarian issues.
We have always maintained that the United Nations
should fully listen to the views of Member States, be
guided by their needs and respect their ownership and
leadership when cooperating with them.
Draft resolution A/77/L.79 before us attempts to use
United Nations resources to establish a new mechanism
on the issue of missing persons in Syria. Regrettably,
the sponsors have drafted the draft resolution without
consulting the Syrian Government and without fully
listening to the wider membership. The draft resolution
is not clear about the mechanism’s responsibilities, does
not identify the sources of funding and is completely
opaque. The draft resolution claims to respect Syria’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity, but it is silent on the
indiscriminate unilateral coercive measures imposed
on Syria by individual countries, the illegal plundering
of natural resources in Syria, the illegal presence of
foreign troops in Syria and illegal military operations.
The sponsors convened only one informal meeting
to introduce the text, without conducting paragraph-byparagraph consultations, which is not in line with the
United Nations usual practice. The sponsors’ insistence
on pushing for the submission of the draft resolution,
despite the clear opposition of many Member States, is

A/77/PV.85

a complete imposition on others. The draft resolution is,
in essence, a unilateral means of exerting pressure on the
Syrian Government and interference in its sovereignty
and internal affairs. It is yet another example of
individual countries politicizing and instrumentalizing
human rights and humanitarian issues to suppress and
contain developing countries. Once the draft resolution
is adopted, countries will have to spend a huge amount
of money — $15 million — over the next two years.
That money should be spent on supporting capacitybuilding in Syria rather than on creating a controversial
mechanism. Based on the analysis I have provided,
China will vote against the draft resolution and calls on
other Member States to join us in opposing it.
The Syrian conflict has dragged on for 12 years,
and the Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process
is the fundamental solution to the Syrian issue. We
welcome Syria’s return to the League of Arab States,
congratulate the reunion of the Arab family after 12
years and support the unity and revitalization of Arab
countries. Countries outside the region should fully
respect the will of the countries and peoples of the
region, stop obstructing the dialogue and reconciliation
process of the Middle East countries and work to create
favourable conditions for a political solution to the
Syrian issue.
Mr. Morales Dávila (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation is taking the floor in explanation of vote
before the voting on draft resolution A/77/L.79, entitled
“Independent Institution on Missing Persons in the
Syrian Arab Republic”.
Nicaragua aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Group of Friends in Defence of the Charter of the
United Nations.
We regret once again that our General Assembly
continues to be the object of double-standard
politicization and selectivity promoted by Western
countries against sovereign and independent countries.
With the proposal to establish that supposedly impartial
and independent instrument, without consulting or
cooperating with the Syrian Arab Republic, it is
clear that the General Assembly is acting beyond the
scope of the powers conferred to it by the Charter of
the United Nations, in violation of international law
and the principle of the sovereignty and sovereign
equality of all Member States, as well as that of
non-interference in the internal affairs of States. It
is essential for the United Nations to preserve its

23-186069/30

A/77/PV.85

29/06/2023

neutrality and credibility as a facilitator of a process
of justice and accountability — one that is led by the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, which has
demonstrated the full capacity of its legal and judicial
institutions — and without external interference or
political or financial pressures.

its allies, especially Al-Hol camp, which is notorious
for its high number of missing persons; those who fell
victim in terrorist-held Idlib; those who went missing
in the illegal military occupation zone in the north of
the country; and those who were illegally detained in
Al-Tanf by forces sponsored by the United States.

It is worrisome that our Assembly continues
to create mechanisms and institutions with United
Nations funding. That makes us wonder if the resources
of the Organization are being used for the benefit of
the Member States or to direct aggression, isolation and
hostility against our peoples. Member States should be
deeply aware of the serious precedent and the legal,
political and budgetary implications of the tendentious
attempts to continue promoting such a mechanism.

It would seem that it is an issue on which the
international community could assist the Syrian
Government in truly achieving results and helping its
people. However, like any humanitarian endeavour,
the search for the missing must be at the request of
the affected State and complement its own efforts. It
is obvious that, if it is not, such activities will be, at
the very least, ineffective and, at most, harmful and
illegal. However, the group of States sponsoring draft
resolution A/77/L.79, under consideration today, did
not bother to consult Damascus. It is submitting a draft
resolution for consideration by the General Assembly on
the establishment of an entity called the “Independent
Institution on Missing Persons in the Syrian Arab
Republic”. In fact, that so-called institution, which is
mandated by the draft resolution to search for people on
Syrian territory, is not designed to cooperate with the
Government of that country.

Nicaragua reaffirms its full solidarity with the
people and the Government of the sister Syrian Arab
Republic and rejects the ill-named international
mechanism. We stress the need to use these spaces
for promoting greater cooperation and collaboration
with the people and the Government of Syria, while
eliminating the policies of imposing terrorist, illegal,
criminal and inhumane unilateral coercive measures,
which are nothing more than aggressions with
catastrophic effects on the lives and livelihoods of the
Syrian people, which hinders the work of the United
Nations and its agencies in Syria. We reiterate our
call for increased efforts at the national, regional and
international levels in support of Syria’s development
and reconstruction and towards living in peace, in
accordance with the wishes of the Syrian people.
In conclusion, in line with its principled position,
Nicaragua firmly rejects the manipulation and use
of the human rights agenda as a pretext to interfere
in the internal, sovereign and independent affairs of
States. That opportunistic and illegitimate approach
is aimed at tarnishing the image of sovereign States
and at replacing the universally accepted principles of
international law and multilateralism.
Ms. Zabolotskaya (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The search for missing persons is a
humanitarian issue of great importance for people who
have survived terrible armed conflict. When speaking of
the fate of missing persons in Syria, we must remember
those who went missing as a result of air strikes of the
so-called coalition; those who went missing as a result of
the coalition’s destruction of Raqqa in 2017; those who
fell in the territories occupied by the United States and
10/30

The question arises, how does it intend to act? Does
it intend to do so by secretly infiltrating the territory of
the State? It is obvious that such activity, as well as the
draft resolution triggering it, contradicts the fundamental
principle of the Charter of the United Nations on
non-interference in the internal affairs of States. The
General Assembly has no authority to impose on any
State a mechanism that would operate on its territory or
on matters within its domestic jurisdiction, without the
consent of that State. Member States are therefore being
asked today to take an unlawful decision that will have
no legal effect whatsoever.
In other words, the General Assembly is being
asked today, in violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, to create an instrument to put pressure
on Syria, under a cynical humanitarian pretext
that bears no relation to the true objectives of that
enterprise. We have no doubt that the mechanism
can be neither independent nor impartial. As with its
predecessor, the so-called Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic,
it can obediently fulfil only the orders of its sponsors.
Russia does not support the idea of creating a socalled independent institution on missing persons in the
23-18606

29/06/2023

Syrian Arab Republic. We support Syria’s request to put
the draft resolution to a vote. We will vote against the
draft text. We call on all States not to support the draft
resolution and not to believe its humanitarian title.
We also support the statement made by the
representative of Venezuela on behalf of the Group of
Friends in Defence of the Charter of the United Nations.
In conclusion, we would like to underscore that
in order to actually resolve the issue of missing
persons, we must develop substantive cooperation with
Damascus, provide it with effective assistance, lift the
illegal unilateral sanctions that negatively affect those
efforts and humanitarian work as a whole, end the
foreign occupation of the country and repatriate foreign
nationals present. All those tools are in the hands of
the group of countries that sponsored the draft decision
under consideration today, but they do not intend to use
them, as their goal is not to help the people of Syria.
Mr. González Behmaras (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the Group
of Friends in Defence of the Charter of the United
Nations, and wishes to make the following statement in
its national capacity.
The ongoing bias of politicization and selectivity
in addressing human rights and related issues, such
as humanitarian affairs, against developing countries
remains a major source of concern. There is an urgent
need to eliminate selectivity, double standards, punitive
approaches and politicization when addressing the issue
of human rights — an area in which no country is spared
challenges. Such negative practices, which are used only
against developing countries, as are unilateral coercive
measures, exacerbate political confrontation and do not
improve the situation on the ground.
Regrettably, there is ongoing interest in using the
issue of human rights, and now humanitarian issues, for
political purposes against the Syrian Arab Republic and to
exploit the Assembly platform for such purposes. We are
particularly concerned about the targeting of Syria and
the proliferation of mechanisms and initiatives related to
that country, without the consent of its authorities. With
the new institution that draft resolution A/77/L.79 seeks
to create, there would be three international mechanisms,
within the United Nations structure, dedicated to
addressing issues related to Syria, all with an undeniable
prism of politicization, regardless of the humanitarian
and noble guise in which they are presented.

A/77/PV.85

We stress that politicizing the human rights issue
against Syria will not help to resolve the conflict. It
has not done so for more than a decade, nor will it do
so now. It will not help to determine the whereabouts
of missing persons. In that regard, we reaffirm our
unequivocal support for the quest for a peaceful and
negotiated solution to the conflict in Syria. We have
full confidence in the ability of the Syrian people
and authorities to achieve that goal. The international
community must contribute to the realization of
that goal. That will not happen so long as politically
motivated initiatives against Syria proliferate.
It is imperative to fully respect Syria’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity, take into account the
genuine interests and aspirations of its people, stop
interventionist and destabilizing measures and foster
cooperation with the Syrian authorities. The context in
which the initiative is presented does not go unnoticed,
as it is more favourable to Syria’s reintegration into
regional mechanisms and rapprochement with several
of its neighbours. That reveals the agenda behind the
humanitarian aims of the new mechanism.
We do not agree with, nor do we accept, the General
Assembly being manipulated or turned into a platform
or instrument against Syria that could, in the future,
be replicated against any other developing country.
Furthermore, the responsibilities of the Assembly,
the Third Committee and the Human Rights Council
must be preserved in order to address, in an objective,
balanced and non-discriminatory manner, the issue of
human rights, in Syria or any other country.
From a technical standpoint, the new international
mechanism raises serious concerns, beyond the
superficial exercise of sham negotiations. For example,
there are concerns about the ambiguities and omissions
in the mandate of the new institution; the inevitable
overlaps that will occur with the work of existing
mechanisms; the fact that its terms of reference are not
the result of a consultation exercise with the country
concerned or of intergovernmental negotiation; and the
criteria for estimating budgetary implications, without
the mandate having even been established or its terms
of reference determined. Also of concern are the
sources of funding for the mechanism, which clearly
does not enjoy the support of the country concerned
and causes division.
For all those reasons, and on the basis of its principled
position against politicization, selectivity, manipulation

23-1860611/30

A/77/PV.85

and double standards against the South, my delegation
will vote against draft resolution A/77/L.79.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): I wish to start by
congratulating my Muslim brothers and sisters as they
celebrate Eid Al-Adha.
On the present agenda item, while reiterating
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic, my delegation
would like to indicate the following in relation to the
draft resolution contained in document A/77/L.79,
entitled “Independent Institution on Missing Persons in
the Syrian Arab Republic”.
Egypt shares the humanitarian concerns related to
the fate and whereabouts of missing persons as a result
of the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic. However,
we have the following concerns and observations
regarding the draft resolution under consideration.
First, the draft resolution does not specify the exact
terms of reference of the proposed institution. Instead, it
provides in paragraph 5 an undue mandate to the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) in the establishment and functioning
of said institution, in total lack of conformity with the
mandate of OHCHR as established in resolution 48/141,
with an exclusive focus on the promotion and protection
of human rights.
Secondly, the draft resolution contains vague
references to the obligations of States under international
law to cooperate with the proposed institution.
Thirdly, not only is there a lack of clarity on the
vetting process to determine the engagement of victims,
survivors and the families of missing persons, but there
is also a lack of a clear definition of the missing persons
addressed by the draft resolution.
Fourthly, the draft resolution does not indicate the
fate and whereabouts of the information and data to be
collected for the purposes of the proposed institution
and the modalities of data collection, disaggregation,
confidentiality and future use.
It is regrettable that, despite conveying the above
observations and concerns to the main proponents of
the draft resolution, satisfactory answers have not been
provided. In view of all this, Egypt will abstain in the
voting on the draft resolution.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
12/30

29/06/2023

The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/77/L.79, entitled “Independent Institution
on Missing Persons in the Syrian Arab Republic”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The present oral
statement is made in the context of rule 153 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly. It has also been
distributed to Member States.
The activities referred to in paragraphs 2, 3, 4,
6 and 10 of draft resolution A/77/L.79 would entail
new activities in 2024 and onwards related to the
establishment and operation of the independent
institution on missing persons in the Syrian Arab
Republic, as well as an additional documentation
workload for the Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management.
The adoption of the draft resolution would give
rise to budgetary implications of up to $3 million in
2024 and in the range of $10 million to $12 million
in 2025 once the institution is fully operational,
including post resources, to cover the activities of
the newly established independent institution on
missing persons in the Syrian Arab Republic, as well
as for the translation of documentation in all official
languages by the Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management.
However, as further internal consultations are
necessary, the Secretariat is not currently in a position
to provide detailed cost estimates for 2024 and 2025.
Should the General Assembly adopt the draft
resolution on the establishment of the independent
institution on missing persons in the Syrian Arab
Republic, a revised estimates report would be
submitted to the General Assembly through the
Fifth Committee during the first resumed part of its
seventy-eighth session, detailing the requirements
for which an additional regular budget appropriation
would be requested for 2024. Resources for 2025 and
beyond would be included in the respective proposed
programme budget.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
23-18606

29/06/2023

A/77/PV.85

In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kiribati, Kuwait, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Myanmar, Netherlands (Kingdom of
the), New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San
Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Tonga, Türkiye, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay,
Vanuatu

The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.

Against:
Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Eritrea, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Nicaragua,
Russian Federation, Syrian Arab Republic,
Zimbabwe

Finally, for Colombia it is important that the terms
of reference for such an initiative be drawn up with the
technical support of the competent human rights offices
of the United Nations system.

Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belize, Brunei Darussalam, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic,
Chad, Congo, Djibouti, Egypt, El Salvador,
Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guyana, India, Indonesia,
Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Philippines, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic Of Tanzania,
Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen
Draft resolution A/77/L.79 was adopted by 83 votes
to 11, with 62 abstentions (resolution 77/301).

Ms. Tickner (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia has suffered first-hand the scourge of the
disappearance of persons. It is a wound that our country
has struggled to heal and that lies at the heart of our
transitional justice system. Truth is a crucial element
of reconciliation, social reparation and peace. We feel
the pain of the victims’ families and their outcry for
information on the fate of their loved ones. It is that pain
that led us to vote in favour of resolution 77/301 today, in
the understanding that the proposed mechanism serves
humanitarian purposes and not political interests.
However, our own experience in the search for
missing persons leads us to call for continued efforts
to seek the participation of the Syrian Government and
the other parties involved, not only out of respect for
the principle of State sovereignty, but also to ensure the
mechanism’s effectiveness.

Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): The
word “missing” shakes Argentina to its core. We have
endured the tragedy of massive human rights violations
and know the suffering it entails. The pain of absence
and endless mourning have been engraved in our
society. There is a before and an after. That is why the
fight against enforced disappearances is one of our
top priorities.
We have created and actively participated in some
of the most important initiatives on the subject, and we
have brought to justice those responsible for enforced
disappearances in our country. We are committed,
together with France, to promoting the widest
possible ratification of the International Convention
for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance, adopted by the General Assembly in
2006 (resolution 61/177). Those of us who ratified the
Convention recognize the competence of the Committee
on Enforced Disappearances in accordance with articles
31 and 32, so as to ensure that those responsible for this
crime are prosecuted and convicted.

23-1860613/30

A/77/PV.85

In accordance with the aforementioned, we voted
in favour of resolution 77/301, reaffirming our historic
commitment to this matter.
In his report on missing persons in the Syrian Arab
Republic of 2 August 2022 (A/76/890), the SecretaryGeneral concluded that the status quo with regard to the
issue of missing persons in the Syrian Arab Republic is
not sustainable.
Argentina has a very firm position on the need
to promote respect for human rights and to clarify
any situation involving them on the basis of truth and
justice. That includes our view of the complex reality
in Syria. In that context, the cooperation of the Syrian
authorities is essential. That is why we would have
preferred that the negotiations on this resolution to have
been more participatory with a view to transparency
and greater consensus. In particular, we would have
wished that greater efforts had been made to ensure the
participation of Syria, the country concerned, in order to
secure its cooperation in the future and thereby ensure
that the mechanism does not become ineffective, which
has happened with other international mechanisms
established in recent years.
In the report of the Secretary-General that I referred
to previously, it was recommended that Member States
consider establishing a new international institution
dedicated to clarifying the fate and whereabouts of
missing persons in that country. However, it also called
for the improvement of existing mechanisms. With
regard to that initiative, we are concerned that it is not
clear from the text of the resolution what the time frame
would be for investigating the disappearance of persons
in Syria, nor does it specify what its contribution would
be to existing mechanisms, resulting in a significant
degree of uncertainty.
We are also concerned that there is a proliferation
of initiatives and follow-up mechanisms on the Syrian
human rights situation in various international forums,
at the risk of duplication and contradictions. At the same
time, we note that similar mechanisms have not been
established for other serious and widespread situations
of enforced disappearances.
The resolution requests that within 80 working days
the terms of reference of the independent institution be
developed. In the light of that, we hope that in doing
so it will take into account in all its dimensions the
report of the Independent International Commission of
Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic (A/HRC/46/55)
14/30

29/06/2023

of 11 March 2021, presented at the forty-sixth session
of the Human Rights Council, which details in all its
complexity the issue of enforced disappearances in
that country.
We therefore request that the Secretary-General
submit those terms of reference to all Member States
for consultation.
Mr. Garrido Melo (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to refer to resolution 77/301, entitled
“Independent Institution on Missing Persons in the
Syrian Arab Republic”, presented by Albania, Belgium,
Cabo Verde, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic,
Luxembourg and North Macedonia.
Chile voted in favour of the resolution, as it considers
that the search for missing persons should be a priority
for States facing situations of conflict or social tension,
as in the case of Syria. Chile is especially concerned
about reports from independent organizations
estimating the number of missing persons to be close to
100,000. Those facts, attributable to the various actors
and groups involved in that conflict, have serious
humanitarian consequences and a profound impact on
the society. The forced disappearance of persons, as a
multi-faceted crime, leads to a social breakdown that
is difficult to repair, but whose recovery is necessary
to achieve the prospect of a future mediated by peace.
Our country has first-hand knowledge of the
impact of forced disappearance of persons on societies,
based on its unfortunate experience during the civilianmilitary dictatorship. It is an unfinished process, despite
the fact that more than 30 years have passed since the
return to democracy. During that time, we have had to
work with various national and international actors in
order to clarify the whereabouts of our compatriots and
make it possible to return their remains to their loved
ones. Progress has been slower and more difficult than
expected with successes and failures.
Along the same lines, Chile considers that the
search for the missing persons in Syria should be a
priority for all actors involved in the conflict and that
it should be carried out in close cooperation with the
Syrian authorities. That is consistent with what was
stated by the Security Council in 2019 when it called
on all parties to armed conflict to take all appropriate
measures to actively search for missing persons without
adverse distinction.
23-18606

29/06/2023

In the framework of the most recent universal
periodic review, several countries, including Chile,
recommended that Syria facilitate the establishment
of an independent mechanism with an international
mandate to coordinate and consolidate reports of missing
persons, including persons who have been subjected to
enforced disappearance. The search for missing persons
must be a priority guiding the actions of all actors who
want to achieve lasting peace.
Therefore, Chile urges those who will be involved
in the Independent Institution, the Secretary-General
and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights to actively engage in dialogue with
the Syrian authorities to enable the institution to fulfil
its mandate. Clarifying the whereabouts of the missing
Syrians can be achieved only with the cooperation of
the Syrian authorities. Therefore, to the extent that the
institution has a strictly humanitarian objective and has
cross-cutting support, it will be possible to respond to
the thousands of families searching for their loved ones.
Mr. Moretti (Brazil): Brazil voted in favour of
resolution 77/301 on the Independent Institution on
Missing Persons in the Syrian Arab Republic. Our vote
was strictly motivated by concerns related to human rights.
It reflects Brazil’s long-time commitment to promoting
the right to memory and truth, both at the domestic and
international levels, with special consideration for the
concerns of the families of all missing persons.

A/77/PV.85

Only a Syrian-owned and Syrian-led, United
Nations-facilitated political process that respects
Syria’s sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity will bring lasting peace and alleviate the
suffering of the Syrian population.
Mr. Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to align my delegation with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Group of Friends in Defence
of the Charter of the United Nations, and to add the
following points in my national capacity.
The Islamic Republic of Iran expresses its serious
concerns regarding the continued proliferation of
country-specific mechanisms that claim to address the
human rights situation in specific States, while the real
intention of such mechanisms is to weaponize human
rights and humanitarian issues against sovereign States
and national Governments, with the purpose of meddling
in their internal affairs. The insatiate appetite for the
proliferation of country-specific mandates in pursuit
of the selective, politicized and malign goals of certain
actors undermines the cause of human rights. It has
only contributed to division, distrust and confrontation.
Moreover, the instrumentalization of the United Nations
undermines its credibility as an international body
established with the aim of protecting and promoting
its prominent goals through dialogue and international
cooperation, based on the principles of non-selectivity,
neutrality and objectivity.

That will be critical for the successful functioning
of the Independent Institution and to win over the
indispensable collaboration of the Syrian Government.

The Islamic Republic of Iran shares its deepest
sympathy with the persons and families who have been
affected by the negative consequences of the long-lasting
war and terrorism waged against the Government and
the people of the Syrian Arab Republic by hostile foreign
actors. Meanwhile, we regret that the humanitarian
issue is being misused by Western Governments for
political objectives. The fact is that the Government
of Syria, despite tough unilateral sanctions, continues
to struggle with terrorism and foreign occupation. The
Government is striving to restore peaceful life in its
liberated territories, enable refugees to return home
and bring about economic recovery. However, the
initiators of numerous anti-Syrian campaigns make no
contribution to that process in any way.

Multilateral efforts should focus on finding a political
solution to that long-lasting crisis, in line with Security
Council resolution 2254 (2015). Such efforts should be
able to engage the Syrian Government and acknowledge
the enormous challenges the country has faced for years.

We regret that the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic was not consulted by the United Nations
bodies and the members of the core group of delegations
sponsoring resolution 77/301 at any stage of the process
of establishing the mechanism. Given the fact that the

We also voted in favour because, in our view, the
resolution points to the responsibilities of all parties
involved in the conflict, and not only one or a few of
them, all. Without prejudice to the foregoing, my
delegation regrets that the negotiating process was not
sufficiently inclusive.
In implementing the resolution, the United
Nations must be firmly guided by such balance and
comprehensiveness, as well as the victim- and survivorcentred approach enshrined in the resolution.

23-1860615/30

A/77/PV.85

29/06/2023

mechanism is intended to work without the consent
of the Syrian Government, we believe that ignoring
the national ownership principle not only violates
and undermines the sovereignty of the country, but
also limits the effectiveness and sustainability of any
initiative aimed at assisting the Syrian people.

a body. We stress that safeguarding the credibility of
the United Nations necessitates the strong rejection
of any attempt to manipulate it as a means to pursue
narrow national political interests and agendas under
the guise of protecting human rights or addressing
humanitarian situations.

The Syrian Government has not requested technical
or legal assistance from the United Nations and has
already rejected the establishment of such a body without
its consent. We believe that if there is any genuine will to
address the humanitarian situation in Syria, particularly
issues related to missing persons initiatives or any
specific plan to intensify efforts, it must be conducted
with the full consent and coordination of Damascus.
Otherwise, it will be pointless and ineffective. We
regret that the resolution does not even contain any
references to the importance of cooperation with the
Government of Syria. We also share the concerns about
squandering a significant amount of United Nations
resources and budget on that ineffective mechanism.

Mr. Magosaki (Japan): Japan would have wished
to co-sponsor resolution 77/301 and would like to
make a general statement. However, as is evident
from our intention to co-sponsor, Japan fully supports
the resolution, which is aimed at clarifying the fate
and whereabouts of missing persons in Syria and at
providing adequate support to victims, survivors and
their families. We therefore call on the Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic to cooperate with the
activities of the now established Independent Institution
on Missing Persons in the Syrian Arab Republic, rather
than reject the international community’s efforts to
help the country’s own citizens.

The Islamic Republic of Iran expresses its full
commitment to tackling any humanitarian issue,
including the issue of missing persons in Syria, within
a proper, legitimate and practical format. In that regard,
we would continue to work with the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic, including through the relevant
working group established under the Astana format
as a very practical and legal means of addressing
the issue. We are grateful to the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic for the work it has done so far to
address the issue of missing persons. In that regard, we
encourage the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
to strengthen its cooperation with the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) in consideration
of the question related to missing persons. We
encourage the finalization of a bilateral memorandum
of understanding between the Syrian Government and
the ICRC. My Government further underlines that
any effort to reveal the fate of the missing in Syria
requires revealing the fate of the victims of the acts of
aggression and atrocities committed by the so-called
international coalition and the crimes committed by
armed terrorist organizations.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that, in
the absence of full respect for the sovereignty and
independence of the Syrian Arab Republic and of the
full consent of its Government, the Islamic Republic
of Iran will not be able to support the initiative and
will not recognize the legitimacy of the work of such
16/30

We also note that the oral statement by the
Secretariat on the budgetary implications, in the range
of $10 million to $12 million for 2025, is contingent
on its full operation, which should be accessible in
Syria with the cooperation of Syria. In that context, we
request that the new Institution carry out the mandated
activities in good faith, so as to prepare for its full
operation. We further request that the new institution
provide adequate details on its budgeted activities in
the annual report requested by the resolution, in full
awareness of the accountability that comes from the
use of the regular budget, including the avoidance of
duplication, and in a clean break from the hitherto
opportunistic planning.
I would like to conclude by expressing our hope
that the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions and the Fifth Committee will
recommend and approve an appropriate budget, in line
with the actual activities of the new institution.
Mr. Marzooq (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): My country
abstained in the voting on resolution A/77/301 out of
its firm belief in the principles of the United Nations,
in particular the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of States. The success of any
international mechanism hinges on its cooperation
with the concerned State. Improving the humanitarian
situation in any country requires the support of the
capacities and competence of the relevant national
institutions, alongside the humanitarian efforts of the
23-18606

29/06/2023

international community, thereby delivering justice and
equity for the victims’ families. Addressing the issue
requires effective cooperation between the relevant
entities and the competent Syrian authorities in the search
for missing persons in order to ensure a productive search
that helps to uncover the fate of all missing persons.
Mr. Pilipenko (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
Republic of Belarus aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Venezuela on behalf
of the Group of Friends of the Defence of the Charter of
the United Nations.
The Republic of Belarus did not participate in the
consultations on the resolution as a matter of principle
and voted against it because we categorically reject the
very concept behind the document, which is based on a
biased country-specific approach. For many years and
in all similar situations, we have consistently stated
this position, including at the informal meeting of the
General Assembly on 28 February on this topic.
What prevented the sponsors from establishing a
universal mechanism to search for missing persons?
Why is it that a specific group of countries is so
concerned about that topic only when it comes to
Syria? Recent hearings in the United States House of
Representatives, for instance, revealed that some 85,000
children have gone missing on the country’s southern
border. In the United Kingdom, according to the special
procedures of the Human Rights Council, 400 Albanian
children have gone missing, only 150 of whom have
been located in the past year. The fate of 250 children
remains unknown. And what about the missing women
and children in the conflicts in Afghanistan, Ethiopia,
the Sudan, South Sudan, Mali, Nigeria, Yemen,
Somalia, the Congo, Iraq, Colombia, Mozambique,
Palestine, Libya and two dozen other conflict hotspots?
On a separate note, we would like to state our
objections to the sponsors’ approach to the work on
the text. There were open consultations, which were
not really open at all and the result of which had no
significant impact on the content of the document
whatsoever, and secret negotiations with the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) and its representatives in Syria, to
which a large number of delegations were mistakenly
invited, only to have those invitations withdrawn
in embarrassment. All of that took place and is
completely contrary to the principles of transparency
and objectivity.

A/77/PV.85

The saddest part of this whole surreal story is that
neither the sponsors of the resolution, nor OHCHR
or its representatives in Damascus, nor the High
Commissioner himself were able to establish a dialogue
on that important topic with the leadership of Syria itself.
The Syrian Arab Republic has unequivocally stated
today that it will see the mechanism as interference in
its internal affairs and will not engage with it. In that
regard, the question about the effectiveness of the future
structure, which will not be able to gain access to the
country’s territory and with which Syrian authorities
are unwilling to work, can be considered rhetorical.
There is also the issue of the working methods
and financing of the new mechanism. The approach
proposed in the resolution would essentially mean
purchasing a black box, the contents of which, as well
as the costs of those contents, are unknown to anyone
except the seller. Those parameters will be determined
sometime later, somehow, by someone. But the bill
will have to be paid by all of us — or perhaps not
us. Despite the oral explanations of the sponsors, the
resolution does not give a clear answer to that question
either, and all of this is taking place in the context of
a critical underfunding in the United Nations system,
a fact that we are constantly reminded of by every
single division of the Secretariat, without exception,
from the Department of Global Communications to the
Department of Peace Operations.
In conclusion, we believe it necessary to note that
the Republic of Belarus recognizes the importance of
the issue of searching for missing persons. We respect
the norms of international humanitarian law and human
rights law, which are designed to prevent cases of missing
persons, and which require the fate of the missing to be
established. These norms are closely linked to the right
of the families to know about the fate of missing family
members. Such work can and should be carried out at
the national level, including through the adoption and
updating of relevant legislation, as well as by ensuring
the implementation thereof, including through possible
cooperation on those issues with other States. All of
that is the prerogative of the national Governments of
sovereign States, not an arbitrarily defined circle of
third parties with dubious political interests.
Ms. Mrad (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Before
addressing resolution 77/301, its advantages,
shortcomings and drawbacks including preparation and
submission, allow me to express my sincere greetings
from this rostrum to all the families of missing persons

23-1860617/30

A/77/PV.85

in Lebanon. This dossier remains a bleeding wound in
the collective memory of our country. Lebanon has had
bitter experience of persons missing during the wars
and conflicts that tore the country apart and dispersed
its people. In our capital, Beirut, every exhibition
features photos of missing persons, documenting 40
years of exhaustive search for those loved ones without
shrines since 1982.
From this rostrum, I wish to send a message to
the mothers, spouses and families to let them know
that Lebanon is not standing on the sidelines when
it comes to that just cause and is not indifferent to
the suffering of families. On the contrary, Lebanon
stresses its commitment to shedding light on the fate
of missing persons in Lebanon during the civil war. We
are committed to healing the bleeding wound that has
been open for 40 years and remains a cause of sustained
suffering for the entire country and the families. I recall
that Lebanon seeks to ensure the well-being of all its
citizens. We have attempted, through an exchange deal,
to repatriate all living Lebanese detainees in Israeli
prisons, as well as to receive the remains of all of those
among them who lost their lives.
Lebanon abstained in the voting today due to
the unclear nature of the mechanism. The resolution
continues to be unclear regarding the nature of the
mechanism and its terms of reference. Lebanon abstained
in addressing that extremely important issue because it
would be used as a means for settling political scores,
which would undermine the very meaning behind the
resolution and its purely humanitarian motives.
No United Nations mechanism for missing persons
can be effective unless it is transformed into a national
committee that cooperates, carries out dialogue and
consultations and coordinates closely with the Syrian
Government. If the mechanism to be established is
meant to support families and maintain attention on that
important dossier in order to ensure that the expected
results are obtained and that wounds can be healed,
it must be transformed into a national one in order to
carry out dialogue and establish partnership with the
Syrian Government under the auspices and supervision
of the United Nations. This initiative could be a ray
of hope for all missing persons, whether in Syria or
elsewhere. However, it needs to be well prepared and
coordinated with all the parties concerned in order
to reach the desired objective and give hope to the
families so they can carry on with their lives despite
their missing loved ones.
18/30

29/06/2023

The dossier of missing persons in Syria, in
particular those who have been missing since the
beginning of the conflict in 2011, cannot be addressed
separately from the dossier of Syrian refugees and their
inevitable return. Certain persons considered missing
could in fact be refugees in neighbouring or third
States. It is impossible to address humanitarian dossiers
in isolation or à la carte; to do otherwise would cause
the international community to lose its credibility in
addressing those humanitarian dossiers.
Lebanon is the only Arab State facing two thorny
issues: the issue of Lebanese missing persons, on the
one hand, and the issue of Syrian displaced people, on
the other. We do not intend to sacrifice either of those
issues in favour of the other. We are committed to
resolving both issues through partnership, dialogue and
understanding among all relevant Arab or international
stakeholders. We call on the sponsors of the resolution
and the international community to develop the
mechanism in cooperation with Syria so that it does
not remain dead letter and so that such an important
humanitarian dossier is not politicized, dispelling the
hopes of all those families.
In conclusion, I take this opportunity to conclude
my statement with the words of Nayfeh Najjar Hamadeh
before she passed away, addressed to her son, since
1984, with respect for the suffering of mothers and
spouses touched by this issue.
“My son, I keep waiting for your present on
mother’s day. I will keep waiting for your return
until the end of my life. I look for you everywhere
in the hopes of finding you. I am living only thanks
to a ray of hope that makes my life worth living
until I see you again.”
Mrs. González López (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): El Salvador expresses its solidarity with all
families that have suffered the loss of family members
during the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic. We
also express our concern at the humanitarian situation
facing the Syrian people. That notwithstanding, the
Republic of El Salvador abstained in the voting on
resolution 77/301, on the establishment of a new
international institution on missing persons in the
Syrian Arab Republic, because we believe that it does
not provide sufficient information as to the institution’s
operation and methods of work. In addition, El Salvador
reiterates its appeal and its commitment to ensuring
23-18606

29/06/2023

greater efficiency in the use of resources in multilateral
forums. We believe that the mechanism adopted is an
added burden to the budget of the Organization.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote.
The exercise of the right of reply has been requested.
May I remind members that statements in the exercise
of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for the
first intervention and to five minutes for the second
intervention and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Altarsha (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My country’s delegation has asked for the
floor to exercise its right of reply to the statement by
the representative of the United States of America.
It is regrettable that his statement was full of
false allegations. He said that the core group or the
small group attempted to contact Damascus but that
the Syrian Government refused to deal with it. In our
statement before the voting, we stressed that this did
not happen and that the small group neither consulted
nor contacted us. The representative of the United
States therefore presented misleading information that
reflects lies and shows how far he is from reality. In
that regard, I would like to add that his shedding of
tears for the Syrian people represents the pinnacle of
hypocrisy. His country is responsible for the killing and
missing of tens of thousands of Syrians.
My delegation expresses its deep regret at the
adoption of the politicized and non-consensual
resolution 77/301. It has established a mechanism
supported by fewer than half the Members of the United
Nations and allows interference in the internal affairs
of a Member State of the United Nations.
We express our thanks and appreciation to all the
delegations that supported the position of Syria and
rejected that devastating initiative. Syria stresses that
it will not cooperate with any future activities of that
institution, particularly given that it turns a blind eye to
the role of terrorism in killing Syrians.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 13.

A/77/PV.85

Agenda item 48 (continued)
Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/77/401/Add.1)
The President: The positions of delegations
regarding the recommendation of the Fourth Committee
have been made clear in the Committee and are reflected
in the relevant official records. Therefore, if there is
no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I
shall take it that the General Assembly decides not to
discuss the report of the Committee that is before the
Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be limited
to explanations of vote. May I remind members that, in
accordance with decision 34/401,
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, i.e., either in the Committee or
in plenary meeting unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in
the Committee.”
I should also like to remind members that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the report of the
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we will proceed to take a decision in the same manner as
was done in the Committee, unless notified otherwise
in advance.
The General Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Committee in its report.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Committee adopted it without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The
draft
resolution
(resolution 77/302).

was

adopted

The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Israel.
Ms. Listenberg (Israel): I would like to clarify that
my statement is not related to the draft resolution just
adopted, but to resolution 77/297, which was adopted

23-1860619/30

A/77/PV.85

under agenda item 48 on 14 June. I note with great
regret that, even though the General Assembly adopted
resolution 77/297 on the Memorial Wall for fallen
United Nations peacekeepers, the Palestinian delegation
breached procedures, politicized the discussion and
co-sponsored the resolution.
According to paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution
52/250, entitled “Participation of Palestine in the work
of the United Nations”, dated 7 July 1998, Palestinians
have the right to co-sponsor draft resolutions and
decisions on Palestinian and Middle East issues. The
subject matter of resolution 77/297 does not fall within
the parameters given in resolution 52/250.
I would like to stress the importance of abiding
by the procedural rules of the Organization.
Co-sponsorship guidelines are explicitly clear in the
rules and regulations governing the Organization and
any decision to circumvent these rules would severely
undermine this institution. We regret that once again
the Palestinians chose to divert a General Assembly
meeting for their own one-sided political interests. We
ask that members not allow the derailment of procedures
to take place in an attempt to advance a political agenda
detached from the normal order of business.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 48?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 125 (continued)
Question of equitable representation on and
increase in the membership of the Security Council
and other matters related to the Security Council
The President: Members will recall that, pursuant
to decision 76/572, of 12 July 2022, the Assembly
continued intergovernmental negotiations on Security
Council reform in informal plenary meetings during
the current session. In a letter dated 22 June 2023, I
circulated a draft oral decision on that issue, as follows:
“The General Assembly,
“Decides to reaffirm the central role of the
General Assembly concerning the question of
equitable representation on and increase in the
membership of the Security Council and other
matters related to the Security Council; and the
commitment of Heads of State and Government
20/30

29/06/2023

representing the peoples of the world to instil
new life in the discussions on the reform of the
Security Council;
“Decides
to
immediately
continue
intergovernmental negotiations (IGN) on Security
Council reform in informal plenary of the
General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session,
as mandated by decisions 62/557, of 15 September
2008, 63/565 B, of 14 September 2009, 64/568, of
13 September 2010, 65/554, of 12 September 2011,
66/566, of 13 September 2012, 67/561, of 29 August
2013, 68/557, of 8 September 2014, 69/560, of
14 September 2015, 70/559, of 27 July 2016, 71/553,
of 19 July 2017, 72/557, of 29 June 2018, 73/554, of
25 June 2019, 74/569, of 31 August 2020, 75/569,
of 22 June 2021, and 76/572, of 12 July 2022,
building on the informal meetings held during its
seventy-seventh session, as reflected in the letter
dated 2 June 2023 from the Co-Chairs, and on the
document entitled ‘Revised Co- Chairs’ Elements
Paper on Convergences and Divergences on the
question of equitable representation on and increase
in the membership of the Security Council and
related matters’, circulated on 5 June 2023, as well
as the positions of and proposals made by Member
States, reflected in the text and its annex circulated
on 31 July 2015, to help to inform its future work;
“Welcomes the active engagement, initiatives
and intensive efforts of the President of the General
Assembly, and notes with appreciation the active
role and concrete efforts of the co-Chairs undertaken
in a consultative manner with a view to an early
comprehensive reform of the Security Council;
“Welcomes the agreement among Member
States to enhance transparency and inclusivity of
the process by introducing webcast for the first
segment (debate) of the IGN meetings while the
second segment (interactive discussion) remains
closed, as well as the establishment of a specific
website to act as a repository of the recordings of
the webcasts, letters, decisions, and other related
documents related to the IGN process as well as
links to the Member States’ statements, as referred
in the co-Chairs’ letter dated 3 March 2023;
“Decides to convene the Open-ended Working
Group on the Question of Equitable Representation
on and Increase in the Membership of the Security
Council and Other Matters related to the Security
23-18606

29/06/2023

Council during the seventy-eighth session of the
General Assembly, if Member States so decide;
“Also decides to include in the agenda of the
seventy-eighth session of the General Assembly the
item entitled ‘Question of equitable representation
on and increase in the membership of the
Security Council and other matters related to the
Security Council’.”
Allow me to add some notions and words of my own.
When the General Assembly met last November,
I highlighted the changed dynamic around the issue
of Security Council reform. I pointed out the complex
crises that have placed our multilateral system under
pressure. I recalled that growing numbers of members
have demanded an urgent focus on that question. I
asked how members would ensure that the process
advanced in an open, inclusive and transparent manner.
And I asked whether members were ready to seek
practical solutions.
As we meet today, it is clear that Member States
have understood the call of our day and have instilled
new life in the intergovernmental negotiations. After
so many years, we have seen positive momentum
at this session. Measurable progress has been
achieved — progress that has also helped to enhance
the transparency, inclusivity and institutional memory
of this important process. The co-Chairs have done
an impressive job. I express my deep gratitude to
them — Ambassador Tareq Albanai of Kuwait and
Ambassador Alexander Marschik of Austria and their
teams — for their unwavering focus on success. I also
express my thanks to all Member States for their active
and constructive engagement.
For the first time in the history of these negotiations,
the first segment of the intergovernmental negotiations
meetings is now webcast, as has just been mentioned. Let
me also reconfirm that a dedicated website on Security
Council reform has been established as a repository for
the intergovernmental negotiations process.
Let me also commend the other two innovative ideas
introduced by the co-Chairs to advance the discussions
this session, the recommendation to combine annual
meetings between the Chair of the Council’s informal
working group on documentation and the co-Chairs of
the intergovernmental negotiations, and an open house
discussion on Security Council reform — also known as
the Taxel talks — with representatives from thinktanks.

A/77/PV.85

Are those decisive breakthroughs? No, they are not,
but they are practical steps in the right direction and
quite useful ones. As the Greek orator Demosthenes
once said, small opportunities are often the beginning
of great enterprises. It is my sincere hope that members
will carry those good experiences into the seventyeighth session and continue to build confidence in the
intergovernmental negotiations process.
Ultimately, the intergovernmental negotiations are
driven by Member States. It is therefore up to them to
show political will for the reform they want to see. True
political commitments are key to rebuilding trust and
reviving the spirit of cooperation in the United Nations
and beyond. The 8 billion people outside these walls do
not see the United Nations as a conglomerate of separate
bodies. They see the United Nations as one. Amid these
unprecedented crises, their expectations for us to deliver
are at their highest. Let us work in good faith to meet that
expectation. We do not have the luxury to spend another
17 years on this issue.
We shall now proceed to consider the draft oral
decision. In that regard, may I remind delegations that
explanations of position are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Miguel (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of
the L.69 group, a diverse, pro-reform group of crossregional developing countries united by a common desire
for reform of the Security Council that safeguards its
credibility, representativeness, transparency, democracy
and effectiveness.
As this is our final time convening within this
format for the seventy-seventh session, allow me to take
this opportunity to reiterate our appreciation to you,
Mr. President, and to our co-Chairs, for the steadfast
leadership throughout this process. They have not only
steered our discussions in a constructive and innovative
manner, but have also fulfilled a key ask of many
delegations, including the L.69, namely, the introduction
of webcasting and the establishment of a repository.
Being able to view the discussions on the first day of the
intergovernmental negotiations has already had a tangible
effect on the way small missions, in particular, are able
to balance the demands of competing processes at the
United Nations, as we are now able to closely follow the
discussions as they take place, thereby ensuring that there
are no gaps in our knowledge of what is happening within
the intergovernmental negotiations. That is reinforced by
the existence of the repository, which makes it possible to

23-1860621/30

A/77/PV.85

access the recordings of the webcasts, links to Member
States’ statements, letters, decisions and all other
documents related to the intergovernmental negotiations.
The rollover decision is an opportunity for us to
transform the next session of the intergovernmental
negotiations. Cognizant that it is the only formal
outcome of the intergovernmental negotiations, we
reiterate our belief that, to reduce it strictly to a
technical rollover is to deprive ourselves of a strong
foundation for our next session. We welcome the fact
that this year’s rollover decision reflects the improved
working methods, ultimately preserving the agreement
that was reached by Member States as to the utility of
webcasting and the repository. To that end, we hope
that, within the context of this Member State-driven
process, the agreement will continue to be honoured.
While we have undoubtedly made steps in the right
direction, we remain concerned about the slow progress
on substantive issues. If we continue to fail to produce
tangible results that can move us closer to the widest
possible political acceptance on the issue of Security
Council reform, then we risk the possibility of the
international community finding another forum within
which it can arrive at an alternative solution. Failure to
make progress on Security Council reform continues to
pose a real threat to our credibility and legitimacy and
indirectly perpetuates the Security Council’s inability
to transform situations on the ground in a manner
that maintains international peace and security. We
therefore reiterate that it is time that we move past
merely ventilating well-established positions. We must
begin the process of negotiating based on a text with
attribution. To quell the stated concerns of Member
States, allow me to underscore three brief points.
First, text-based negotiations are in line with
standard United Nations practice and procedure. That
approach is consistently employed as a tool to find
common ground, despite deep divides. The rationale
behind that lies within the very purpose of negotiations,
which is to find the most acceptable outcome that
addresses all interests and concerns.
Secondly, negotiations on the basis of a text with
attribution will identify more clearly the areas of
convergence and illuminate the areas of divergence, as
well as low-hanging fruit, that require greater attention
in order to move us closer to common ground.
Finally, we reject once again the argument that textbased negotiations will lock Member States into their
22/30

29/06/2023

positions. In spite of the divergences that exist, textbased negotiations will operate as the give-and-take
mechanism necessary to help us bridge our divides.
As such, it is natural to expect positions to shift as all
Member States and delegations will have to compromise
to find the widest possible political acceptance on
this issue. If Security Council reform is our intended
outcome, then we must prioritize it by being willing to
demonstrate the necessary flexibility and openness to
try a different approach that has proven its ability to
yield concrete results.
As we close this session, the L.69 group reiterates
its commitment to this process. We will remain open
and flexible to approaches that can bring us closer to
finding the widest political acceptance on the issue
of Security Council reform. While we do not believe
that this is a process that should be rushed for the sake
of arriving at an outcome, we also recognize that it
is crucial for us to orient ourselves in such a manner
that we can begin seeing tangible results. The world
needs a Security Council that can adequately address
the rapidly evolving challenges to international peace
and security.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): I take the floor to explain
our position on the adoption of the oral decision rolling
over the intergovernmental negotiations on Security
Council reform to the seventy-eighth session of the
General Assembly.
India aligns itself fully with the statement that has
been delivered by the representative of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines on behalf of the L.69 group, and
with that to be delivered by the representative of
Japan on behalf of the Group of Four. In addition, I
would like to make the following three points in my
national capacity.
First, we would like to place on record our
appreciation for the proactive and consultative approach
demonstrated by the co-Chairs, which has resulted in
some improvements in the elements paper compared to
last year, including a greater number of convergences
and some additional attributions. Throughout the
process, we have participated constructively and shared
our suggestions for improvement in the elements paper,
even though that approach was not followed by some
groups and some delegations. The process culminated
in the co-Chairs clearly recommending that our work
in the next session be continued, based on the latest
23-18606

29/06/2023

iteration of the elements paper to which we have all had
the chance to contribute.
Secondly, we have been consistent in our position
that the rollover decision of the intergovernmental
negotiations simply cannot be reduced to a mindless
technical exercise. As the only formal General
Assembly outcome that emerges from the process
each year, it must also evolve and reflect the progress
achieved during our deliberations. We were therefore
encouraged by your efforts, Mr. President, to introduce
in the decision a small reflection of that evolution,
based on your wide-ranging consultations and the
recommendation of the co-Chairs with regard to
webcasting and the beginning of a digital repository.
I must say, however, that even with those so-called
changes, there has been no breakthrough whatsoever
that may be described as progress. That state of affairs
is clearly in the interest of those who seek a status quo
to keep the process frozen in repetitive cycles.
Thirdly and finally, we see the technical rollover
decision as yet another wasted opportunity to instil a
breath of life into a process that has shown no signs of
life or growth in over four decades. We join consensus in
adoption of the draft presented simply to acknowledge
your personal efforts.
Further, it is now apparent to us that in its current
form and modalities — that is, without application of
the General Assembly rules of procedure and without
a single negotiating text — the intergovernmental
negotiations could well go on for yet another 75 years
without any progress whatsoever in the direction
of genuine reform. That notwithstanding, and as a
responsible and constructive Member of the United
Nations, India will of course continue to engage in
the process alongside our reform-minded partners and
persist in our efforts to move from repetitive speeches
to text-based negotiations. However, for those of us who
truly wish to fulfil our leaders’ commitment towards
an early and comprehensive reform of the Security
Council, looking beyond the intergovernmental
negotiations looks increasingly to us as the only viable
pathway to a future Security Council that would better
reflect the world of today.
The President: I extend my particular thanks to the
representative of India for her personal acknowledgement
of all those who contributed to this result, albeit modest.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks you, Mr. President, for convening today’s meeting.

A/77/PV.85

We highly appreciate your active support for and your
strong leadership of the intergovernmental negotiations on
Security Council reform at this session. We also appreciate
your transparent, open, inclusive and constructive spirit.
Under your leadership, the two co-Chairs, Ambassador
Albanai of Kuwait and Ambassador Marschik of Austria,
have done effective work and achieved positive outcomes
in this year’s negotiations. China sincerely thanks the
two co-Chairs for their tremendous efforts and their
outstanding contributions.
The draft oral decision on the intergovernmental
negotiations on Security Council reform circulated by you,
Sir, in accordance with established practice, is aimed at
ensuring that the negotiations continue to be advanced at
the next session. China fully supports the draft and hopes
that Assembly will adopt it by consensus. I believe that
this is also the expectation and hope of all Member States.
The intergovernmental negotiations process is the
only legitimate forum to discuss the issue of Council
reform. In this year’s negotiations, the co-Chairs have
adopted many innovative approaches to help Member
States broaden their perspectives and conduct in-depth
discussions, thereby reinvigorating the negotiation
process. Based on the consensus of Member States, the
co-Chairs have established a webcast of the first segment
and, with the support of the President of the General
Assembly, a dedicated website has been developed to
store negotiation material so that small and understaffed
permanent missions can also follow the process.
Member States have reflected upon major issues in
the current round of negotiations, such as the goals and the
directions of Security Council reform, and conducted full,
frank and pragmatic discussions on how to address the
root causes of the problems faced by the Council, as well
as on how to correct the unfairness of its composition.
The convergence is expanding while the divergence is
narrowing. This year’s co-Chairs elements paper fully
reflects the progress of the discussion and also provides a
reference for all parties to participate in the next round of
negotiations. China welcomes the positive progress made
in this year’s negotiations and hopes that all parties will
continue to advance the reform process of the Council
through the intergovernmental negotiations track at the
next session. Maintaining the Assembly’s tradition of
adopting a decision on negotiation rollover by consensus
is crucial to maintaining the unity of Member States.
Council reform concerns war and peace, and there is
no room for trial and error. Therefore, advancing Security
Council reform necessitates continuous efforts to gather

23-1860623/30

A/77/PV.85

and consolidate consensus and narrow differences, as
well as to ensure that this track is advancing in the right
direction rather than regressing. We must ensure that all
Member States can benefit from the reform rather than
seeing a mere handful of countries satisfy their desire to
elevate their own status. We should effectively increase
the representation of developing countries, in particular to
correct the historical injustice against Africa and to give
more opportunities to small and medium-sized countries
to join the Security Council so that its composition is
more fair, just and balanced and its decision-making
more democratic.
The world today faces multiple challenges. China
hopes to see the Council earnestly fulfil its obligation
to maintain international peace and security. China also
supports the necessary and reasonable reform of the
Security Council. China stands ready to work with all
parties to maintain the intergovernmental negotiations
track, as well as the unity of Member States, and to
promote Security Council reform with a view to moving
towards the broadest consensus, reflecting the common
interest of all Member States, and also in line with the
long-term interests of the United Nations.
The President: I wish to express thanks for the
references to all those who led the negotiations. I also thank
the representative of China for his constructive approach
and promised support to carry on the negotiations on the
basis of the achieved progress on this issue.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank you, Mr. President, for the draft oral
decision to roll over the consideration of the issue of
Security Council reform to the seventy-eighth session
of the General Assembly. In our opinion, it adequately
reflects the content of this year’s discussions on reform
issues. Two documents are being rolled over to the
next General Assembly session: an updated co-Chairs
paper and a framework document, both of which reflect
the aspirations of most Member States. We support the
adoption of the oral decision as is, unchanged.
We are convinced that the current session of
intergovernmental negotiations has introduced new
elements that are important for understanding the outline
of an eventual reform. The discussion that has taken place
has made it possible to identify issues where further
convergence of positions is possible. At the same time,
there remain fundamental differences among Member
States on many aspects. Those appear to be at the root of
the problems faced by the intergovernmental negotiations.
The time has come to protect the intergovernmental
24/30

29/06/2023

negotiations format and support the oral draft decision in
the form in which it has been presented by the President
of the General Assembly. Only in that way can we
maintain consensus in this process that is so important
to us all. What is at stake is preserving not only this
year’s achievements but those of all previous years. It
is important that disagreements on the reform not lead
us to lose something even more important, which is the
format itself. We call on all to join consensus and count
on their support.
The political significance of Security Council reform
is beyond doubt. It is clear that in this context, it is
extremely important to continue seeking a solution that
would enjoy significantly more support from Member
States than the formally required two-thirds of the vote.
Ideally, it would be supported by consensus. Previous
sessions have convincingly shown the futility and danger
of attempts to find a solution without taking the whole
range of positions into account.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the Permanent
Representatives of Kuwait and Austria, Mr. Tareq Albanai
and Mr. Alexander Marschik, for the work accomplished.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the States members of the African Union.
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
plenary meeting of the General Assembly dedicated to
adopting the draft oral decision under agenda item 125,
“Question of equitable representation on and increase in
the membership of the Security Council and other matters
related to the Security Council”. We take note of your
introductory remarks and applaud your commendable
leadership of the seventy-seventh session, including your
support for and commitment to instilling new life into the
intergovernmental negotiations process.
I would like to reiterate the strong commitment of
Africa to advancing the reform of the Security Council
to better reflect the current geopolitical realities and to
correct the acknowledged injustice that Africa continues
to suffer. We therefore remain steadfastly devoted to
the reform process. In this regard, we commend the
stewardship and dedication of the co-Chairs, Mr. Tareq
Albanai, Permanent Representative of the State of Kuwait,
and Mr. Alexander Marschik, Permanent Representative
of Austria, in facilitating the reform process and for
providing us with their revised elements paper on
convergences and divergences on the question of equitable
representation on and increase in the membership of the
Security Council and related matters.
23-18606

29/06/2023

We would like to reiterate that although the
aforementioned document reflects the co-Chairs’
understanding of what has emerged during this session of
intergovernmental negotiations, some of our preliminary
comments were addressed in the revised co-Chairs’
elements paper. Some of the critical points in relation
to the co-Chairs’ elements paper were reflected in our
statement during the fifth session of intergovernmental
negotiations for further appropriate consideration.
We further continue to implore the co-Chairs of the
intergovernmental negotiations to encourage Member
States to build on the framework document as the most
appropriate document to move the intergovernmental
negotiations process forward, as it already accurately
reflects the positions and views of the larger United
Nations membership, including the Common African
Position in its entirety. Therefore, we urge Members that
did not populate the framework document to do so. We
cannot overemphasize that. Hence, at the next session
of the General Assembly, we would encourage the
co-Chairs to further develop the framework document
by incorporating the elements reflected in the elements
paper, including what is already captured regarding the
wide support that Africa enjoys among the United Nations
membership to rectify the historical injustice done to the
African continent.
Also, Africa welcomes the progress made at this
session, and let me seize this opportunity to acknowledge
with satisfaction, Mr. President, the indication in your
oral decision of the efforts of the co-Chairs to facilitate
agreement among Member States for webcasting of the
first segment of each of the intergovernmental negotiations
meetings, which we believe will enhance transparency
and inclusivity in the intergovernmental negotiations
process. Africa is appreciative of the efforts of the
co-Chairs to establish a website that acts as a repository of
the webcasts, as well as of the letters, decisions and other
documents related to the intergovernmental negotiations
process and the links to Member States’ statements. That
is very significant for Member States, especially for smallsized delegations, many of which form part of the Group
of African States.
Furthermore, we note with appreciation the
effectiveness of interactive informal conversations and we
call for their continuation in the next intergovernmental
negotiations sessions. Likewise, we believe that the
discussions with think tanks should be maintained with
very competent, experienced and diverse panels.

A/77/PV.85

Mr. President, let me also seize this opportunity to
commend you for indicating in the draft oral decision that
the positions of and proposals made by Member States,
as reflected in the framework document and its annex
circulated by the President of the General Assembly at
its sixty-ninth session and the co-Chairs’ elements paper
on convergences and divergences, be rolled over to the
seventy-eighth session.
The African Group remains committed to a
comprehensive reform of the Security Council based on
all five clusters outlined in decision 62/557, and we will
continue to engage in the intergovernmental negotiations
process in building consensus that is in accord with
decision 62/557 and favourable to the Common African
Position, as enshrined in the Ezulwini Consensus and the
Sirte Declaration.
Mr. Pilipenko (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
Republic of Belarus supports the proposed draft oral
decision. The reform of the Security Council is an
extremely important topic that directly affects the national
interests of all States Members of the United Nations
without exception. We believe that it is necessary to find
a package solution to the existing contradictions on this
issue that takes into account the interests and concerns
of all parties through dialogue and consultations and
on the basis of consensus. We continue to welcome an
incremental and systematic consideration of the key
thematic clusters, which cover, in our view, the full
spectrum of the most relevant issues of the topic under
consideration. The given areas of discussion are closely
interrelated and should not be considered in isolation. We
note the importance of preventing certain elements from
gaining primacy over others and of not discussing certain
elements at the expense of others.
We call for the preservation of the existing format of
intergovernmental negotiations. We must finally admit
that there is no alternative to that today. We recall that
the format is enshrined in decision 62/557, which is
supported by Member States and that arbitrarily changing
the modalities of the agreed process of intergovernmental
negotiations would have serious negative impacts both on
the reform itself and the integrity of the United Nations
system as a whole. Because Security Council reform
affects the long-term development of the Organization
and the interests of all Member States without exception,
it should also be implemented exclusively on the basis
of general dialogue, broad consensus and, as we have
already said, a package decision that would take all views
into consideration.

23-1860625/30

A/77/PV.85

We continue to see major divergences in Member
States’ views regarding categories of membership in the
context of Council reform, as well as the issue of the veto
right. Those differences in State approaches to the format
of the reform are of key importance. We note that none of
the proposed solutions enjoys tangible support. That sends
the clear message that, in order to arrive at a mutually
acceptable solution, we must continue moving forward
incrementally on the basis of mutual respect and trust.
On the issue of the veto, we note that it should not
be seen as the privilege of certain States. That right is
an exclusive element of the responsibility of permanent
members when considering issues of international peace
and security. The veto mechanism is enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations and is an important tool for
developing balanced decisions that will determine peace
and security on our planet.
We have consistently called for greater representation
of developing countries within the Council. We would
welcome the expansion of that primary organ for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
inter alia through an additional seat for the Eastern
European regional group. However, we believe that in a
context where the outcome of the negotiation process is
immature, it would still be premature to carry out textbased negotiations. As has already been noted, such a step
would lead to even greater confrontation and significantly
complicate the intergovernmental negotiations. Sooner
or later, the reform will enter the realm of practicalities,
and it would be unreasonable to ignore the opportunities
provided by that process.
But everything has its own time. At present, all
countries are facing a number of global challenges, and
the most important thing is to maintain and preserve
unity. Belarus is ready and calls on all countries to take
incremental steps towards each other, including in the
context of Security Council reform in the framework of
the General Assembly, in order to create an environment
conducive to cooperation for the constructive and creative
implementation of the current agenda. Belarus stands
ready to continue its cooperation with all Member States
on that issue.

29/06/2023

efforts you have exerted throughout the session, especially
in the past few weeks, to bring us to this timely and
consensual conclusion on this very important agenda item.
I wish also to congratulate my dear friends, Ambassador
Tareq Albanai of Kuwait and Ambassador Alexander
Marschik of Austria, co-Chairs of the intergovernmental
negotiations process, for their leadership, good spirit,
ingenuity and willingness to innovate and build trust and
common understandings among the intergovernmental
negotiations membership. Egypt commends their efforts,
without which our agreement today would not have
been possible.
Egypt supports and is extremely happy with the draft
oral decision on the question of equitable representation
on and increase in the membership of the Security
Council as proposed, rolling over the deliberations
of the intergovernmental negotiations to the seventyeighth session. Egypt also welcomes the progress the
intergovernmental negotiations has achieved in this
session. The agreement on the webcast and the creation
of the web page was no easy feat. It is a testament to
the collective will and determination of the United
Nations membership to enhance the inclusiveness and
transparency of the intergovernmental negotiations
process, in a clear demonstration of the possibility of
agreement and arriving at balanced outcomes. It is only
through dialogue, common understanding and trust
that the intergovernmental negotiations will be able to
achieve an outcome that garners the widest possible
political acceptance, ensures rectification of the historical
injustice that Africa has had to endure for decades and
delivers a Security Council that is effective, democratic,
representative and better positioned to make informed
decisions for the benefit of international peace and security.

Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): Egypt aligns itself with the
statement made by the representative of Namibia on behalf
of the Group of African States and that to be delivered by
the representative of Bahrain on behalf of the Group of
Arab States.

We believe that any call to contemplate a piecemeal
approach, setting arbitrary timelines or forcing textual
proposals on the intergovernmental negotiations process
will most certainly lead to unravelling the delicate balance
and progress that we have managed to achieve thus far.
Egypt has been and will remain strongly opposed to any
such calls. We look forward to engaging constructively
during next session’s intergovernmental negotiations
meetings, formal and informal, on the basis of the five key
questions of decision 62/557, and to working with the entire
United Nations membership on that crucially important
and consequential matter towards its appropriate and
eventual conclusion.

Allow me to seize this opportunity to sincerely thank
you, Mr. President, and the members of your team for the

Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I would like, first of all,
to align myself with the statement to be made by the

26/30

23-18606

29/06/2023

Permanent Representative of Italy on behalf of the Uniting
for Consensus group.
Pakistan fully supports the oral decision you,
Mr. President, have submitted for a rollover of the
Security Council reform process. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank you most sincerely for your firm
guidance of the intergovernmental negotiations process,
which has demonstrated your commitment to and sincerity
concerning the objective, as well as clarity in the process.
We would also like to pay tribute to the co-Chairs,
Ambassador Tareq Albanai and Ambassador Alexander
Marschik, for their able, active and imaginative guidance
of the intergovernmental negotiations process at this
session. We especially welcome the innovation to the
working methods of the intergovernmental negotiations
proposed by the co-Chairs, accepted by Member
States and reflected in the draft decision to be adopted
today. The webcasting of the opening segments of each
intergovernmental negotiations meeting and the creation
of a website as a repository of the recordings of the webcast
and other documents related to the intergovernmental
negotiations have increased the transparency and
inclusivity of the process, as desired by so many small
and medium-sized States.
There have been constructive discussions in the
framework of the intergovernmental negotiations this
year on all five interlinked clusters of issues on Security
Council reform, as identified in decision 62/557. As evident
from the co-Chairs’ revised elements paper, the areas of
convergence have been broadened and divergences have
been further reduced through the intergovernmental
negotiations process this year. The Uniting for Consensus
Group continues to believe, together with other groups,
that we need to reach agreement on the principles of reform
in all five clusters in order to begin formulating a text on
Security Council reform that has a chance of securing the
widest possible political acceptance of Member States.
Pakistan looks forward to continuing its constructive
participation in the intergovernmental negotiations
process at the next session. That is the only agreed and
accepted modality to promote Security Council reform.
It would be unwise to disrupt the intergovernmental
negotiations process by advancing new modalities and
precipitate initiatives. We will oppose any such move.
Certainly, we all agreed at the seventy-fifth session
to breathe new life into the process for the reform of the
Security Council, and I believe that this year we have done
so. We have breathed new life into the process. However, a
breakthrough on Security Council reform can be achieved

A/77/PV.85

only through patient negotiations, reciprocal flexibility
and mutual accommodation. The Uniting for Consensus
group has demonstrated the greatest flexibility and
accommodation, including our compromise proposals.
We are convinced that our approach will achieve the
widest possible support of Member States through further
consultations and negotiations, but what we need to avoid
on Security Council reform is to allow that process to be
utilized for narrow national objectives. First, the lack of
progress that is so advertised by some should not become
an alibi to explain the current global tensions and great
Power rivalries. It is not due to a lack of agreement on
Security Council reform. Secondly, it should not serve
as an avenue to build new political and military blocs by
offering privileges to ambitious allies and friends. Thirdly,
it should not become a vehicle to satisfy the national egos
of a few large States.
Mr. Moretti (Brazil): Brazil associates itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines on behalf of the L.69 group and that
to be delivered by the representative of Japan on behalf of
the Group of Four.
In my national capacity, I congratulate you,
Mr. President, and the co-Chairs of the intergovernmental
negotiations for your persistent efforts in identifying
areas of convergence and in fostering potential progress.
We particularly commend your leadership in taking
the first steps to improve the rules of procedure of
the intergovernmental negotiations by introducing
webcasting and establishing a specific website to act as a
repository of all intergovernmental negotiations processrelated documents.
Those enhancements have long been sought by
Member States, especially those with smaller delegations.
They represent a modest but significant advancement
for the intergovernmental negotiations, and we hope
they will herald further transformative improvements in
the intergovernmental negotiations process. In order to
deliver the much-needed reform, the intergovernmental
negotiations process must break free from its cyclic,
repetitive and even monotonous routine. That is why Brazil
supports the recommendations outlined by the co-Chairs
of the intergovernmental negotiations in their letter of
2 June. Preserving the intergovernmental negotiations as
our primary framework will require that Member States
finally take control of the process. A concrete document,
serving as a foundation for substantive negotiations, is
both indispensable and long overdue.

23-1860627/30

A/77/PV.85

29/06/2023

During the intergovernmental negotiations cycle,
the urgent need for Security Council reform has been
acknowledged more explicitly than ever, by more Member
States than ever. That includes developing and developed
countries alike from all corners of the world, including
permanent members of the Council. The future of
international governance structures rests on their capacity
to adapt and remain fit for purpose. The time of reform is
upon us. The longer we delay action, the larger and graver
the challenges we have been facing will become.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position before adoption.
The Assembly will now take action on the draft
oral decision.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt it?
The draft oral decision was adopted (decision 77/559).
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position, I would like to remind delegations
that explanations of position are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I speak on behalf of the
members of the Group of Four (G-4): Brazil, Germany,
India and my own country, Japan.
Mr. Wallace
the Chair.

(Jamaica),

Vice-President,

took

We stand at a watershed moment. International peace
and security are being seriously challenged on many
fronts and the credibility of the Security Council’s ability
to fulfil its mandate is being tested. The Council must be at
the centre of our collective response to those challenges. It
must function, guide and facilitate meaningful discussions,
thereby making necessary decisions to address difficult
issues. For that purpose, the Council needs to be reformed
and strengthened in a way that reflects today’s realities,
not those of almost 80 years ago.
The G-4 would like to echo others in expressing our
deep respect and appreciation to President Csaba Kőrösi
and to the co-Chairs of the intergovernmental negotiations
for the sincere and tireless efforts at this session.
As referred to in decision 77/559, which we have just
adopted, we welcome the positive, tangible improvements
to the process, including the introduction of the webcast,
the establishment of a repository website and other
initiatives to move us forward. The revised co-Chairs’
elements paper is a good summary of the current status
of our convergences and divergences. At the same time,
28/30

however, we believe that most Member States are eager to
go further by redoubling our efforts to actually negotiate
on such important issues as categories of membership,
regional representation and the question of the veto.
We have been updating the co-Chairs’ elements
paper for many years and have already identified quite a
few convergences. The remaining issues are contentious.
We all know that it is only through negotiation that we
can reach an agreement on those difficult matters. Such
negotiations requires a text or language in writing to
advance. In that regard, we support the co-Chairs’
suggestion, in their letter dated 2 June, for a structured
dialogue on concrete proposals submitted by Member
States and groups. Such focused discussion would surely
deepen our understanding of each other’s positions and
hopefully foster greater convergence. It will also naturally
contribute to the Summit of the Future and beyond.
The G-4 looks forward to actively and constructively
participating in that dialogue. We will continue our
engagement with fellow Member States for the early
realization of Security Council reform — for both the
present and future generations.
Mr. Massari (Italy): On behalf of the Uniting for
Consensus group, we thank the President of the General
Assembly for his steadfast leadership during the seventyseventh session and for his proposal of oral decision 77/559,
as adopted a few moments ago. We also wish to commend
the co-Chairs, Ambassador Albanai and Ambassador
Marschik, for their dynamic guidance of the negotiations
this year.
Uniting for Consensus joined the consensual adoption
of the oral decision as we believe that it adequately
reflects the discussions that occurred this year in the
intergovernmental negotiations. In that regard, we have
welcomed the innovations introduced by the co-Chairs
following the agreement among Member States on the
working methods of the intergovernmental negotiations at
the current session, duly reflected in the decision adopted
today. We are of the opinion that those innovations — namely,
the webcasting of the open segment of the meetings and
the creation of a website to act as a repository of the
recordings of the webcast and other documents related
to the intergovernmental negotiations — have not only
increased the transparency and inclusivity of the process
but have also contributed to making the discussions at this
session of the intergovernmental negotiations livelier and
more actively participated in by a large number of groups
and individual Member States.
23-18606

29/06/2023

Our group has always operated in favour of a consensual
approach, and we welcome the fact that the Assembly was
able once again to rally around that approach and approve
an orderly transition of negotiations to the seventyeighth session. This session of the intergovernmental
negotiations has also confirmed the sense of urgency felt
by the wider membership for a comprehensive reform of
the Security Council, especially during last year’s highlevel week, and for the intergovernmental negotiations to
achieve progress. The current context requires reform that
turns the Security Council into a more efficient organ with
a greater number of non-permanent members. Uniting for
Consensus remains committed to the intergovernmental
negotiations as the platform to do so, and we are convinced
that a general agreement among the membership on the
fundamental principles and contents of the reform can
be found in that context. In our view, true compromise,
political will and time are crucial to achieving concrete
results on a comprehensive Security Council reform.
In that spirit, we are looking forward to resuming the
discussions on the reform of the Security Council in the
context of the next intergovernmental negotiations. The
General Assembly may rest assured that Uniting for
Consensus shall continue to be a positive, constructive
and fully engaged actor.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I have
the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the
Group of Arab States. I would like at the outset to thank
President Csaba Kőrösi for convening this meeting and
for his continued support to the intergovernmental
negotiations process while pushing towards the desired
reform of the Security Council. I also thank the co-Chairs
of the intergovernmental negotiations, Mr. Tareq Albanai,
Permanent Representative of the State of Kuwait, and
Mr. Alexander Marschik, Permanent Representative of
the Republic of Austria, for their fruitful efforts in leading
the negotiations.
There is no doubt that the five meetings of the
intergovernmental negotiations held at this session
have enriched our discussions on that important topic.
Moreover, the procedural steps taken at this session,
based on meetings held by the co-Chairs and their
extensive exchanges with delegations — namely, the live
transmission of the first segment of the meetings and the
launching of a dedicated website for the intergovernmental
negotiations — are important for making the working
methods of the negotiations process more transparent
and inclusive.
The Arab Group therefore welcomes the consensus
adoption today of oral decision 77/559, which will ensure

A/77/PV.85

a smooth transition to the next session and allow Member
States to continue working collectively with the aim of
reaching a common understanding that provides the
necessary groundwork for a consensual solution leading to
a real and comprehensive reform of the Security Council.
The Arab Group reiterates that the intergovernmental
negotiations process is the only forum for reaching an
agreement on the expansion and reform of the Security
Council, in accordance with decision 62/557, which calls
for, among other things, a solution that enjoys broadest
political acceptance on the part of the Member States,
and in order to preserve the principle of Member States’
ownership of the negotiations.
The Arab Group appreciates the efforts made at
this session to update the co-Chairs’ amended elements
paper on convergences and divergences. While that paper
shows a convergence of positions towards many elements
regarding the reform of the Council, it confirms at the
same time that we have more work to do in order to bring
the views closer and reduce the gap with regard to many
other elements.
I reaffirm the position of the Arab Group demanding
permanent Arab representation with full powers in the
category of permanent seats in the event of any future
expansion of the Council. In addition, fair representation
requires proportionate Arab representation in the category
of non-permanent seats in the expanded Security Council.
In conclusion, the Arab Group looks forward to
continuing the discussions of the intergovernmental
negotiations at the next session and stresses its determination
to continue participating actively and positively with the
aim of reaching a real and comprehensive reform of the
Security Council in a transparent and constructive spirit.
Mr. Phann (Cambodia): My delegation takes the
floor to express its full support for the adoption of
oral decision 77/559, on Security Council reform. We
believe that this is an important step towards ensuring
the continuity of the reform process at the seventyeighth session.
My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to
express our gratitude to the co-Chairs for their leadership
and tireless efforts, which made positive progress possible,
through the co-Chairs’ elements paper on convergences
and divergences on the question of equitable representation
and increase in membership of the Security Council and
related matters.
My delegation is pleased with the progress made in
advancing the intergovernmental negotiations process

23-1860629/30

A/77/PV.85

during the seventy-seventh session. That includes
webcasting of the first segment of meetings of the
intergovernmental negotiations and the establishment of a
website to serve as a repository of important information,
ensuring the transparency and inclusivity of the process.
It is vital to achieve Security Council reform through a
process that is inclusive and allows all Member States
to have a voice. We urge all Member States to continue
constructive engagement in the intergovernmental
negotiations process and to work together to achieve a
more representative and effective Security Council. The
adoption of the oral decision by consensus serves as
an excellent example for us to achieve the objective of

30/30

29/06/2023

Security Council reform. In future, we must prioritize that
consensus approach when negotiating Council reform.
Finally, my delegation is confident that Member
States will be able to bridge differences in all clusters
and make tangible progress during the next cycle of the
intergovernmental negotiations process.
The Acting President: We have heard the last speaker
in explanation of position.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 125?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m.

23-18606
