S/PV.8960

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8960th meeting

Monday, 31 January 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Juul. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Norway)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-24419 (E)
*2224419*

S/PV.8960

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation requests a procedural
vote on the proposal to hold today’s meeting on the
initiative of the United States. In explaining its proposal
to convene today’s meeting, the delegation of the United
States underscored that it considers the deployment of
Russian troops on Russian territory to be a threat to
international peace and security. That is tantamount
not only to unacceptable interference in the domestic
affairs of our State but also an attempt to mislead the
international community on the actual situation in the
region and on the reason for current global tensions.
We are essentially being asked to convene a
Security Council meeting based on speculations and
unfounded accusations that the Russian Federation has
often and consistently refuted. Furthermore, the open
format for discussion proposed by the United States on
this extremely provocative topic makes this meeting a
classic example of megaphone diplomacy aimed at the
public. As we have all often said, diplomacy of that
kind must be rejected. We do not think that it helps to
unite the Council. On the contrary, we fully understand
that our American colleagues wish to generate hysteria
surrounding their own statements about the Russian
acts of aggression allegedly being prepared, including
in the Security Council. Colleagues are being put in an
extremely difficult position.
Such hysteria is particularly damaging to Ukraine
itself. As we witnessed just a few days ago, its President
requested Western countries not to generate unfounded
hysteria about the deployment of Russian troops
near the border, as it harms the Ukrainian economy.
President Zelenskyy said that such panic was not
needed. It apparently serves only those who hype up
this topic — the myth of Russian aggression. I have
before me statements by Ukrainian officials that there
is no threat from Russia. For instance, the Secretary of
the National Security and Defence Council of Ukraine,
the Ukrainian Minister of Defence, Mr. Reznikov, and
the President, Mr. Zelenskyy, have explicitly said that
they do not see the activities we are being told about
today in the Council. I am not going to quote the full
2/21

31/01/2022

texts; we are prepared to circulate those statements to
Council members later today.
We urge all colleagues to adopt a position of
principle and prevent the use of the forum of the
Security Council to promote the propagandist beliefs
of our colleagues. We would also like to remind the
members of the Security Council that, in December
2021, the Russian delegation announced plans to hold
the annual discussion on the situation in Ukraine during
our presidency of the Council, which begins tomorrow.
The seventh anniversary of the adoption of the
package of measures for the implementation of the
Minsk agreements will provide us with an excellent
opportunity to constructively demonstrate the Security
Council’s commitment to resolution 2202 (2015) serving
as the international legal foundation for the Ukrainian
settlement. The event is scheduled for 17 February. If
our American colleagues wish to add any information
for the public concerning this, they will be able to do so
at the planned February meeting. We urge all sensible
members of the Council not to support this provocative
proposal and to show a responsible attitude towards the
Charter and the Security Council.
The President: The representative of the United
States has asked for the floor.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): As our colleague said, we called for this
meeting. And we called for this meeting because
of what we have all witnessed over the course of the
past few months in terms of the actions of the Russian
Federation on the border with Ukraine. They indicate
that it is within their own territory, but it is also very
close to their neighbour’s border.
It is a neighbour that has been invaded already
before. It is a neighbour that has Russian troops
occupying its territory. We have had numerous
meetings — more than 100 meetings over the course
of the past few weeks — both with Russian officials
and in consultations with our European and Ukrainian
colleagues. All of those meetings have been in private.
We think that it is now time to have a meeting in public
and have this discussion in a public forum.
We have worked with the Ukrainians at their
request to provide assistance to them so that they
can prepare for what they see as inevitable, including
having provided $200 million dollars in assistance in
recent weeks and more than $5 billion in assistance
22-24419

31/01/2022

Threats to international peace and security

since 2014, and that is so that they can be prepared. The
Security Council heard from our Russian colleagues
that we are calling for this meeting to make all members
feel uncomfortable. Imagine how uncomfortable you
would be if you had 100,000 troops sitting on your
border in the way that those troops are sitting on the
border with Ukraine.
For us, this is about peace and security. It is about
honouring the Charter of the United Nations, which
calls on us as members of the Security Council to
protect peace and security. This is therefore not about
antics. It is not about rhetoric. It is not about the United
States and Russia. What this is about is the peace and
security of one of our Member States.
The President: In view of the request and comments
made by members of the Security Council, I intend to
put the provisional agenda to the vote.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
provisional agenda for today’s meeting. I shall put the
provisional agenda to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, France, Ghana, Ireland, Mexico,
Norway, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America
Against:
China, Russian Federation
Abstaining:
Gabon, India, Kenya
The President: The provisional agenda received
10 votes in favour, 2 votes against and 3 abstentions.
The provisional agenda has been adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Belarus, Lithuania, Poland and
Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

S/PV. 8960

Before we begin with our speakers list
today — recalling the Security Council’s latest
note by the President (S/2017/507) on its working
methods — I wish to encourage all speakers, both
members and non-members of the Council, to deliver
their statements in five minutes or less. Note 507 also
encourages briefers to be succinct and focus on key
issues. In that spirit, briefers are further encouraged
to limit their initial remarks to seven to 10 minutes.
Everyone is also encouraged to wear a mask at all
times, including while delivering remarks.
I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: The United Nations is closely
following the ongoing diplomatic discussions on the
future of the European peace and security architecture
among representatives of the Russian Federation, the
United States, members of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, the European Union and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe. We hope that
the outcome of those talks will strengthen peace and
security in Europe, including for Ukraine.
Although not an active participant in those
exchanges, in all his contacts, the Secretary-General
has unequivocally supported the ongoing diplomatic
efforts at all levels. Still, we remain greatly concerned
that, even as those efforts continue, tensions continue
escalating in a dangerous military build-up in the heart
of Europe. It is reported that more than 100,000 troops
and heavy weaponry from the Russian Federation are
positioned along the border with Ukraine. Unspecified
numbers of Russian troops and weaponry were
also reportedly being deployed to Belarus ahead of
large-scale joint military exercises in February on the
borders with Ukraine, Poland and the Baltic States.
NATO members are reportedly planning additional
deployments in Eastern European member States, and
NATO has advised that 8,500 troops are currently on
high alert. Accusations and recriminations among the
various actors involved in the ongoing discussions have
created uncertainty and apprehension for many that a
military confrontation is impending.
The Secretary-General has made clear that there
can be no alternative to diplomacy and dialogue to
deal with the complex long-standing security concerns
and threat perceptions that have been raised. He has
expressed his strong belief that there should not be any
military intervention in this context and that diplomacy
should prevail. He has been equally explicit that any

22-244193/21

S/PV.8960

Threats to international peace and security

31/01/2022

such intervention by one country in another would
be against international law and the Charter of the
United Nations.

that, tragically, is still far from resolution. It is painfully
obvious that any new escalation in or around Ukraine
would mean more needless killing and destruction.

His expectation is that we all contribute to avoiding
confrontation and creating conditions for diplomatic
solution to end the crisis. We therefore welcome the
steps taken so far by all involved to maintain dialogue.
We urge and expect all actors to build on those efforts
and remain focused on pursuing diplomatic solutions
by engaging in good faith. We further urge all actors
to refrain from provocative rhetoric and actions,
to maximize the chance for diplomacy to succeed.
Achieving mutual understanding and lasting mutually
acceptable arrangements is the best way to safeguard
regional and international peace and security in the
interests of all.

Whatever one’s position may be regarding the
current situation or the status quo in eastern Ukraine,
this should be inconceivable. The fact that it is not
should give us pause. The principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, the Helsinki Final Act and
multiple other commitments to safeguarding regional
and international peace and security are crystal clear.
Any escalation or new conflict would deal another
serious blow to the architecture so painstakingly built
up over the past 75 years to maintain international
peace and security just when we need it most.

Let me repeat the full commitment of the United
Nations to the sovereignty, political independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine within its
internationally recognized borders, in accordance with
relevant General Assembly resolutions. It is important,
especially at this time, for the international community
to intensify its support for the efforts of the Normandy
Four and of the Trilateral Contact Group, led by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), to ensure the implementation of the Minsk
agreements endorsed by the Security Council in its
resolution 2202 (2015).
We welcome the recent meeting of the Normandy
Four advisers in Paris and their agreement to reconvene
shortly in Berlin as another sign that diplomacy can
work. We commend these efforts and those of the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine.
Likewise, United Nations agencies in Ukraine are
committed to continue delivering on their mandates
in accordance with the humanitarian principles of
neutrality, impartiality, humanity and independence.
Safe, unimpeded humanitarian access must be respected
under any circumstances to provide support to the
2.9 million people in need of assistance, the majority of
whom are in non-Government controlled areas. In this
regard, I encourage Member States to contribute to the
humanitarian response plan. Further, the Human Rights
Monitoring Mission in Ukraine continues to document
civilian casualties in the conflict area.
No one is watching the current diplomatic efforts
more than the people of Ukraine. They have endured a
conflict that has taken over 14,000 lives since 2014 and
4/21

Once again, I would like to stress the SecretaryGeneral’s appeal to all concerned to take immediate
steps to de-escalate tensions and continue on the
diplomatic path. The United Nations stands ready to
support all efforts to that end.
The President: I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
for her briefing.
The situation we are facing in Europe is urgent
and dangerous, and the stakes for Ukraine — and
for every United Nations Member State — could not
be higher. Russia’s actions strike at the very heart of
the Charter of the United Nations. This is as clear and
consequential a threat to peace and security as anyone
can imagine. In the wake of the Second World War, the
Council was formed to address precisely the kind of
threat that Ukraine now faces. As Article 39 says, “[t]
he Security Council shall determine the existence of
any threat to the peace”. Therefore, our charge is not
only to address conflicts after they occur, but also to
prevent them from happening in the first place. That is
why today’s meeting is so crucial.
Russia’s aggression today not only threatens
Ukraine; it also threatens Europe. It threatens
the international order this organ is charged with
upholding — an order that, if it stands for anything,
stands for the principle that one country cannot simply
redraw another country’s borders by force or make
another country’s people live under a Government they
did not choose. We continue to hope Russia chooses
22-24419

31/01/2022

Threats to international peace and security

the path of diplomacy over the path of conflict in
Ukraine, but we cannot just wait and see. It is crucial
that the Security Council address the risk that Russia’s
aggressive and destabilizing behaviour poses across
the globe.
First, let us be clear about the facts. Russia has
assembled a massive military force of more than 100,000
troops along Ukraine’s border. These are combat
forces and special forces prepared to conduct offensive
actions into Ukraine. This is the largest — hear me
clearly — the largest mobilization of troops in Europe
in decades. And as we speak, Russia is sending even
more forces and arms to join them. Russia has already
used more than 2,000 rail cars to move troops and
weaponry from across Russia to the Ukrainian border.
Russia has also moved nearly 5,000 troops into Belarus,
with short-range ballistic missiles, special forces and
anti-aircraft batteries. We have seen evidence that
Russia intends to expand that presence to more than
30,000 troops near the Belarus-Ukraine border, less
than two hours north of Kyiv, by early February. In
addition to military activity, we have also seen a
dramatic spike in cyberattacks on Ukraine in recent
weeks. Russian military and intelligence services are
spreading disinformation through State-owned media
and proxy sites, and they are attempting, without any
factual basis, to paint Ukraine and Western countries
as the aggressors to fabricate a pretext for attack.
Russia’s military build-up on the border has been
paired with extensive new demands and aggressive
rhetoric. This is an escalation in a pattern of aggression
that we have seen from Russia again and again. In 2014,
Russia illegally invaded and seized Crimea. In 2008,
Russia invaded Georgia. Russian troops are currently
refusing to depart Moldova, despite the wishes of the
Moldovan people and their democratically elected
Government. And in the Donbas region of Ukraine,
Russian-backed separatists continue to foment and
ignore violence towards the Ukrainian people. Recently,
Russia has threatened to take military action should its
demands not be met.
If Russia further invades Ukraine, none of us
will be able to say we did not see it coming. And the
consequences will be horrific, which is why this meeting
is so important today. Already, Russia’s war in eastern
Ukraine has killed more than 14,000 Ukrainians.
Nearly 3 million Ukrainians — half of whom are
elderly people and children — need food, shelter and
life-saving assistance. Devastating as this situation is,

S/PV. 8960

it would pale in comparison to the humanitarian impact
of the full-scale land invasion Russia is currently
planning in Ukraine.
Over the years, Russian leaders have claimed that
Ukraine is not a real country and questioned its right to
self-determination. So, let us be clear — Ukraine is a
United Nations Member State that recently celebrated
three decades of independence. It has a proud people
and a rich culture. Ukraine is a sovereign country and
a sovereign people, entitled to determine their own
future, without the threat of force. This is not just the
conviction that Ukrainians hold — it is a right enshrined
by the Charter of the United Nations, a right that Russia
and every other Member of this institution has freely
committed to upholding.
Our international order is not perfect. But it is
grounded in respect for people and countries to govern
themselves, to defend themselves and to associate
with whom they choose. All countries have a stake in
defending and preserving these principles, and nothing
could be more fundamental. What would it mean
for the world if former empires had license to start
reclaiming territory by force? That would set us down
a dangerous path.
Russia could, of course, choose a different path — the
path of diplomacy. In recent weeks, the United States,
along with our European allies and partners and other
nations around the globe, concerned by Russia’s threat
to Ukraine, has continued to do everything we can to
resolve the crisis peacefully. In all of those talks, our
messages have been clear and consistent. We seek the
path of peace; we seek the path of dialogue. We do not
want confrontation, but we will be decisive, swift and
united should Russia further invade Ukraine.
We continue to believe that there is a diplomatic path
out of the crisis caused by Russia’s unprovoked military
build-up. We are working to pursue diplomacy in every
possible venue, but we also know that diplomacy will
not succeed in an atmosphere of threat and military
escalation. That is why we have brought this situation
before the Security Council today.
The United States has been clear — if this is truly
about Russia’s security concerns in Europe, we are
offering it an opportunity to address those concerns
at the negotiating table. The test of Russia’s good faith
in the coming days and weeks is whether it will come
to that table and stay at that table until we reach an

22-244195/21

S/PV.8960

Threats to international peace and security

understanding. If it refuses to do so, the world will
know why and who is responsible.
We urge our fellow members of the Council and
other Member States to assess not only Russia’s
statements but its actions, too, with clear eyes so as
to evaluate the risk it presents not just to Ukraine’s
border and its people, but to all of us. We urge them
to speak clearly and forcefully in favour of the path of
diplomacy, rather than the path of conflict.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this open meeting. I also thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing.
The primary responsibility of the Security Council
is to maintain peace and security with a view to
preventing conflicts in the world. We have argued here
several times that, in terms of prevention, the Council
still has a long way to go. The Council has been seized
many times to discuss the situation in Ukraine since
the beginning of the aggression in 2014, and here we
are again today.
We express our deep concern regarding Russia’s
military build-up near Ukraine in recent months.
Dozens of battalions have already been relocated to the
Ukrainian border. Military troops are being dispatched
from the east to the west of Russia. Those include heavy
combat forces, tanks, artillery, air defence systems and
ballistic missiles. Several thousand Russian troops have
also been sent to Belarus. That movement of troops and
weaponry is very worrying. It has caused anxiety and
fear among people in Ukraine and justifiably serious
international concerns, particularly for us in Europe.
Let me reaffirm our unwavering support for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders.
In 1994 — 27 years ago — Ukraine received security
assurances through the Budapest Memorandum,
whereby Russia, together with the United States and the
United Kingdom, pledged “to respect the independence
and sovereignty and the existing borders of Ukraine”,
in exchange for Ukraine giving up its nuclear arsenal.
The signatories also reaffirmed their commitment to
seeking Security Council action to provide assistance
to Ukraine should it become a victim of an act of
aggression. We call on Russia and the Security Council
to expressly confirm respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine.
6/21

31/01/2022

It would be wrong to consider the threat of a
military attack by Russia against Ukraine as another
crisis between Russia and the West. It is a challenge
to the European security order and to the whole
international security architecture, which is based on
the Charter of the United Nations. It is an affront to
the 1975 Helsinki Final Act and its decalogue, upon
which the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) was founded and of which Russia is
a part.
The latest developments on the Russian-Ukrainian
border are a well-known playbook. We saw them in
Georgia in 2008 and in Ukraine repeatedly since
2014, unfortunately at the cost of thousands of lives,
both civilian and military. Russia has used military
violence as a means of achieving its political and
geopolitical goals.
Russia is a big country and has a role to play in
European and world geopolitics. It can play an important
part in making the world a better and safer place.
Unfortunately, it is doing the contrary. The narratives
of spheres of influence in Europe or dictating by threats
the geostrategic orientation of other countries are
tools of another century, of another time reminiscent
of the Cold War. Countries are and should be free to
join whichever organization they want, be it NATO,
the European Union, the Collective Security Treaty
Organization or the Commonwealth of Independent
States. Sovereign countries take decisions by their free
will, not under the threat of a gun.
What is there to gain in a potential conflict of which
everyone anticipates disastrous consequences? What
can justify the loss of thousands of lives, widespread
destruction, the severance of relations and continued
tensions, including, as has been made repeatedly clear,
severe consequences for Russia itself? There is no other
place where more is known about war and its disastrous
consequences than in this Chamber. Therefore, we must
be able to look beyond and seek other means to address
issues, however complex they are or seem to be.
Albania believes that the crisis should be solved
through talks and discussion. Finding solutions through
negotiations was our primary focus as Chairperson-inOffice of the OSCE in 2020. It remains the same now in
the Council. There are several mechanisms to be used
through diplomatic efforts. Concrete steps towards
de-escalation are needed, paving the way towards talks
in efforts to seek solutions. Such efforts should be
22-24419

31/01/2022

Threats to international peace and security

made in good faith and not conducted in a climate of
escalation rhetoric. The resumption of the Normandy
format meetings last week in Paris was the right step
and we hope that the process will continue.
We should all bear in mind that the crisis in and
around Ukraine has a direct impact on the whole of
Europe. The instrumentalization of ethnic minorities,
targeted cyberattacks, political interference here and
there for political gain, a growing tendency of genocide
denial and the glorification of war crimes and war
criminals are all acts that seek destabilization, create
tension and should be treated as a threat to peace and
security — because they are. That is why we deem it of
paramount importance to invest in prevention. I hope
that this meeting will be part of such genuine efforts.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I am grateful to
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing.
Article I of the Charter of the United Nations
defines our purpose here — to take collective measures
for the prevention and removal of threats to the peace.
Today over 100,000 Russian troops are massed
on Ukraine’s borders. They are equipped with tanks,
armoured vehicles. rocket artillery and short-range
ballistic missiles. They are supported by Russian air
and maritime long-range strike capabilities. That is
not a routine deployment — it is the largest military
build-up in Europe in decades. In the best-case
scenario, the scale of the Russian forces assembled on
three sides of Ukraine is deeply destabilizing. In the
worst case, it is preparation for a military invasion of a
sovereign country.
In 2008, Russia told the Council that it was sending
peacekeepers into Georgia. In reality, it was invading
an independent, democratic county. In 2014, Russia
denied to the Council the presence of its forces in
Crimea. In reality, its soldiers were annexing part of
an independent, democratic Ukraine. Today Russia
denies that its forces are posing a threat to Ukraine.
But yet again we see disinformation, cyberattacks and
destabilizing plots directed against an independent,
democratic country.
The United Kingdom welcomes our discussion
today as part of the intense diplomatic effort to
ensure that Russia de-escalates the situation and
avoids conflict. We are unwavering in our support for
Ukraine’s sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity. At the same time, we have sought dialogue

S/PV. 8960

with Russia through the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and the NATO-Russia
Council and bilateral discussions with all levels of the
Russian Government. We are ready to address mutual
security concerns based on existing European security
structures and international commitments. That
includes our expectation that Russia should address our
concerns. We are committed to a constructive dialogue
if Russia is genuine about finding a diplomatic solution.
The Council has a vital interest in this diplomatic
effort because — let us be clear — this is not a regional
issue. Any Russian invasion or act of aggression against
Ukraine would be a gross breach of international law
and Russia’s commitments under the Charter. Conflict
would result in terrible bloodshed and destabilize the
entire international community. There should be no
doubt about how costly such a miscalculation would
be for Russia or how devastating it would be for the
people of Ukraine, whose only provocation is to want
a democratic future for their country. There would be
no winners, only victims — civilians caught in the
crossfire or forced to flee and families grieving the loss
of fallen soldiers on both sides.
We urge Russia to make clear in the Council that it
will abide by its obligations under the Charter, that it
has no plans to invade Ukraine, that it will abstain from
the threat or use of force against its neighbour, that it
will not further undermine Ukraine’s sovereignty or
territorial integrity by military or any other means and
that it will stand down its troops.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): The
situation at the borders of Ukraine is a matter of deep
concern for France.
The accumulation of significant military
capabilities on the border of a neighbouring sovereign
State constitutes threatening behaviour. It raises
legitimate questions about Russia’s intentions,
especially since that country has already undermined
the territorial integrity of Ukraine in the past. France
reaffirms its full and complete support for the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders.
It calls on Russia to engage in a de-escalation of the
situation, respect international law and participate
constructively in dialogue within the framework of
established international mechanisms.
The priority is to work collectively for a rapid
de-escalation. President Macron has worked for that

22-244197/21

S/PV.8960

Threats to international peace and security

over the past few days, during his trip to Berlin and
during his telephone conversation with President Putin.
This Security Council meeting must also be part of that
objective. France supports all dialogue efforts in the
various existing frameworks and hopes that Europeans
will play their full part in them. Within the framework of
the Normandy format, which brings together Germany,
France, Russia and Ukraine, those efforts made it
possible, during the meeting in Paris on 26 January,
to agree on a declaration of support for unconditional
respect for the ceasefire and the implementation of the
Minsk agreements. We will continue our efforts in that
regard at the next meeting planned to be held in Berlin
in the near future.
The dialogue, regardless of the forums in which it
is conducted, must respect the fundamental principles
on which European security is based, as set out in the
Charter of United Nations and the founding documents
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, including the Helsinki Final Act and the Charter
of Paris for a New Europe. Those principles include, in
particular, the sovereign equality and territorial integrity
of States, the inviolability of borders, non-recourse to
the threat or use of force and the freedom of States to
choose or modify their own security arrangements.
They are neither negotiable nor subject to revision or
reinterpretation. The notion of a sphere of influence has
no place in the twenty-first century.
If Russia does not choose the path of dialogue
and respect for international law, the response will be
strong and united. Any further attack on Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity will have massive
consequences and a severe cost. The Europeans are
working on coordinated restrictive measures and stand
ready, together with their partners, to react. If the path
of dialogue and cooperation is chosen, the European
Union is ready to commit itself to developing its
relations with Russia on the basis of a united, long-term
and strategic approach, according to the five guiding
principles of 2016.

31/01/2022

talks between Russia and the United States, as well as
under the Normandy format in Paris.
India’s interest is in finding a solution that can
provide for the immediate de-escalation of tensions,
taking into account the legitimate security interests of
all countries and aimed at securing long-term peace
and stability in the region and beyond. We have also
been in touch with all the parties concerned.
It is our considered view that the issues can be
resolved only through diplomatic dialogue. In that
context, we welcome the efforts under way, including
under the Minsk agreements and the Normandy format.
Flowing from the recently concluded meeting in Paris
under the Normandy format, we also welcome the
unconditional observance of the July 2020 ceasefire
and the reaffirmation of the Minsk agreements as the
basis of work under the ongoing Normandy format,
in particular the commitment of all sides to reducing
disagreements on the way forward. We also welcome
their agreement to meet in Berlin in two weeks. We
urge all parties to continue to engage through all
diplomatic channels and to keep working towards the
full implementation of the Minsk package.
Quiet and constructive diplomacy is the need of
the hour. Any steps that increase tension may best be
avoided by all sides in the larger interest of securing
international peace and security. More than 20,000
Indian students and nationals live and study in different
parts of Ukraine, including in its border areas. The
well-being of Indian nationals is of priority to us.
I reiterate our call for the peaceful resolution of the
situation by sincere and sustained diplomatic efforts
to ensure that the concerns of all sides are resolved
through constructive dialogue.

In the context of current threats and tensions,
France reaffirms its solidarity with the Ukrainian
people and Government. With our European partners,
we will continue to mobilize in support of Ukraine, in
particular by supporting reforms.

Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): A few moments ago, the
Security Council voted to adopt the agenda for this
meeting to consider the situation in Ukraine. Our
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security makes it imperative to encourage
the path of dialogue and preventive diplomacy. That is
the only way to end the tensions, bridge the differences
between the parties and forge a unified and pacific
position on the situation in Ukraine.

Mr. Tirumurti (India): We have been closely
following the evolving developments relating to
Ukraine, including through ongoing high-level security

Let me begin by thanking Rosemary DiCarlo,
Under-Secretary-General
for
Political
and
Peacebuilding Affairs, for her briefing. I also welcome

8/21

22-24419

31/01/2022

Threats to international peace and security

the participation of the representatives of Ukraine,
Belarus, Poland and Lithuania in this meeting.
Ghana has been following closely the situation in
Ukraine. I have also listened carefully to the briefing
that we just received from the Secretariat as well as the
statements of those delegations that spoke before me.
We have paid careful attention to the perspectives of
the parties key to the situation and hope that by the end
of this meeting, the views of members of the Council
will be closer to each other than when we first begun.
We note from the situation in Ukraine that while
there has been a build-up of Russian troops at the
internationally recognized borders of Ukraine, those
troops are currently within the national territory of
the Russian Federation. We also have taken note of the
fact that while the military build-up of the troops of the
Russian Federation is within its borders, that has caused
Ukraine and other parties concern over the intentions
behind the build-up and its prospective implications for
international peace and security.
We therefore welcome the ongoing dialogue
between the Russian Federation and the United States
to address primary and secondary security concerns
that have implications for the situation in Ukraine as
well as the recent face-to-face dialogue between the
representatives of the Russian Federation and Ukraine
under the Normandy format in Paris after several
months of no contact, to enhance trust and eliminate
any possibility of an accidental incident.
We note with concern the implications that the
situation has had for the economy of Ukraine and
neighbouring markets and welcome in that regard the
call by the President of Ukraine for an easing of the
strong narratives on the situation. This must be a time
for confidence-building so as to facilitate the restoration
of normalcy for the people of Ukraine.
In conclusion, Ghana believes that in conformity
with the provisions of the Charter of the Organization,
differences between Member States should be resolved
only through peaceful means. We remain encouraged
by the ongoing diplomatic engagement between the
parties and reiterate our support for those efforts,
which should also take into account the delicate nature
of the situation.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I thank UnderSecretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing.

S/PV. 8960

Today’s discussion is an important opportunity
for the Council to address the developing situation
at Ukraine’s borders, which has become a matter of
profound international concern.
Let me underline at the outset that Ireland, along
with our European Union partners, is a strong and
unwavering supporter of Ukraine’s independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity within its
internationally recognized borders.
At this moment of rising tension on Ukraine’s
frontiers, arising from Russia’s military build-up,
Ireland calls for calm, de-escalation and the pursuit of
diplomacy. We call also for constructive and determined
engagement on all dialogue tracks, including the
Normandy format and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
Ireland is fully committed to the core principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. Those
include the sovereign equality and territorial integrity
of States. We recall today that those principles were
agreed, collectively and freely, by all Members of the
United Nations.
Moreover, European security is built on a series
of essential commitments and obligations. It is the
fundamental right of a sovereign and independent
State to chart its own path in the world; to choose its
own foreign policy; and to make arrangements for the
security and defence of its territory. The Helsinki Final
Act, one of the foundational documents of the OSCE,
confirms the obligation of States to
“respect each other’s sovereign equality … and
the right of every State to juridical equality, to
territorial integrity and to freedom and political
independence.”
Subsequent agreements, including the Charter of
Paris and the Charter for European Security, agreed
in Istanbul in 1999, reaffirm the core principles
underpinning collective European security.
Earlier this month, Ireland marked 100 years of a
hard-won independence. Just as we would not accept
another State determining our foreign and security
policy, Ukraine similarly has the sovereign right to
choose its own policies.
We in the Council are too often faced with the
terrible humanitarian consequences of violent conflict,
usually where diplomacy and dialogue have failed.

22-244199/21

S/PV.8960

Threats to international peace and security

Force is never the answer. It is not the answer now.
What is needed now above all is a negotiated diplomatic
solution that reinforces our collective security in
Europe. We have the institutions and the mechanisms
within which to pursue such a solution. Let us use them.
Absent that, it will be innocent civilians who once again
pay the awful price of conflict. That is not a prospect
any of us wish to contemplate.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China opposes the Security Council’s holding of this
open meeting, as requested by the United States. The
Permanent Representative of the United States to the
United Nations, in her letter to the President of the
Council dated 27 January, claimed that the reason why
the United States is asking the Council to hold this open
meeting was that Russia’s deployment of troops along
the Ukrainian border posed a threat to international
peace and security.
China cannot align itself with that point of view.
Recently, there have indeed been some tensions over
the issue of Ukraine, and we are paying attention to
what exactly is causing those tensions. Some countries,
led by the United States, have claimed that there will
soon be a war in Ukraine. Russia has repeatedly stated
that it has no plans to launch any military action, and
Ukraine has made it clear that it does not need a war.
Under such circumstances, what is the basis for the
countries concerned to insist that there may be a war?
We note that the United States, Ukraine and
the relevant European countries, as well as NATO,
are engaged in various forms of diplomatic contact
with Russia. The parties concerned should persist in
seeking to resolve their differences through dialogue
and negotiations. What we urgently need now is quiet
diplomacy, not microphone diplomacy. That is the
viewpoint held by many members of the Council that
have also made unrelenting efforts towards that end.
Regrettably, the United States did not accept such a
constructive proposal.

31/01/2022

their differences through consultations on an equal
footing, fully taking into account each other’s legitimate
security concerns and on the basis of mutual respect.
China’s position on Ukraine has been consistent.
To resolve this issue, we must return to the original
plan of the implementation the new Minsk agreement.
That agreement, endorsed by the Security Council
in its resolution 2202 (2015), represents a binding,
foundational political document recognized by all
parties and should be effectively implemented. China
supports all efforts in line with the directional spirit of
the agreement and hopes that all parties concerned will
show their positive willingness to implement it, resolve
their differences arising from its implementation
through consultation, and promote the actual
implementation of the new Minsk agreement.
The expansion of NATO is a problem difficult to
circumvent in handling the current tension. NATO
is a product of the Cold War, and NATO’s expansion
epitomizes group politics. We believe that the security
of one country cannot be achieved at the expense of
the security of other countries, still less can regional
security be guaranteed by intensifying or even
expanding military groups.
Today, in the twenty-first century, all parties
should completely abandon the Cold War mentality
and come up with a balanced, effective and sustainable
European security mechanism through negotiations,
and Russia’s legitimate security concerns should be
heeded and addressed.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Ms. DiCarlo for
her briefing.

At a time when dialogue and negotiations are
under way and concrete progress has yet to be made,
the holding of such an open meeting by the Council
is clearly not conducive to creating a favourable
environment for dialogue and negotiations, nor is it
conducive to defusing tensions.

First and foremost, I would like to thank those
countries that conducted themselves properly and
deemed it possible to vote against or abstain in the
voting on the proposal of the United States to raise
this topic for discussion today. One might have the
impression that Russia fears discussing the Ukrainian
situation and therefore put forward a procedural vote to
block it. Russia is not refusing to discuss the situation
in Ukraine, but we just do not understand what we are
discussing in this Chamber today. Indeed, why are we
here today?

China once again calls on all parties concerned to
remain calm and not to do anything that might aggravate
tensions or intensify the crisis but to properly resolve

As I have stated previously, during our
presidency of the Security Council in February, we
are planning to hold a meeting — specifically on

10/21

22-24419

31/01/2022

Threats to international peace and security

17 February — to commemorate the seventh anniversary
of the implementation of the Minsk agreements, at
which point we could talk about the situation in relation
to a Ukrainian settlement. But today’s meeting is not
about that at all.
Recently, we have been faced with a very unusual
situation even by the standards of our turbulent times.
The deployment of Russian troops within our own
territory, which has repeatedly occurred in various
degrees in the past, has never before raised any show
of concern. Troops and military personnel remain in
their own areas of deployment and in barracks where
they have always been, whether or not they are actually
on the border.
This deployment of Russian troops in our own
territory is getting our Western and United States
colleagues to say that a planned military action, even
an act of aggression, is about to be launched. But
the Permanent Representative of the United States
spoke as if that act of aggression had already taken
place. I listened to her statement very carefully. The
Russian military action against Ukraine, all of them
are assuring us, is going to take place in just a few
weeks’ time, if not a few days’ time. However, no proof
whatsoever has been put forward to uphold such a
serious accusation. Nevertheless, that has not stopped
people from whipping up hysteria to such an extent that
an actual economic impact is already being felt by our
Ukrainian neighbours.
Our Western colleagues are talking about the need
for de-escalation. However, first and foremost, they
themselves are whipping up tensions and rhetoric and
provoking escalation. The discussion about the threat
of war is provocative in and of itself. They are almost
calling for it; they want it to happen. They are waiting
for it to happen as if they want to make their words
become a reality — and this despite the fact that we
are constantly rejecting these allegations, and despite
the fact that no threat of a planned invasion of Ukraine
has come from the lips of any Russian politician or
public figure over this entire period. No such threat has
been made.
Rather, at all levels, we have been categorically
rejecting such plans, and we are going to do that again
right now. Everybody who claims the opposite is
misleading those who might believe it.
If our Western colleagues, who provoked and
supported the 2014 bloody anti-Constitutional coup

S/PV. 8960

that brought nationalist radicals, Russophobes and
pure Nazis to power in Kyiv, had not done that, then
we would today be living in an atmosphere of goodneighbourly relations and mutual cooperation. However,
some in the West simply and clearly do not like such a
positive scenario.
What is happening today is yet another attempt
to drive a wedge between Russia and Ukraine.
Thanks to the geopolitical games promoted by the
West, our Ukrainian brothers have been suffering for
some seven years now. The Ukrainians are actively
being brainwashed, and they are induced to embrace
Russophobic and radical thinking, leading to the belief
that for Ukraine to have a bright future, it must not
establish relations with its neighbours, but rather strive
at any cost to join the European Union and NATO.
They are banning Russian, which is a native language
for significant number, if not the majority, of people in
Ukraine. They are causing a schism in the Orthodox
Church. They are making heroes of persons who
fought for Hitler — who killed Jews, Poles, Ukrainians
and Russians.
The best interests of the Ukrainian people in this
destructive game are something that our Western
colleagues are not taking into consideration. Their aim
is to prevent the natural brotherly coexistence of our
two peoples and countries, which would destroy their
plans to weaken Russia and create an arc of instability
around it. There is nothing that we are seeing that is
new in this regard. It is the same spirit of divide and
conquer — or divide and rule. This is the spirit that
characterized Western States in the past.
It is also noteworthy that our American colleagues
have artificially injecting the sham tension that they
themselves created on the Russian-Ukrainian border
into the negotiation process launched at our insistence
on providing legally binding security guarantees for
us. They are deliberately creating the impression that
Moscow is seeking to escalate tension in order to use
it as a bargaining chip in negotiations with the United
States and NATO. All one needs to do is look at the
timetable for the negotiation process to see that such
fabrications are fundamentally wrong.
The situation in fact is completely the opposite.
Our Western colleagues are trying to ride the crest of
this wave of hysteria to boil dialogue between us slowly
down to a so-called settlement of the situation on the
border with Ukraine.

22-2441911/21

S/PV.8960

Threats to international peace and security

Our security requirements are much broader:
Ukraine must not join NATO and no foreign troops
should be deployed on its territory. Both of these are
elements of an overdue agreement that could radically
improve the military-political situation in Europe
and the world as a whole. This type of agreement is
something that we have talked about in the Astana,
Istanbul and Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe summits where, apart from affirming the
freedom to choose one’s allies or alliances, it was also
stipulated that the security guarantees of some States
should not be carried out to the detriment of the security
of other States.
Since our American colleagues convened today’s
meeting, let them show us at least some evidence apart
from bogus narratives fabricated in their own heads
that Russia intends to attack Ukraine. In the statement
of my American colleague, there was a significant
hodgepodge of accusations of aggressive actions by
Russia, but not a single concrete fact.
Incidentally, I would like to put a question not only
to our United States colleague, but also to those who
said similar things: where did they get the figure of
100,000 troops deployed, as they state, on the RussianUkrainian border? We have never cited or confirmed
that figure. We remember these tricks from the moment
when United States Secretary of State Colin Powell
waved around a vial with an unknown substance in
this Chamber as so-called evidence of the presence of
weapons of mass destruction in Iraq. Such weapons
were never found, but we all know very well what
happened to that country.
It seems that our American colleagues are also
prepared to sacrifice Ukraine for their own geopolitical
interests. Otherwise, it is difficult to explain why,
when calling us together today, the initiators of today’s
meeting did not even heed the opinion of the President
of Ukraine, who asked the West not to whip up panic,
which has already had a harmful impact on the
economic situation in that country. Otherwise, it is also
difficult to explain why our colleagues from the United
States and a number of other countries are actively
pumping Ukraine full of weapons and ammunition and
even talk about it with great pride. Ukraine readily
uses such weapons against civilians in the east of its
own country. All this is being done in violation of the
Minsk agreements, approved by the Security Council
as the only basis for a peaceful settlement of the
internal Ukrainian conflict. Incidentally, my American
12/21

31/01/2022

colleague mentioned that 14,000 people have died in
the conflict. I recommend that she read the reports
of the Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and see how many of those 14,000 people have died on
each side, as most were civilians in Donbas who died
of shelling from the Ukrainian armed forces and the
national battalions.
The manoeuvres of the United States regarding the
convening of this meeting are particularly inadequate
and hypocritical because it is the Americans themselves
who have record levels of troops outside their territory.
United States troops, advisers and weapons, including
nuclear weapons, are frequently deployed thousands
of miles from Washington, D.C., not to mention the
fact that United States military adventures have
killed hundreds of thousands of civilians in countries
to which they were supposedly bringing peace and
democracy. The United States has repeatedly, including
in recent years, used force against other States without
the authorization of the Security Council. In its
arsenal are unilateral sanctions coercive measures and
threats with which they are trying to force everyone to
comply, like the rulings of some self-styled Supreme
Court. According to American experts, 84 United
Nations member States out of 193 have been subject
to occupation or aggression or attacks by the United
States. In 191 states, American troops were deployed
in some way in the twentieth or twenty-first century.
Data available online indicate that there are around 750
United States bases in more than 80 countries, with
175,000 troops deployed abroad, including more than
60,000 in Europe. The United States military budget in
2020 was $778 billion. Russia’s budget is $61 billion,
lower by a factor of 12. Those are examples of an evident
and concrete threat to international peace and security.
As for the calls for a settlement of the crisis around
Ukraine, we agree wholeheartedly, but the crisis has
only one dimension — it is an internal Ukrainian crisis.
I repeat that the situation can be improved only through
Kyiv’s implementation of the Minsk agreements,
which stipulate above all direct dialogue with
Donetsk and Luhansk. There is no other option. If our
Western partners pushing Kyiv to sabotage the Minsk
agreements, which Kyiv is eagerly using, then this
situation could end in the worst way for Ukraine — not
because someone will have destroyed it, but because it
will have destroyed itself.
22-24419

31/01/2022

Threats to international peace and security

Russia has absolutely nothing to do with this.
Not one should try to shift the blame. We will talk
about all of this in detail on 17 February at the longplanned annual meeting of the Security Council on the
implementation of resolution 2202 (2015).
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
for her briefing.
My delegation is closely following the situation
on the borders of Ukraine and Russia and has received
reports of a large-scale mobilization of Russian troops
on the borders of Ukraine, suggesting that military
action is imminent. This alarming information is
accompanied on the ground by real agitation, with
the deployment of significant financial means and
military equipment from countries friendly to Ukraine.
The resulting verbal escalation and high tension are
polarizing a great deal of diplomatic activity, which is
reflected in various initiatives, including the Normandy
format in the context of the implementation of the
Minsk agreements.
In the face of this particularly concerning
escalation of tensions, my country, aware of what is at
stake and the strength of the forces involved, calls on
all stakeholders to show restraint and turn to dialogue
and negotiations in order to preserve stability and peace
in the region. This is the moment for the international
community and its members to activate the channels
of preventive diplomacy, in accordance with Chapter
VI of the Charter of the United Nations, devoted to the
pacific settlement of disputes.
It is obvious that the effectiveness of preventive
diplomacy depends not only on the good faith of the
protagonists, but above all on tact, composure and
the framework of its implementation. The duality
of rhetoric — alarmist, concerning the imminence
of military action in Ukraine, on the one hand, and
rejectionist juxtaposed to it, on the other — amplify
the fragmentation of the Council at a time when the
peoples of the world expect it to reach consensus and
take resolute action to match the scale of devastation
caused by the wars and crises that are ravaging several
regions of the planet. The strength of the Council lies
in its unity. It is unity, not fragmentation, that lifts the
Council to the height of its mandate to serve the peoples
of the world. We believe that diplomacy, in its most
practical and efficient forms, is capable of bringing
calm to the borders of Ukraine.

S/PV. 8960

In conclusion, I would like to echo the appeal made
on Friday by the President of Ukraine, urging us to
keep a sense of proportion and not to stoke panic.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Let me also thank UnderSecretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing
before the Council this morning.
Geopolitical tensions and threats to international
peace and security require the Security Council’s
prompt and timely engagement. Open references to
military actions, unilateral economic sanctions and
other measures are developments that should be avoided,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
The Security Council must fulfil its primary
objective — to prevent war. There is a general and
urgent need to resort to meaningful dialogue with and
between the parties directly involved in the escalation
of tensions. We urge all parties to exercise maximum
restraint and to engage constructively in talks aimed
at resolving their differences. There is room to restore
confidence and find a lasting diplomatic solution to
this crisis. For that, we need political will and genuine
commitment from all sides.
Brazil encourages all parties to strictly observe
international law. It is imperative that we be consistent
in applying the principles enshrined in the Charter,
in a non-selective manner. The prohibition on the use
of force, the peaceful resolution of disputes and the
principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and the
protection of human rights are pillars of our collective
security system.
Brazil also highlights the need for good faith
in order to address the legitimate security concerns
of all parties, including Russia and Ukraine. We
encourage the parties to pursue genuine talks on the
implementation of the Minsk agreements. Resolution
2202 (2015), which provides useful guidelines on
addressing the situation in eastern Ukraine, is also
a valuable tool in diplomatic efforts to overcome the
situation. Brazil welcomes the resumption of talks in
the Normandy format and the renewed commitment to
the ceasefire in eastern Ukraine.
Despite the sensitive and difficult nature of the
issue on our agenda today, I would like to conclude
with a note of hope. Over the past few days, it has been
encouraging to hear statements to the effect that there is
no military solution to the situation. At this moment in
particular, that should be the motto of the whole United

22-2441913/21

S/PV.8960

Threats to international peace and security

Nations membership and of the Security Council for a
renewed commitment to diplomacy and prevention.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I thank you, Madam
President, for the able way in which you have presided
over the Security Council in the month of January. I
also thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
for her briefing and welcome the participation of the
representatives of Ukraine, Belarus, Lithuania and
Poland in today’s meeting.
Kenya abstained in the procedural vote to hold
this meeting. We did so to reflect our contention that
the main issue in question is the impasse between
NATO and the Russian Federation. We believe that it
is imminently solvable and that the diplomatic steps
under way already show promise. That, rather than
escalation in search of a winner-take-all outcome, is
what is required to support and protect international
peace and security.
Kenya has always maintained that respect for the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of all countries
is a cornerstone of global peace. Where there are
disputes regarding territorial jurisdiction or security
interests, we strongly support patient diplomacy as the
first, second and third options. When the dispute is
between major Powers and concerns the security of a
third country, it is imperative that they embrace a spirit
of compromise.
We believe that the United States, NATO and the
Russian Federation have an opportunity to establish a
diplomatic framework that will allow them to resolve
their differences. Their security and that of the entire
world depend on them willingly taking that step, not
in ushering in a new age of containment, provocation
and proxy options. Compromise is not surrender.
The special powers given to the Security Council’s
permanent members demand that they embrace that
principle, if the United Nations is not to go the way of
the doomed League of Nations.
Africa recalls the rejections of compromise and the
search for total victory that led to the Cold War. We
experienced that Cold War as a series of hot wars and
interventions that deeply damaged our dreams for peace,
development and competent inclusive Government.
Our internal divisions and fragilities were weaponized
at the altar of geopolitical rivalry. It confirmed the
truth of the African saying that recognizes that, when
elephants fight, it is the grass that suffers.
14/21

31/01/2022

Given that the majority of the conflict situations
the Security Council deals with are in Africa, we do
not want them to serve as surrogates for a new Cold
War. We in Africa therefore have a direct stake in
de-escalation and a renewed faith in diplomacy. We
have serious challenges to solve together. Rarely has
the world more urgently needed a United Nations that
can deliver ambitiously.
Kenya believes that there is still plenty of
opportunity for the Normandy format talks, the
Trilateral Contact Group on Ukraine and direct
negotiations between the United States and the Russian
Federation to produce a satisfactory outcome. We urge
all those parties to ensure that their negotiations respect
the security, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine. Faith in innovative diplomacy may also allow
for agreements between today’s major Powers, inspired
by the 1975 Helsinki accords, which delivered some
stability to Europe during the Cold War. This time,
however, such agreements need to advance the principle
of non-interference in other parts of the world, and
particularly in Africa.
In conclusion, it is critical that diplomacy and its
acceptance of compromise as an inevitable outcome win
the day. If there are future discussions to be held in the
Security Council on this matter, let it be to announce a
new era of cooperation.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for
her briefing. I welcome the representatives of Ukraine,
Belarus, Poland and Lithuania to today’s meeting.
I would like to begin by noting that my country
deems the holding of today’s meeting to be timely, in
line with our foreign policy principles. We also believe
it to be relevant, as the Security Council must be
informed about the current situation in Ukraine.
It is not in our interest to contribute to further
polarizing the narrative. I will therefore simply state
what, for Mexico, are the basic principles when
addressing the issue, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations. In this case, I will refer to three of
them: the prohibition on the threat or use of force in
international relations, the principle of non-intervention
and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
With regard to the first principle, the mere
escalation of tensions in Eastern Europe is a potential
threat to international peace and security, and it is
22-24419

31/01/2022

Threats to international peace and security

therefore within the purview of the Council, pursuant
to Article 39 of the Charter. For that reason, and in the
light of the prevailing mistrust, it is important to try
to avoid any type of action that could be considered
to be hostile by any of the parties, however slight it
may seem. However, undoubtedly, the remarks we just
heard from the representative of the Russian Federation
were encouraging. He was very clear in reiterating,
here in the Council, that there is no planned invasion
of Ukraine. I believe I repeated what he said word for
word. If that is indeed the case, that is good. It is a
unilateral statement of non-aggression.
In keeping with what the Secretary-General
and others here in the Chamber have stated, Mexico
maintains that there is no military solution to the issue.
On the contrary, preventive diplomacy and dialogue
must prevail as a means of de-escalation, and, as we
heard, there are various channels to achieve that — the
Geneva talks, the Trilateral Contact Group and the
Normandy format.
With regard to non-intervention, we reiterate the
importance of respecting the sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity of Ukraine in full compliance with
international law, the Charter of United Nations and
General Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV). It is also up
to the Security Council to determine, if necessary, the
existence of an act of aggression, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX). That is
reinforced by the principle of the peaceful settlement of
disputes. States have the duty to resolve their disputes
by peaceful means, as established under international
law. Mexico has defended, defends and will continue
to defend the use of diplomacy over force. Diplomatic
channels with regard to the issue facing us remain open;
they have not been exhausted.
What must not be put in doubt is the responsibility
of the Council to carry out its preventive work and
measure up to dealing with what the circumstances
demand. I firmly believe that, in holding this meeting,
we are doing that and fulfilling our mandate without
exceeding or falling short of it.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, for her informative briefing.
The United Arab Emirates is closely monitoring
recent developments. In the context of our discussion
today, we would like to focus on the following aspects.

S/PV. 8960

First, my country firmly believes that the dispute in
Europe requires a serious dialogue among the various
States of the region based on the values of stability,
coexistence and peace. We stress the importance of
reaching a negotiated solution to this issue through the
available mechanisms and with the support of regional
organizations. In that regard, we refer to the Normandy
format and the initiative of the Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe that aims to initiate a genuine dialogue on
European security to address the security concerns of
the countries of the region. We also welcome President
Volodymyr Zelenskyy’s appeal for calm. We hope
to build on it for establishing further confidence in
the region.
Secondly, my country welcomes the announcement
made at the Normandy format meeting on 26 January,
at which the Russian Federation and the Republic of
Ukraine confirmed their intention to implement an
unconditional ceasefire in eastern Ukraine. We are
counting on the various initiatives currently under way
to enable dialogue, including between the United States
and the Russian Federation. Diplomatic efforts must be
supported and provided the opportunity to achieve the
desired results. My country also stresses the importance
of maintaining security and stability, as well as the
centrality of the Minsk agreements and the need to
adhere to them and ensure their implementation. That
will contribute to reaching a comprehensive regional
understanding that maintains the security and stability
of the countries concerned and addresses all their
legitimate concerns.
Thirdly, escalation must be avoided, as it could
have a significant negative impact on civilians and
exacerbate the fragile humanitarian situation in eastern
Ukraine. In that regard, we stress the importance of
taking into account the humanitarian needs of civilians
and preventing the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in the region.
Fourthly, respect for, and adherence to,
international law is essential to ensure that the situation
in Eastern Europe does not deteriorate further. We also
stress the importance of the principles of sovereignty,
territorial integrity and good-neighbourliness, which
are imperative for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
In conclusion, my country reiterates the importance
of constructive dialogue to resolve differences. The role

22-2441915/21

S/PV.8960

Threats to international peace and security

of the Security Council, as the organ responsible for
maintaining international peace and security, is essential
to providing a diplomatic platform that enables States
to present and resolve their differences peacefully.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Norway.
Let me start by expressing Norway’s strong support
for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity
within its internationally recognized borders. That
includes the Crimean peninsula and its territorial
waters. Norway is deeply concerned about the Russian
large-scale military build-up near Ukraine’s borders and
in occupied Crimea. It is unprovoked and unjustified.
Further escalation can have devastating humanitarian
consequences. Through its harsh statements and
unrealistic demands, Russia is currently challenging
the security architecture in all of Europe. The crisis
therefore not only affects the region but represents a
clear threat to international peace and security.
Russia has repeatedly accused NATO of increasing
tensions. I would like to underline that the Alliance is
defensive and voluntary. We do not seek confrontation.
At the same time, we cannot and will not compromise
on the principles on which the security in Europe
rests. We stand ready to discuss security concerns.
Norway supports a European security order based on
international law and national sovereignty. We cannot
allow this to be replaced by spheres of influence.
Every country has the right to freely choose its
security alignment. We call on Russia to de-escalate
and engage constructively in dialogue through the
established international mechanisms in good faith.
Furthermore, Norway underlines its support for the
existing international frameworks for the sustainable
and peaceful resolution of conflict in accordance with
international law. Russia has itself repeatedly invoked
in many other Council discussions the principles of
respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity. Norway
calls on Russia to now respect those principles when it
comes to Ukraine.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the United States has asked
for the floor to make a further statement.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I cannot say that I am surprised by my
Russian colleague’s comments, but I am disappointed.
16/21

31/01/2022

I cannot let the false equivalency go unchecked. I
therefore feel that I must respond.
Let me be clear: there are no plans to weaken
Russia, as claimed by our Russian colleague today.
On the contrary, we welcome Russia as a responsible
member of the international community. But its actions
on the border of Ukraine are not responsible. The
threats of aggression on the border of Ukraine — yes,
on its border — are provocative. Our recognition of
the facts on the ground is not provocative. The threats
of action if Russia’s security demands are not met
are provocative. Our encouraging diplomacy is not
provocative. The provocation is from Russia, not from
us or other members of the Security Council.
We have made clear our commitment to the path
of diplomacy. I hope that our Russian colleagues will
also choose that path and engage peacefully with
the international community, including Ukraine. I
say to Russia simply this: its actions will speak for
themselves, and we hope and encourage that it make
the right choices before the Council today.
The President: The representative of the
Russian Federation has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): I had not planned on entering into a
conversation between Russia and the United States at
this meeting. We said everything we wanted to say
in our statement today. However, we simply do not
understand the threats, provocation and escalation by
Russia being referred to by the representative of the
United States. However, when I heard her statement,
I heard no reference to the Minsk agreements or to
resolution 2202 (2015), which is very telling. That is the
context that we need to use when we are talking about
the Ukrainian crisis, and the United States is looking at
this from a completely different angle.
Finally, I would like to apologize to Council
members, and I ask the representatives who will speak
after me not to interpret my departure as a walkout in
protest. As we are about to assume the presidency of
the Security Council tomorrow, I have to meet with
the Secretary-General, and I cannot re-schedule the
meeting because of the schedule to the SecretaryGeneral.
The President: I wish to again remind all
speakers to limit their statements to no more than five
22-24419

31/01/2022

Threats to international peace and security

minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out its
work expeditiously.
I now give the floor the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I would like to
immediately apologize that my statement may not be
within the five-minute limit, especially given the length
of the Russian intervention.
I would like to express gratitude to the Norwegian
presidency for convening this briefing of the Security
Council, of the need for which I spoke exactly a
fortnight ago with Her Excellency the Foreign Minister
of Norway during our meeting in New York. I express
our thanks to the United States, which, as a member
of the Security Council, in close coordination with
Ukraine and partners, requested today’s briefing. And,
of course, I express our appreciation for the briefing by
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo.
It is a duty and a need for the Security Council
to be fully informed in the case of grave threats to
international peace and security. What is going on
along the border with Ukraine — where the Russian
Federation continues its military build-up — falls
under that qualification.
It is important that Ukraine’s voice be heard today
in the Security Council and not be lost in translation,
as the position of my country has been delivered by a
foreign ambassador in the Russian language. I ask the
deputy to Mr. Vassily Alekseevich to tell him that my
leadership speaks its own language and has its own
ambassadors and spokespersons. There is therefore
no need to interpret the words of Ukrainian officials
in a foreign language, especially if it is done the way
Humpty Dumpty spoke of the meaning of the words,
even if Lewis Carroll appears to be a favourite writer
of top Russian diplomats.
Against the backdrop of an unprecedented sequence
of high-level diplomatic contacts over the past few
weeks, a serious discussion in the Security Council
is required more than ever to present facts, to listen
to each other’s positions and concerns and to outline
further actions towards de-escalation.
The fact is that about 112,000 Russian troops
have been amassed around Ukraine’s borders and in
Crimea, and together with the maritime and aviation
components, their number reaches about 130,000.

S/PV. 8960

Another fact is that the Russian troops are also
being deployed to Belarus for the Union Resolve 2022
joint drills to be held from 10 to 20 February. They
include, in particular, Iskander missile divisions, S-400
Triumf and Pantsir anti-aircraft systems, Sukhoi Su-35
4++ generation fighters.
On top of that, on 26 January, the Russian fleet
started another military drill in the Black Sea with
the involvement of frigates, patrol ships, missile
ships, assault landing ships and minesweepers. This
reminds us of the ongoing heavy militarization of the
temporarily occupied Crimea, the Black Sea and the
Sea of Azov by Russia, which poses a serious threat to
Ukraine, all littoral States and, thereby, the region.
The significant reinforcement of combat capabilities
of the Russian occupation forces in Donbas is another
worrisome trend. Currently, these formations consist
of up to 35,000 personnel, including around 3,000
servicemen of the Russian Armed Forces, on command
posts and in other critical combat positions. In the
border areas outside Government control, illegal border
crossings by cargo trains and truck convoys, delivering
arms supplies to the Russian armed formations
in Donbas, are a routine practice. Reports of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine (SMM)
provide ample evidence of various illegal activities in
the border areas. It is no surprise that restrictions of the
OSCE SMM freedom of movement are on the increase,
in particular in non-Government-controlled areas close
to the Ukraine-Russia border.
On 22 December 2021, the Trilateral Contact
Group reached another understanding on resuming
the ceasefire regime. Nevertheless, shooting, shelling
and sniper fire on Ukrainian positions and systematic
use of attack unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) against
Ukrainian troops have not stopped. We have lost
12 servicemen, killed in action, and 14 have been
wounded since 22 December 2021. Just a few days ago, on
25 January, armed formations of the Russian Federation
once again attacked the positions of the Armed Forces
of Ukraine in the area of Pyshchevyk, Donetsk region,
using an attack UAV. VOG-17 fragmentation grenades
dropped from that UAV resulted in severe injuries to
two Ukrainian servicemen.
The current impasse in the consultations process
within the framework of the Trilateral Contact Group
continues on practically all tracks, while the decisions

22-2441917/21

S/PV.8960

Threats to international peace and security

adopted by the Normandy format leaders during their
December 2019 summit in Paris remain unimplemented.
Over the past year and a half, we have seen deliberate
efforts by the Russian side to obstruct Trilateral Contact
Group activities and even to prevent the finalization of
the arrangements agreed, including at the expert level,
within the Trilateral Contact Group in the security and
humanitarian areas.
All this is accompanied by Russia`s stubborn denial
of being a party to the armed conflict that has been
raging for eight years now in the Donbas region of
Ukraine, attempts to impose a so-called direct dialogue
with its puppet occupation administrations, as well
as its refusal to engage in substantive discussion on a
political settlement of the conflict.
The question is: Why are all these Russian forces
there? We have asked this question in different forums
and have sent our own clear messages. Ukraine is not
going to launch a military offensive neither in Donbas,
nor in Crimea, nor anywhere else. Ukraine sees no
alternative to a peaceful resolution of the ongoing
conflict and the restoration of its sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
Yet we are also seeing a surge in Russian
disinformation campaigns, including false accusations
of Ukraine plotting a military attack. That is not
going to happen. This is direct evidence of Russia’s
unwillingness to de-escalate and prepare to justify
its possible further aggression. We are well aware of
Russia’s history of ploys and provocations, and we will
do everything possible to prevent another Mainila-type
provocation by Russia.
Once again, I have clear instructions from my
Government to reiterate today the absence of any
aggressive intention, as well as Ukraine’s strong
commitment to peace.
Today we heard from the Russian side that it
does not intend to launch a war against my country,
although perhaps one should rather speak about
launching a new phase of the Russian aggression. That
is a very important message, as we still lack credible
explanations from Russia concerning its actions and
military movements. Based on experience, we cannot
believe Russian declarations, but only practical moves
to withdraw troops from the border.
Ukraine strongly rejects any attempt to use the
threat of force as an instrument of pressure to make
18/21

31/01/2022

Ukraine and our partners accept illegitimate demands.
There is no room for compromise on principal issues.
Ukraine’s most principled position is that we have the
inherent sovereign right to choose our own security
arrangements, including treaties of alliance, which
cannot be questioned by Russia. Moreover, that right
is enshrined in many international legal instruments to
which Russia itself is also a party. Ukraine will not bow
to threats aimed at weakening Ukraine, undermining
its economic and financial stability and inciting public
frustration. That will not happen, and the Kremlin must
remember that Ukraine is ready to defend itself.
At the same time, we support the need to keep
diplomatic channels with Russia open, if that prevents
a shift to military tools. My President has recently
reiterated that he is ready to meet with his Russian
counterpart. If Russia has any questions for Ukraine,
it is better to meet and talk than to bring troops to the
Ukrainian borders and intimidate the Ukrainian people.
For Ukraine, the first priority today is to achieve a
sustainable and unconditional ceasefire in Donbas. The
ceasefire regime must be guaranteed and reliable and, on
that basis, further steps can be taken. The intensification
of the work in the Normandy format, including at the
level of the leaders of the four countries, is an important
prerequisite for next steps towards lasting peace in
Donbas. We are ready to resume Normandy Four talks
in all formats. The recent meeting of political advisers
on 26 January in Paris, despite many differences, offers
hope for a continuation of the negotiation process,
which Ukraine will staunchly support.
Despite the Russian attempt to impede the briefing
from being held, we believe that the Security Council
and the wider United Nations membership have received
today some very important information. The members
of the Security Council need to take that information
into account so as to make an informed decision,
when appropriate, on acting swiftly and decisively in
employing preventive diplomacy under Chapter VI of
the Charter of the United Nations, which enshrines the
Security Council’s responsibility to investigate any
dispute or situation that might lead to international
friction or give rise to a dispute.
After listening to the Russian Ambassador today,
I would like to ask how long Russia will pursue its
clear attempt to push Ukraine and its partners into a
Kaf kaesque trap. Still, I should perhaps acknowledge
that it was important to hear the Russian envoy speak
22-24419

31/01/2022

Threats to international peace and security

today, and I must end by repeating what my Foreign
Minister recently said:
“If Russian officials are serious when they say
they do not want a new war, Russia must continue
diplomatic engagement and pull back the military
forces it has amassed along Ukraine’s borders and
in the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine.
Diplomacy is the only responsible way.”
Let us judge by actions, not by riddles and
semantic puzzles.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belarus.
Mr. Rybakov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
Republic of Belarus continues to maintain its consistent
and principled position that it is unacceptable to resolve
any conflict by force. Having made significant efforts
to settle the conflict in Ukraine, our country remains
ready to do everything possible to restore dialogue and
mutual understanding in the region.
There is no alternative to the Minsk agreements,
which have played a key role towards the peaceful
resolution of the crisis. The negotiation process within
the Trilateral Contact Group, as well as the practical
implementation of the agreements in the intra-Ukrainian
conflict zone, will put the peace process in Ukraine on
a sustainable, positive trajectory.
The proposal of today’s topic by the United States
delegation for consideration by the Security Council
is another attempt to artificially ignite tensions in the
region, purely as an instrument for political accusations.
Such actions serve only to heighten mistrust and in no
way contribute to resolving disagreements.
Despite the concerns frequently expressed
by representatives of the Republic of Belarus in
international negotiation forums and during bilateral
contacts, the build-up of military forces near our
western and southern borders not only continues but is
also becoming threatening in nature. Despite repeated
calls for dialogue and cooperation, including in the area
of arms control, the pressure being exerted on Belarus
by certain countries is only increasing. Our suggestion
to return to negotiations is not being reciprocated by
our Western partners.
Incidentally, I would like to draw members’ attention
to the fact that we have heard here today references to
the Budapest Memorandum. I urge members to reread

S/PV. 8960

the contents of that document as they pertain to the
Republic of Belarus and pay special attention to the
pledges therein not to exert any coercive economic
measures upon Belarus. I would also ask members to
recall the numerous packages of economic sanctions
imposed by individual States against us.
In view of the current difficult situation, the
Belarusian and Russian leaders have taken the decision
to jointly assess the preparedness of the armed forces
of the two States to ensure military security, taking
into account the commitments of our military-political
alliance. Within the framework of those agreements, it
was decided to check the preparedness of Union State
response forces in February.
The main objectives of the preparedness check of
our armed forces are to assess the combat readiness
and capabilities of our military command and control
bodies to take joint actions to guarantee the security
of the Union State; exercise in coordinated operations
to neutralize threats on the borders of the Union State
caused, inter alia, by the migration crisis and the need
to stabilize the humanitarian situation; to organize
the defence and protection of strategically important
facilities; to curb and ward off external aggression
during defensive operations; to counter terrorism; and
to protect the interests of the Union State.
As part of the final stage of those activities, a joint
Belarusian-Russian exercise known as Union Resolve
2022 will take place from 10 to 20 February, during
which joint training and combat drills with control
targets will be carried out. We note that these activities
of a regional grouping of troops to ensure the military
security of the Union State are regularly practiced
during joint exercises and are purely defensive in
nature and pose no threat to our European partners or
neighbouring countries.
The Republic of Belarus continues to strictly
observe all of its obligations under international
and regional arms control treaties. Incidentally, all
information about the forthcoming military exercises
can be found on the official website of the Ministry of
Defence of the Republic of Belarus. A few days ago,
on 28 January, President Aleksandr Lukashenko, when
responding to questions, stated that war is possible only
in two cases, namely, if Belarus or our ally, Russia,
were to be attacked.
Responding to the various insinuations against
Belarus in relation to the internal Ukrainian situation,

22-2441919/21

S/PV.8960

Threats to international peace and security

we would once again like to recall that we are ready
to continue to provide all the necessary assistance in
resolving the conflict in Ukraine, including by creating
the necessary conditions for the activities of the
Trilateral Contact Group and negotiations in any other
possible forums and formats.
Today many people in the world talk about the need
for a broad dialogue on international security issues.
President of Belarus Aleksandr Lukashenko came
up with the initiative to hold such a dialogue under
the provisional name “Helsinki-2” a few years ago.
Unfortunately, that idea has not yet been implemented.
Belarus is sincerely interested in a speedy
settlement of the regional crisis solely on the basis of
dialogue and mutual respect.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): Poland is grateful for the
convening of today’s meeting of the Security Council,
as we are increasingly concerned over Russia’s
continuous large-scale military build-up on the border
with Ukraine, both in the territory of Russia and in
the territory of Belarus, including the continuous
redeployments of troops and prepositioning of military
hardware and offensive weapons. We cannot keep
quiet because what is happening in our neighbourhood
constitutes a serious threat to international peace and
security, reaching far beyond our region and continent.
The current security situation in eastern Europe
unfortunately follows a pattern of precedents, with the
Russian Federation being the destabilizing actor in the
region at least since 2008 and the war in Georgia to 2014
and the illegal annexation of the Crimean peninsula.
As we speak, the frozen conflicts in eastern Ukraine,
the Georgian breakaway regions of South Ossetia and
Abkhazia and the Transnistrian region of the Republic
of Moldova are unresolved, undermining the stability
and regional security of that part of the world.
We cannot keep quiet because what is happening
in our neighbourhood constitutes the outright violation
of the fundamental principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations. Poland strongly adheres to the
principles of international law, such as the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States, the inviolability of
frontiers and the non-use or threat of force. We call
upon all Member States to act in the same spirit.
20/21

31/01/2022

We know very well from our country’s history
that a political order based on spheres of influence
brings about no positive results. It is here in the United
Nations where it is our duty to protect the principles of
international law, strongly condemn any threat of the
use of force and work together to dismantle spheres of
influence in order to maintain peace.
What is at stake today is not only the subordination
of Ukraine and the creation of the so-called buffer zone
in Eastern and Central Europe. The real threat is to
shake the very foundation of the security architecture
in Europe by undermining tenets of international law,
such as the inviolability of borders and the freedom to
choose one’s own security arrangements, among others.
Unfortunately, that may have a global impact and
contribute to the deterioration of international security,
not to mention a possible humanitarian crisis, and there
are other revisionist Powers that may follow suit.
Poland deeply believes in the power of preventive
diplomacy. Holding the chairmanship-in-office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), we stand open to facilitate talks on European
security within the organization. The OSCE can
provide the right venue to discuss matters of concern,
since it is the broadest regional format. We call for the
constructive engagement of all participating States in
order to find a peaceful solution to the current crisis.
Let there be no doubt that the current status quo is
not a solution at all. Living in constant fear of another
frozen conflict is against the commitment of the United
Nations to practice tolerance and live together in peace
with one another as good neighbours. With the Winter
Olympics less than a week away, let us do whatever we
can to maintain the Olympic peace in Eastern Europe.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lithuania.
Mr. Paulauskas (Lithuania): Let me thank you,
Madam President, for convening this meeting on such
an important issue and for granting us an opportunity
to speak. I deliver this statement on behalf of the Baltic
States — Estonia, Latvia and my own country, Lithuania.
First, let me reiterate my country’s unwavering
support for Ukraine’s sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity within its internationally recognized
borders. We strongly condemn the clear violation of
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity through
22-24419

31/01/2022

Threats to international peace and security

acts of aggression by the Russian armed forces since
February 2014.
We do not recognize and continue to condemn the
illegal annexation of Ukraine’s Autonomous Republic
of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol by Russia. We
remain concerned over the increasing militarization of
the peninsula and the severe deterioration of the human
rights situation there.
In that context, let me add that we welcome the
establishment of the International Crimean Platform
launched at the kick-off summit that took place on
23 August in Kyiv, and we support the implementation
of its joint declaration. We invite other States Members
of the United Nations to join that initiative as well.
The conflict in Ukraine has claimed around 14,000
lives, displaced 1.5 million persons and resulted in
countless suffering on both sides of the contact line in
eastern Ukraine.
We reiterate our full support for the efforts towards
a peaceful and sustainable resolution of this conflict,
namely, in the Normandy format, the Trilateral
Contact Group and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), including its Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine. Yet, despite all
international efforts, until now we see little progress
towards a resolution of this conflict. Ukraine’s
constructive approach has not been reciprocated
by Russia.
We condemn Russia’s continued aggressive actions
and threats against Ukraine and call on Russia to
de-escalate the situation and abide by international
law. We call on Russia to immediately stop fuelling the
conflict by providing financial and military support
to the armed formations that it backs and to withdraw
Russian military troops and materiel from the eastern
border of Ukraine and the Crimean peninsula.
Despite all the diplomatic efforts, Russia further
escalates and continues the military deployment around
Ukraine’s borders. Moreover, Russian troops are
deployed in Belarus as well. That adds up to the current
escalation and is of direct concern to us.

S/PV. 8960

The Kremlin continues to use the false narrative
that Russia is forced to defend itself from a threat, even
as the opposite is true. It is Russia that is threatening
Ukraine and other neighbours by positioning over
100,000 troops. Russia is not a victim, as it attempts
to portray itself. It is the aggressor, strengthening its
security at the expense of others. Through its own
actions in the Georgian breakaway regions of South
Ossetia and Abkhazia, the Transnistrian region and the
illegal annexation of Crimea, Russia has contributed to
a significant deterioration of the security environment
in Europe.
We reaffirm our full commitment to the core
principles of international security enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, the founding documents
of the OSCE, including the Helsinki Final Act and the
Charter of Paris for a new Europe, and others. That
includes notably the sovereign equality and territorial
integrity of States, the inviolability of frontiers and
refraining from the use of force. The violation of such
principles by Russia is an obstacle to a common and
indivisible security space in Europe and threatens
peace and stability in our continent.
The times of limited sovereignty in Europe are long
gone. Notions of spheres of influence have no place in
the twentieth-first century. States have the freedom to
choose or change their own security arrangements. No
third country has a veto right over the sovereign choices
of independent and democratic States.
In response to the recent tensions, the European
Union made clear in the December and January
European Council conclusions that any further
military aggression against Ukraine will have
massive consequences and severe costs, including
restrictive measures to be coordinated closely with our
transatlantic partners,
We call on Russia to respect the principles of the
United Nations Charter, de-escalate and engage in
genuine dialogue. It is our duty as Members of the
United Nations to defend the rules-based international
system. The violation of its fundamental principles will
have consequences for other parts of the world.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

22-2441921/21
