V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of tbe Second Committee

2. A/so decides that the Goveming Council shall hold a
special one-week session every six years, beginning in
1988, to consider and approve the system-wide mediumterm environment programme and to consider the global
programme on the environment of the proposed United
Nations medium-term plan;
3. Further decides that in 1988 the Goveming Council
shall meet to consider and approve the next system-wide
medium-term environment programme and to consider
appropriate changes to the global programme on the environment of the extended United Nations medium-term
plan for the period 1984-1989, and that it shall, at its regular session in 1989, consider the global programme on the
environment of the next United Nations medium-term
plan before submitting it to the General Assembly for approval;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to conduct consultations with Governments to establish the necessary transitional arrangements for a change in the term of office of
members of the Goveming Council from three years to
four, with half of the membership being elected every two
years;
5. Decides that the reports requested ofthe Goveming
Council in section I, paragraph 3, of its resolution
2997 (XXVII) and in paragraph 5 of its resolution
3436 (XXX) shall be submitted biennially instead of annually.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

42/186.

Environmental Perspective to the Year 2000
and Beyond

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 38/161 of 19 December 1983 on
the process of preparation of the Environmental Perspecti ve to the Year 2000 and Beyond, in which it, in ter a lia,
welcomed the desire of the Governing Council of the
United Nations Environment Programme to develop the
Environmental Perspective and transmit it to the General
Assembly for adoption, benefiting in carrying out that
function from its consideration of the relevant proposals
made by a special commission, which adopted the name
World Commission on Environment and Development,
Welcoming the Environmental Perspective to the Year
2000 and Beyond, 51 prepared by the Intergovernmental
Inter-sessional Preparatory Committee on the Environmental Perspective to the Year 2000 and Beyond of the
United Nations Environment Programme, referred to in
General Assembly resolution 38/161, considered further
by the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme at its fourteenth session and adopted in
its decision 14/13 of 19 June 1987,46 as a basis for the further elaboration of its programme and operations, while
acknowledging that diff'erent views exist on sorne aspects,
Appreciating that concepts, ideas and recommendations
contained in the report ofthe World Commission on Environment and Development 12 have been incorporated into
the Environmental Perspective,

1. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme and its Intergovernmental Inter-sessional
~reparatory Committee on the 1?nvironmental Perspect1ve to the Year 2000 and Beyond m the preparation of the
Environmental Perspective to the Year 2000 and Beyond;

141

2. Adopts the Environmental Perspective to the Year
2000 and Beyond, contained in the annex to the present
resolution, as a broad framework to guide national action
and international co-operation on policies and programmes aimed at achieving environmentally sound development, and specifically as a guide to the preparation of
further system-wide medium-term environment programmes and the medium-term programmes of the organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, in the
light of Goveming Council decision 14/13;
3. Notes that the perceptions generally shared by Governments of the nature of environmental problems, and
their interrelations with other international problems, and
of the eff'orts to deal with them include the following:
(a) An international atmosphereofpeace, security and
co-operation, free from the presence and the threat of wars
of all types, especially nuclear war, in which intellectual
and natural resources are not wasted on armaments by
any nation, would greatly enhance environmentally sound
development;
(b) The imbalance of present world economic conditions makes it extremely difficult to bring about sustained
improvement in the world's environmental situation; accelerated and balanced world development and lasting improvements in the global environment require improved
world economic conditions, especially for the developing
countries;
(c) Since mass poverty is often at the root of environmental degradation, its elimination and ensuring equitable
access of people to environmental resources are essential
for sustained environmental improvements;
(d) Toe environment puts constraints on as well as
provides opportunities for economic growth and social
well-being; environmental degradation, in its various
forms, has assumed such proportions as can cause irreversible changes in ecosystems, which threaten to undermine human well-being; environmental constraints, however, are generally relative to the state of technology and
socio-economic conditions, which can and should be improved and managed to achieve sustained world economic
growth;
(e) Environmental issues are closely intertwined with
development policies and practices; consequently, environmental goals and actions need to be defined in relation
to development objectives and policies;
(j) Although it is important to tackle immediate environmental problems, anticipatory and preventive policies
are the most eff'ective and economical in achieving environmentally sound development;
(g) The environmental impacts of actions in one sector
are often felt in other sectors; thus internalization of environmental considerations in sectoral policies and programmes and their co-ordination are essential for the
achievement of sustainable development;
(h) Since confticts of interest among population
groups, or among countries, are often inherent in the nature of environmental problems, the participation of the
concerned parties is essential in determining effective environmental management practices;
(1) Environmental degradation can be controlled and
reversed only by ensuring that the parties causing the
damage will be accountable for their actions, and that they
will participate, on the basis of full access to available
knowledge, in improving environmental conditions;
(J) Renewable resources, as part of complex and interlinked ecosystems, can have sustainable yields only ifused

142

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

while taking into account system-wide effects of exploítation;
(k) The safeguarding of species is a moral obligation of
humankind and should improve and sustain human wellbeing;
([) Building awareness at various levels of environmental conditions and management, through the provision of information, education and training, is essential for
environmental protection and improvement;
(m) Strategies to <leal with environmental challenges
have to be flexible and should allow for adjustments to
emerging problems and evolving environmental management technology;
(n) International environmental disputes, which are
growing in number and variety, need to be resolved by
peaceful means;
4. Welcomes as the overall aspirational goal for the
world community the achievement of sustainable development on the basis of prudent management of available global resources and environmental capacities and the
rehabilitation of the environment previously subjected to
degradation and misuse, and the aspirational goals to the
year 2000 and beyond as set out in the Environmental Perspective, namely:
(a) The achievement over time of such a balance between population and environmental capacities as would
make possible sustainable development, keeping in view
the links between population levels, consumption patterns, poverty and the natural resource base;
(b) The achievement offood security without resource
depletion or environmental degradation and restoration of
the resource base where environmental damage has been
occurring;
(e) The provision of sufficient energy at reasonable
cost, notably by increasing access to energy substantially
in the developing countries, to meet current and expanding needs in ways which minimize environmental degradation and risks, conserve non-renewable sources of energy and realize the full potential of renewable sources of
energy;
(d) The sustained improvements in levels of living in
all countries, especially the developing countries, through
industrial development that prevents or minimizes environmental damage and risks;
(e) The provision of improved shelter with access to
essential amenities in a clean and secure setting conducive
to health and to the prevention of environment-related
diseases, which would, at the same time, alleviate serious
environmental degradation;
(f) The establishment of an equitable system of international economic relations aimed at achieving continuing
economic advancement for ali States based on principies
recognized by the international community, in order to
stimulate and sustain environmentally sound development, especially in developing countries;
5. Agrees that the recommendations for action contained in the Environmental Perspective should be implemented, as appropriate, through national and international action by Governments, intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations and scientific bodies;
6. Requests the Governing Council to keep under review the extent to which the long-term environmental actions recommended in the Environmental Perspective
have been implemented and to identify any new environmental concerns that may arise;

7. Calls special attention to section IV of the Environmental Perspective, which spells out instruments of environmental action, to be used as support in addressing, as
appropriate, problems dealt with in previous sections of
the Environmental Perspective;
8. Stresses the essential role of the United Nations Environment Programme within the United Nations system
in catalyzing environmentally sound and sustainable development, and agrees with the Governing Council that
this role should be strengthened and that the resources of
the Environment Fund should be substantially increased
with greater participation;
9. Endorses the priorities and functions for the United
Nations Environment Programme set out in paragraph 117 of the Environmental Perspective;
10. Decides to transmit the text of the Environmental
Perspective to ali Governments and to the governing bodies of the organs and organizations of the United Nations
system as a broad framework to guide national action and
international co-operation on policies and programmes
aimed at achieving environmentally sound and sustainable
development;
11. Calls upan the governing bodies of the organs and
organizations of the United Nations system to consider
the Environmental Perspective and take it into account in
the development of their own medium-term plans and
programmes as relevant to their own mandates;
12. Requests the governing bodies of relevant United
Nations organizations to report regularly to the General
Assembly on the progress made in achieving the objectives
of environmentally sound and sustainable development in
line with paragraph 114 of the Environmental Perspective;
13. Invites the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programrne to report to the General
Assembly at its forty-fourth session on the implementation of the present resolution and the relevant provisions
of the Environmental Perspective to the Year 2000 and
Beyond.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987
ANNEX

Environmental Perspective to the Year 2000 and Beyond
CONTENTS
Paragraphs

Page

):-;TRODUL7ION

1-4

143

ll. SECTORAL ISSUES

5-68
5-9

143

I

A.

Population

B.

e

Food and agriculture
Energy

D.

Industry

E

Health and human settlements
International economic rela-

F

111.

10-25

144

26-35
36-47

146
147

48-59

149

tions .

60-68

150

ÜTHEll ISSUES OF GLOBAL CONCERN

69-86

151

A.

Oceans and seas . . . . . . . . .

70-73

151

B.

Outer space ... •..........

c. Biological diversity . . ......

74-75
76-81

151
151

Security and environment ...

82-86

152

87-120
88-93

152
152

94-99

152

D.
IV.

143

INSTRUMENTS OF ENVIRONMENTAL
ACTION .. - . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

A.
B.

Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

143

V. Resolutions adopted on the repons of the Second Commlttee
C. Legislation and environmental
law .................... .
D. Awareness building and training .................... • •
E. Institutions ............ .

100-104

153

(k) The safeguarding of species is a moral obligation of humankind,
and should ímprove and sustain human well-being;

105-109
110-120

153
153

(/) Building awareness at various levels of environmental conditions
and management through the provision of information, education and
training is essential for environmental protection and improvement;
(m) Strategies to deal with environmental challenges have to be flexible and should allow for adjustments to emerging problems and evolving
environmental management technology;

l.

INTRODUCTION

l. Awareness of environmental issues has been growing during the
past decade. This awareness has emerged among and within the Govemments as they have addressed environmental problems singly, bilaterally,
regionally and globally. The establishment ofministries for environmental conservation and enhancement is but one sign of this growth of common concem. Much of this concem has crystallized in the decisions of
the Goveming Council of the United Nations Environment Programme.
Despite these noteworthy developments, and the emergence in the world
community of many shared perceptions regarding environmental problems and actions, environmental degradation has continued unabated,
threatening human well-being and, in sorne instances, the very survival
of life on our planet.
2. To meet this challenge, the overall aspirational goal must be sustainable development on the basis of prudent management of available
global resources and environmental capacities, and the rehabilitation of
the environment previously subjected to degradation and misuse. Development is sustainable when it meets the needs of the present without
compromising the ability of future generations to meet theirs.
3. The following are sorne shared perceptions of Govemments of the
nature of environmental issues and their interrelations with other international problems and the eff'orts to deal with them:
(a) An international atmosphere of peace, security and co-operation,
free from the presence and the threat of wars of ali types, especially nuclear war, in which intellectual and natural resources are not wasted on
armaments by any nation, would greatly enhance environmentally sound
development;
(b) The imbalance ofpresent world economic conditions mak.es it extremely diflicult to bring about sustained improvement in the world's environmental situation. Accelerated and balanced world development and
lasting improvements in the global environment require improved world
economic conditions, especially in the developing countries;
(e) Since mass poverty is often at the root of environmental degradation, its elimination and ensuring equitable access of people to environmental resources are essential for sustained environmental improvements;
(d) The environment puts constraints on as well as provides opportunities for economic growth and social well-being. Environmental degradation, in its various forms, has assumed such proportions as can cause
irreversible changes in ecosystems which threaten to undermine human
well-being. Environmental constraints, however, are generally relative to
the state of technology and socio-economic conditions, which can and
should be improved and managed to achieve sustained world economic
growth;
(e) Environmental issues are closely intertwined with development
policies and practices; consequently, environmental goals and actions
need to be defined in relation to development objectives and policies;
(/) Although it is important to tackle immediate environmental
problems, anticipatory and preventive policies are the most eff'ective and
economical in achieving environmentally sound development;
(g) The environmental impacts of actions in one sector are often felt
in other sectors; thus, intemalization of environmental considerations in
sectoral policies and programmes and their co-ordination are essential
for the achievement of sustainable development;
(h) Since conflicts of interest among population groups, or among
countries, are often inherent in the nature of environmental problems,
participation of the concerned parties is essential in determining effective
environmental management practices;
(¡) Environmental degradation can be controlled and reversed only
by ensuring that the parties causing the damage will be accountable for
their actions, and that they will participa te, on the basis of ful! access to
available knowledge, in improving environmental conditions:
(J) Renewable resources, as part of complex and interlinked ecosystems, can have sustainable yields only if used while taking into account
system-wide effects of exploitation;

(n) lntemational environmental disputes, which are growing in
number and variety, need to be resolved by peaceful means.
4. Environmental problems cut across a range of policy issues and
are mostly rooted in inappropriate developrnent patterns. Consequently,
environmental issues, goals and actions cannot be framed in ísolation
from the development and policy sectors from which they emanate.
Against this background, and in the light of General Assembly resolution 38/161 of 19 December 1983, the present document reflects an inter•
govemmental consensus on growing environmental challenges to the
year 2000 and beyond, in six main sectors. In addition, the document discusses briefly other issues of global concem whic h dci not fil easily under
the sectoral headings and considers instruments for environmental action, including the role of ínstitutíons in dealing with environmental issues. Throughout the Environmental Perspective, an attempt has been
made to reflect consistently the interdependent and integrated nature of
environmental issues. Under each sectoral heading, this document covers: the issue; the outlook; the goal to be aspired to in dealing with the issue; and recommended action. While drawing upon the report of the
World Commission on Environment and Development, the Environmental Perspective has sought to delineate, in an organized manner, the
elements of shared perceptions, environmental issues, aspirational goals
and the agenda for action envisaged for the Environmental Perspective
by the Goveming Council and the General Assembly.

11.

SECTORAL ISSUES

A.

l.

Papulation

lssue and outlook

S. lssue: The optimum contribution of human resources for the
achievement of sustainable development has not been realized. Yet popu•
lation levels, growth and distribution will continue to overload the capacities of the environment in many countries. Rapid population growth,
among other factors, has exacerbated poverty. The negative interaction
between population and environment has tended to create social tensions.

6. Outlook: People are the most valuable asset anywhere for the betterment of economic and social conditions and the quality of \ife. Yet, in
a number of countries, the momentum of population growt h today, coupled with poverty, environmental degradation andan unfavourable economic situation, has tended to create serious disequilibria between population and environment and to aggravate the problem of "environmental
refugees". Traditions and social altitudes, especially in rural areas, have
been a major impediment to populatíon planning.
7. World population may exceed 6 billion by the year 2000. Severa!
countries have achieved population equilíbrium as deftned by low birth
and death rates and high life expectancies. But, for a large part of the developing world, this has not happened because of unfavourable economic
conditions. Over 90 per cent of the net addition to the world's population
between now and the year 2025, when the world population may exceed
8 billion, will occur in the developing countries. Many of them already
suff'er from desertification, fuelwood deficits, and loss of forests. Population planning would help, but is not sufficient, to achieve equilibrium between populatíon and environmental capacities. Countries have not yet
related population planníng to development planning, nor have they
linked population and environmental action for mutually reinforcing improvements. Equally, there is the need for more concem for human progress and social justice as factors influencing human resources development and environmental improvement.
2.

Goal and recommended action

8. Goa /: The achievement over time of such a balance between population and environmental capacities as would make possible sustainable
development, keeping in view the links between population levels, consumption patterns, poverty and the natural resource base.

144

General Aaembly-Forty-second Selsion

9. Recommended action:
(a) Development planning which takes into account environmental
considerations should be an importan! instrument in achieving population goals. Countries should identify the rural and urban areas with acute
population pressures on the environment. The environmental problems
of large cities in developing countries should receive special attention. As
poverty increases, economic development decreases and population rates
grow, development plans should give special attention to population•
related programmes aimed at improving environmental conditions at local levels;
(b) Significan! changes in natural resources should be monitored and
anticipated. This information should be fed back into sub-national and
national development plans and related to the planning of spatial distribution of populations;
(e) Land and water use and spatial planning should bring about a
balanced distribution of population through, for example, incentives for
industrial location, and for resettlement and development of intermediate-sized towns, keeping in view the capacities of the environment;
(d) Public works, including food-for-work programmes, should be
designed and implemented in areas of environmental stress and population pressures, with a view to providing employment and simultaneously
improving the environment;
(e) Governments and voluntary organizations should increase public
understanding, through formal and non-formal education, of the significance of population planning for environmental improvement and the
importan! role of local action. The role of women in improving the environment and in population planning should receive special attention, as
social changes that raise the status of women can have a profound eff'ect
in bringing down population growth rates;
(/) Prívate enterprise, and industry in particular, should participate
actively in the work of governmental and non-governmental organizations aimed al relieving population and environmental stress;
(g) Education should be geared towards making people more capable of dealing with problems of excessive population density. Such educa•
tion should help people acquire practica! and vocational skills to enable
them to become more self-reliant and enhance their participation in the
improvement of the environment at the local leve);
(h) lnternational agencies, notably, the United Nations Fund for
Population Activities, the United Nations Children's Fund, the International Labour Organisation, the World Health Organization and the
World Food Programme, should give priority attention to the geographical arcas experiencing acule population pressures on the environment.
They should reftect sensitivity to environmental improvement in the design and implementation of their population-related programmes. Multilateral and bilateral development assistance should be increased to finance innovative projects to make population programmes more
eff'ective by relating them to environmental improvement;
(1) Population policies must have a broader focus than controlling
numbers. Governments should work on severa) fronts: to achieve and
maintain population equilibrium, to expand the carrying capacity ofthe
environment and improve health and sanitation at local levels, to develop
human resources through education and training, and to ensure equitable distribution of the benefits of economic growth.
B. Food and agriculture
Jssue and outlook
IO. Jssue: The shortage of food in many developing countries creates
insecurity and environmental threats. The quest to meet rapidly growing
food needs, combined with insufficient attention to the environmental
impact of agricultura! policies and practices, has been causing great environmental damage. This includes: degradation and depletion in the form
of loss of soil and forests; drought and desertification; loss and deterioration of the quality of surface and ground water; reduction in genetic
diversity and of fish stocks; damage to the sea ftoor; waterlogging, salinization, and siltation; soil, water and air pollution; and eutrophication
caused by improper use of fertilizers and pesticides and by industrial effluents.
11. Outlook: While food production capabilities have increased
greatly over the last three decades, self-reliance in food production has
not been achieved in many countries. In the absence of proper environmental management, the conversion of forests and grassland into crop·
land will increase land degradation. For example, in sub-Saharan Africa
desertification and frequent droughts are major concerns causing largescale migration from rural areas. In most developing countries the pressure on the natural resources, including those in the public domain, is a
1.

serious concern. In sorne developed countries loss of land productivity
from excessive use of chemicals and loss of prime quality land to urbanization are major concerns.
12. Soil erosion has increased in ali regions: increased intensity of
land use has resulted in the reduction of fallowing which, in turn, has undermined soil conservation, management of moisture and control of
weeds and diseases in small holder agriculture. The main causes of soil
erosion have been deforestation, overgrazing and overworking of farmland. Inappropriate patterns of land use and inadequate access to land
are other factors which have been at work. Sorne off'-site impacts have
been flooding, reduction in hydro-electric capacity, reduced Iife ofirrigation systems and declines in fish catches. The world's rivers may be carrying 24 billion tons of sediment to the seas annually. Technologies
which make optima! use of natural resources, minimum tillage, fallowing
and drought-, pest- and disease-resistant varieties, combined with mixed
cropping, crop rotation, terracing and agro-forestry, have kept erosion
under control in sorne places.
13. Nearly one third of ali Iand is al risk of desertification. Over the
last quarter century the population in arid lands has increased by more
than 80 per cent. Since the adoption in 1977 of the Plan of Action to
Combat Desertification55 awareness of the problem has grown and so
have organizational eff'orts to deal with it. But the basic elements of the
action needed, namely, to stop the process, to rehabilitate degraded
lands, and to ensure their eff'ective management, do not yet receive the attention they urgently need. Although long-term economic returns on investments in the control of dryland degradation are high, insufficient resources are being devoted to it.
14. Forests cover approximately one third of all land. Tropical forests occupy over l.9 billion hectares, of which l.2 billion hectares are
closed forests, and the remaining open tree formations. Although the rate
of tree plantations in the tropics has accelerated recently (about 1.1 million hectares annually), it amounts to only about one tenth ofthe rate of
deforestation. Use of forest land for agriculture through shifting or sedentary cultivation, increasing demand for fuelwood, unmanaged clearance and logging, burning and conversion for pastoral purposes are the
main factors behind tropical deforestation. In semi-humid and dry climates fire can be a significan! cause as well. Widespread deforestation has
brought about far-reaching changes in tropical forest ecosystems, which
no Jonger can perform well their essential functions of water retention,
climate control, soil conservation and provision of livelihood.
15. Timber, an increasingly scarce commodity, has become the subject of extensive international negotiations. The lnternational Tropical
Timber Agreement, ratified in 1985, aims at promoting international
trade in industrial wood and environmental management of tropical forests. The Tropical Forestry Action Plan, prepared under the auspices of
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, puts forward five priority areas aimed at: forestry Jand use planning, forestrybased industrial development, fuelwood and energy planning, conservation of tropical forest ecosystems and institutional support for better
forestry management.
16. There have been significan! changes in weather patterns as a result in part ofloss of forests and vegetation cover. This has reduced river
ftows and lake levels and also lowered agricultura! productivity. Irrigation has greatly improved arability in many arcas of uncertain, or inadequate, rainfall. It has also been playing a vital role in the Green Revolution. Inappropriate irrigation, however, has wasted water, washed out
nutrients and, through salinization and alkalinization, damaged the productivity of millions of hectares. Globally, salinization alone may be
removing as much land from production as the land being irrigated, and
about half of the land under surface irrigation may be saline or waterlogged. Excessive use of ground water for irrigation has resulted in lower
water tables and semi-arid conditions.
17. Fisheries potential has not yet been tapped sufficiently or in such
ways as to ensure sustainable yields, particularly in the developing
coastal States, which do not possess the necessary infrastructure, technology or trained manpower to develop and manage fisheries in their exclusive economic zones. Excessive fishing activities have led to overexploitation of severa! important fish stocks and the exhaustion of sorne. By
the year 2000, annual fish supplies may fall short of demand by about 10
to 15 million tons. Regional agreements on co-ordination of national fishing policies for licensing procedures, catch reporting, monitoring and
surveillance have begun to consider sustainability ofyields and use of appropriate technology. The World Conference on Fisheries Management

SSReport ofthe United Nations Conference on Desertification, Nairobi,
29 August-9 September 1977 (A/CONF.74/36), chap. l.

V.

Resolutlons adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

and DevelopmentS6 established a framework and programmes of action
for fisheries management.
18. Freshwater fish fanning and aquaculture now produce annually
about 8 million tons of fish. In Europe and in South and South-East Asia,
aquaculture has made important strides. Whether as part of a traditional
way ofsupplementing fann incomes and protein intake oras an industry,
carefully practised aquaculture holds great promise for integrated environmental management and rural development in many countries.
19. The use of high-yielding seed varieties has multiplied agricultura!
output but has led to a reduction in the genetic diversity of crops and an
increase in their vulnerability to diseases and pests. The emerging technology ofdirect gene transfer, or transfer ofthe symbiotic nitrogen-fixing
capacity of leguminous crops to cereals, can greatly increase production
and reduce costs. Also, the spread of gene banks, through the Intemational Board for Plant Genetic Resources, and the work of the Intemational Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology should improve the prospects for genetic diversity, and thereby enhance
agricultura! productivity.
20. Overuse of pesticides has polluted water and soil, damaging the
ecology of agriculture and creating hazards for human and animal
health. Pesticides have to be used to increase agricultura! production, but
their indiscriminate use has destroyed natural predators and other nontarget species and increased resistance in target pests. More than 400 insect species are believed to be resistan! to pesticides and their number is
increasing.
21. Use of chemical fertilizers per capita has increased fivefold between 1950 and 1983. In sorne countries excessive use offertilizers, along
with household and industrial effluents, has caused eutrophication of
lakes, canals, irrigation reservoirs, and even coastal seas through runoffs
ofnitrogen compounds and phosphates. Ground water has also been polluted by nitrates in many places, and nitrate levels in rivers have risen
steadily over the last two decades. Degradation of the quality of surface
and ground water, caused by chemicals, including nitrates, has been a
significant problem in developed and developing countries alike.
22. In North America, Western Europe and sorne other areas, food
surpluses have accumulated as a result in part of farm price subsidization. The push to produce more in response to incentives, coupled with
excessive use of fertilizers and pesticides, has led to degradation and soil
erosion in sorne countries. Similarly, export subsidization of food grains
by sorne countries has undennined agricultura! exports of sorne others,
and also led to environmental neglect of fannland. In sorne countries,
however, there is a trend towards reducing the scale of fanning, encouraging organic fanning, restoring the natural beauty of the countryside and diversifying the rural economy.
23. In the developing countries, fanners receive too little for their
produce, and production is thereby discouraged. City dwellers often buy
food at subsidized prices, and peasants may receive only a fraction of the
market price. In countries where farmers have begun to receive better
prices for their produce, agricultura! production has increased and soil
and water management has improved. When equitable agricultura!
prices are accompanied by technical assistance for environmental management of farming, they can help improve the quality oflife in the countryside as well as in cities, partly by stemming the flow of rural-urban migration. Upward adjustment of food prices is, however, a politically
sensitive issue, especially in situations of low resource productivity, low
income, large-scale unemployment and slow economic growth.
2. Goal and recommended action
24. Goal: The achievement of food security without resource depletion or environmental degradation, and restoration of the resource base
where environmental damage has been occurring.
25. Recommended action:
Policies of Govemments for using agricultura! land, forests and
water resources should take into account degradation trends as well as
evaluation of potentials. Agricultura! policies should vary from region to
region to reflect different regional needs, encouraging fanners to adopt
practices that are ecologically sustainable in their own areas and promote
national food security. Local communities should be involved in the design and implementation of such policies;
(a)

145

(b) Policy distortions that have caused undue pressures on marginal
lands, or taken away prime farmland for urbanization, or led to environmental neglect of natural resources, have to be identified and eliminated;
(e) Govemments should design and implement regulatory measures,
as well as taxation and price policies and incentives, aimed at ensuring
that the right of awning agricultura! land carries an obligation to sustain
its productivity. Long-terrn agricultura! credits should require fanners to
undertake soil conservation practices, including keeping a portian of
land fallow, where appropriate;
(d) Govemments should promote equity in means for food production and in distribution. Govemments should design and implement
comprehensive agrarian refonns to improve the levels of living of fann
workers who lack land. Govemments should take decisive action to tum
the terms of trade in favour of farmers, through pricing policy and govemment expenditure reallocation;
(e) Govemments should ascertain direct and indirect environmental
impacts of altemative crop, forestry and land use pattems. Fiscal and
trade policies should be based on such environmental assessments. Govemments should give priority to establishing a national policy and to
creating or strengthening institutions to restare arcas where natural factors and land use practices have reduced productivity;
(j) In the national development plans and agricultura! programmes
of countries experiencing desertification, dryland rehabilitation and
management have to figure prominently. Better systems of early warning
against drought and other dryland disasters have to be developed, with
the World Meteorological Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the United Nations Environment Programme and the relevant regional organizations playing appropriate
roles;
(g) Sound forest policies should be based on an analysis of the
capacity of the forests and the land under them to perfonn various functions. Programmes to conserve forest resources should start with the local people. Contracts covering forest use will have to be negotiated or
renegotiated to ensure sustainability. Clear-cutting of large forest arcas
should be a voided and replanting of logged forestry areas should be required. Portions offorests should be designated as protected areas to conserve soil, water, wildlife and genetic resources in their natural habitat;
(h) Social and economic costs of deforestation, including clearcutting, have to be estimated and reported on in relation to the periodic
national reporting on the economic performance of forestry. Similarly,
the damage costs ofwaterlogging and salinization have to be reported in
conjunction with the reporting on irrigation and agricultura! production.
The loss of land to deserts and its consequences for food production,
trade, employment and income have to be made part of the annual reporting on economic growth. Economic policies and planning have to reflect such environmental accounting;

(1) In areas experiencing deforestation and lack of forest resources,
economic and other incentives should be introduced to manage forests
and woody vegetation from an environmental standpoint and to promote
tree nurseries, tree farming and fuelwood plantations. Local communities should be encouraged to take majar responsibility for such undertakings;
(J) Projects should be designed and implemented to promote afforestation, agro-forestry systems, water management and soil conservation
measures, such as land contour-levelling and terracing, in areas of environmental stress. Such projects should respond to the needs of the local
people for food, fodder and fue!, while increasing the long-term productivity of natural resources. Environmental improvement schemes should
become a regular part of national relíef, rural employment and incomesupport schemes to sustain development in regions prone to drought or
other environmental stress;

(k) Within the framework of a national water policy, which should
facilitate an intersectoral and integrated approach to water development
and use, technical, economic and organizational means have to be geared
to improving efficiency of water use in farrning and animal husbandry.
Emphasis on ground-water storage in drylands should improve assurance of water availability. lmprovements in water application techniques
to minimize wastage, co-ordination of fanning pattems with water supply, and such pricing of water as would cover the cost of its collection,
storage and supply, should be introduced to conserve water in scarcity

areas;
56 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Report

of the FAO World Conference on Fisheries Management and
Development, Rome, 27 June-6 Ju/y 1984.

(/) In the choice of technology and the scale of irrigation environmental costs and benefits should be taken into account. Decentralized
and small-scale irrigation have to receive special attention. Proper drainage to preven! salinization and waterlogging has to accompany irriga-

146

General Assembly-Forty•second Session

t1on. Development assistance has to play a vital role in improving productivity of existing irrigation, reducing its environmental damage and
adapting it to the needs of small-scale, diversified agriculture;
(m) The traditional rights of subsistence farmers, particularly shifting cultivators, pastoralists, and nomads, must be protected from encroachment. Provision ofinfrastructure, services and information should
help modernize nomadic life-styles without damaging their traditionally
harmonious relationships with ecosystems. Programmes of land clearance and resettlement should be based on an assessment of their environmental, along with their social and economic, impacts. Agro-industry,
mining and schemes of geographical dispersa! of settlements should also
aim at improving environmental conditions in rural areas;
(11) Public education, information campaigns, technical assistance,
training, legislation, standard setting and incentives should be oriented
toward encouraging the use of organic matter in agriculture. The use of
fertilizers and pesticides has to be guided, in ter a/ia, through training,
awareness building and appropriate price policies, so as to establish integrated nutrient supply systems responsive to environmental impacts.
Similarly, subsidies, which have led to the overuse or abuse of chemical
ferrilizers and pesticides, have to be phased out;
(o) Decentralized storage facilities, with the upgrading oftraditional
methods to ensure protection of stored grains, should receive attention in
the planning of support services for rural and agricultura) development;
(p) Where the agricultura! frontier has extended in an uncontrolled
manner, Governments should make special efforts to expand the area under woodland and nature reserves;
(q) Satellite imagery, aerial photography and geographical information systems of assessing and monitoring should be deployed to establish
natural resource data bases. Such data should be made available, freely
or ata nominal charge, to the countries in need. The United Nations Env1ronment Programme should co-ordinate international programmes in
t his field. Such data collection and their socio-economic analyses should
facilitate the design and implementation ofland use and natural resource
development plans, and improve international co-operation in the environmental management of t ransboundary natural resources;
(r) In international co-operation, priority should be given to schemes
aimed at strengthening skills and instítutional capabilities in the developing countries in fields such as applied genetics, agro-forestry, organic recycling, integrated pest management, crop rotation, drainage, soilconserving ploughing, sand-dune stabilization, small-scale irrigation and
environmentally sound management of fresh-water systems;
(s) Biotechnology, including tissue culture, conversion of biomass
into useful produce, micro-electronics and information technology,
should be deployed, after assessing carefully their environmental impacts
and cost effectiveness, with a view to promoting environmental management of agriculture. Governments should enhance the access of farmers
to such technologies through national policies and international cooperation. Research should be intensified on new technologies urgently
needed in regions wh1ch have unreliable rainfall, uneven topography,
and poor soils. Governments should also set up targets for the development of cadres of professionals specializing in environmental management of soil, water and forests and in biotechnology with a multidisciplinary and integrated outlook;
( r) Aquaculture should be developed to the fullest, where possible in
conJunction with farming, using low-cost, simple, labour-intensive technology. Co-operation for environmental management of marine living
resources and fisheries should be intensified, through technical assistance
as well as conventíons and agreements;
(u) Beca use of women 's importan! role in agriculture in man y developing countries, they should be provided with adequate education and
training npportunities. They should also have the necessary power to
take decisions regarding agriculture and forestry programmes;
(v) Distortions in the structure ofthe world food market should be
minimized, and the focus of production should be shifted to food deficit
countries. In developed countries incentive systems should be changed to
discourage overproduction and foster improved soil and water management. Governments must recognize that all parties lose through protectionist barriers, and redesign trade and tax policies using environmental
and economic criteria;
(w) International agreements should be concluded in respect of
agricultura! price policies, with a view to minimizing waste and mismanagement of food and natural resources in agriculture. Such agreements
should aim at bringing about an international division of labour in
agriculture in confonnity with the long-tenn capabilities of countries in
agricultura! production. In this context, consideration should be given to

strengthening the work of the World Food Programme through the establishment of a world food bank from which countries could draw food
supplies in emergency situations;
(x) Special attention should be given to protection and careful development of wetlands, particularly in view of their long-term economic
value;
(y) Sustainable exploitation of living wild resources should receive
special consideration in the light of its contribution to achieving food
security.

C.
l.

Energy

Issue and ourlook

26. Issue: There are vast disparities in the patterns of energy consumption. Accelerated economic growth and growing populations require a rapid expansion in energy production and consumption. Major
problems in this regard include: depletion of the supplies of, and inadequate access to, fuelwood, and environmental impacts of fossil energy
production, transmission and use, for example, acidification of the environment, accumulation of greenhouse gases and consequent climatic
change. Although energy is crucial to the development process, there has
been little concerted action to balance environmental imperatives andenergy demands.
27. Outlook: About three fourths of the world's energy consumption
is in the form of fossil fuels: oíl, coal, and natural gas. The remainder is
supplied mainly by biomass, hydropower and nuclear power. The main
problems caused by fossil fue! use are: air pollution, acidification of soil,
fresh water and forests, and climatic change, especially warming of the
atmosphere. The costs of controlling these problems and of dealing with
their environmental and health impacts have been enormous. New and
renewable sources of energy, including solar, wind, ocean and geothermal, are being developed but are unlikely to make a significan! contribution during the rest of this century
28. International oíl prices are fluctuating. The immediate economic
impact of lower prices has been significant, yet the momentum of efforts
to improve energy efficiency and to develop alternatives for fossil fuels,
which began in the wake of high oil prices, may decline.
29. Though developing countries account for about one third of the
world's energy consumption, many of them do not have adequate access
to energy. Most of them depend on oíl imports and on biomass and animal energy. Wood, which provides energy to about half of the world's
people, is becoming scarce, and overcutting has devastated the environment. Sorne countries have made progress in developing biogas while improving the environment, but the potential of biogas remains largely untapped. Given the needs of industrialization and the trends of population
growth, energy needs will increase tremendously during the coming
decades. lf energy efficiency measures are not put in place, it will not be
possible to meet those needs.
30. Many countries have made efforts to control air pollution by setting standards and íntroducing appropriate equipment in factories as
well as automobiles, and by developing clean technologies for cooking,
space heating, industrial processes and power generation. But attempts
to deal with urban and industrial air pollution have often effectively
transported the problem, for example, in the form of acid deposition, to
other areas and countries. At least 5 to 6 per cent ofthe European forests
may have already died because of acidification. As a first step, sorne
European countries have agreed on a technical co-operation programme
to monitor and control long-range transmission of sorne air pollutants.
Reducing emissions of sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxides, however, is
rather costly, although effective reduction technologies have been introduced in sorne countries. On the other hand, no effective technologies exíst to control carbon dioxide accumulation which can markedly change
climatc. Moreover, available technology is not being fully utilized. The
dilli.:ulty is to determine up to what leve! the damage costs of polluting
fossil fuels should be accepted and how much to invest in scientific research to develop clean technologies.
31. Energy is often used in wasteful ways. The costs of this waste are
being borne by all, but mostly by the poor_ Moreover, part of these costs
are being transferred to children, future gcnerations and other countries.
Severa! countries have experimented successfully over the last decade
with conservation of energy for domestic use, improved efficiency of energy in industry and agriculture and adoption of energy mixes to minimize environmental damage. In sorne countries the nature of industrial
growth has been changing in ways which economize on energy, for example, rapid growth of electronic, recreation and service industries. Conse-

V.

147

Resolutions adopted on tbe reporta of tbe Second Committee

quently, there has been a noticeable delinking of economic growth from
increase in energy consumption. Energy savings, renewable sources and
new technologies can reduce energy consumption while maintaining the
momentum of economic growth.
32. While oil exploration and coa! mining have received great attention, the potential of natural gas has not been realized. Considerable
quantities are being wasted in the absence of necessary infrastructure and
investment. The world also has a relatively untapped capacity to develop
hydropower. In the past, environmental planning has not received adequate attention in hydropower development. Decentralized small-scale
hydropower schemes are not yet used on a significan! scale, although
they may be capable of providing economical, efficient and environmentally sound sources of energy.
33. Nuclear energy is widely used as a source of electricity, and the
lntemational Atomic Energy Agency has formulated guidelines to ensure that it is developed and used safely. The problems associated with it
include the risk of accidental contamination, which can spread quickly
over long distances, and the safe handling and disposal of radioactive
wastes, including decommissioned nuclear reactors.

tion to their environmental impacts. Technologies to develop renewable
sources of energy, such as wind, geo-thermal and especially solar, should
receive particular attention. lnternational co-operation should facilitate
this process;
(h) lnternational co-operation should aim at the creation of a régime
for the safc production and use ofnuclear encrgy, as well as the safe handling of radioactive waste, taking into account, through appropriate
mechanisms including prior consultations, the interests and concems of
countries that have decided not to produce nuclear energy, in particular
concems regarding the siting of nuclear plants close to their borders.
This régime should extend globally to encompass observanoe of comparable standards and procedures on management of reactors and the sharing of information and technology for nuclear safety. The Convention on
Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and the Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emcrgency57
should be complemented by bilateral and subregional agreements and
should also lead to technical co-operation among countries on environmental management of nuclear energy.
D.

Goal and recommended action
34. Goal: The provision of sufficient energy at reasonable cost, notably by increasing access to energy substantially in the developing countries, to meet current and expanding needs in ways that minimize environmental degradation and risks, conserve non-renewable sources of
energy and realize the full potential of renewable sources of energy.
35. Recommended action:
(a) Govemments' energy plans should systematically take into account environmental requirements. E.nergy efficiency policies coupled
with environmentally sound energy production and appropriate energy
mixes should be pursued to achieve sustainable energy consumption pattems. National eff'orts should be supported by intemational cooperation, especially scientific research, establishment of standards and
transfer of technology and information;
(b) Energy pricing, taxation, trade and other policies should take
into account the environmental costs of ali forms of energy. Subsidies for
fossil fuels should be progressively phased out. Prívate enterprise, consumers and govemment institutions should be provided with economic
incentives to make greater use of renewable sources of energy. Where
needed, intemational co-operation should facilitate the exploration for
and environmentally sound production of energy;
(e) lnformation should be made available on the harmful environmental impacts of intensive use of fossil fuels. Urban and industrial air
pollution, accumulation of greenhouse gases and the attendant climatic
change, as well as transfrontier transport of air pollutants in al1 regions
must receive urgent attention, including monitoring by appropriate
methods. Standards must be set and enforced within and among countries, and conventions and agreements should be concluded to deal with
these problems. In this context, the "polluter pays principie" should be
accepted. Govemments should ensure that clean technologies are put
into practice on a wider scale Iban in the past at the local level. The
United Nations system, in conjunction with other intergovemmental
bodies, should improve access to information on renewable sources of energy and on efficient energy use;
(d) In view of the significance of fuelwood, natíonal programmes of
aff'orestation and of environmental management of woodlands should receive increased resources. Agro-forestry programmes, tree plantations
and village woodlots should receive special encouragement in countries
experiencing fuelwood deficit. Commercial cutting offuelwood should be
subjected to rigorous scrutiny and control, in view of its environmental
costs. Application of fuel-efficient stoves and charcoal should be encouraged. Pricing of fuelwood should be guided by the consideration of
sustaining supplies consistent with needs;
(e) As biogas can be an important source of energy, the existing technology for the use of agricultura!, animal and human wastes should be
applied more widely by means ofincentives and guidance. Technical cooperation among developing countries should play a vital part in this
process, bearing in mind its sanitation and agricultura! benefits;
(f) Decisions on large-scale hydropower projects should be guided by
analysis of social costs and benefits in the light of likely environmental
impacts. Small-scale hydropower schemes should receive particular attention since they could facilitate simultaneous attainment of environmental, economic and social objectives;
(g) Renewable energy sources should receive high priority and
should be applied on a wider scale than in the past, giving full considera-

Industry

2.

1.

lssue and outlook
36. Issue: Industrial development brings obvious benefits, but it frequently entails damage to the environment and to human health. The
main negative impacts are: wasteful use and depletion of scarce natural
resources; air, water and soil pollution; congestion, noise and squalor; accumulation of hazardous wastes; and accidents with significant environmental consequences. lndustrialization pattems and the consequent cxploitation of natural resources and environmental degradation have been
markedly unbalanced. The prospect for accelerated, yet environmentally
sound, world industrial development is slim in the absence of concerted
intemational action.
37. Outlook: Although sorne eff'orts to deal with cnvironmental problems of industry have been made, negative impacts will grow in magnitude if not addressed methodically now. A promising trend is the steadily
growing awareness of industrial environmental risks throughout the
world. While this awareness increasingly informs and inftuences public
policy, environmental knowledge remains as yet markedly unevcn. In thc
absence of mechanisms for the unhindcred sharing of environmental
knowledge, Govemments and industry may import hazardous materials
and allow establishment of processes discarded clsewherc. lnadequate
knowledge at the grassroots level of changes in thc environment, and of
their causes as well as economic implications, impedes participation of
the conccrned people in decision-making on siting of industrial plants
and choice of industrial technology.
38. Natural resources have been used wastefully in industry. Recently, a number of countries have made significant progress in developing and adopting low-waste and clean industrial technologies and in
recovering as well as recycling scarce industrial raw materials. New
materials and processing technologies have made it possible to save raw
materials and energy resources and to reduce environmental stress. Nevertheless, in many countries resource-intensive processes persist in the
absence of suitable policies and access to proper technology.
39. Uncontrolled industrial practices have led to unacceptably high
levels of harmful or toxic substances in the air, the pollution of rivers,
lakes, coastal waters and soil, the destruction of forests, and the accumulation of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases which threaten to
cause climatic changes, including a global warming of the atmosphere.
Sea levels rnay rise considerably as a result. Industrial production and
emission of chlorofluorocarbons threaten a significant depletion of the
ozone !ayer, leading to increased ultraviolet radiation.
40. Recently, there has been an increase in the seriousness of industrial accidents, particularly in the chemicals industry. Even in the developed countries, the state of preparedness to meet such contingencies has
been inadequate. Also, frameworks for international co-operation in
such situations have been lacking. A crucial problem has been the lack of
timely warning and of full sharing of information on the nature and magnitude of the hazards al local and regional levels.
4 l. With industrial growth and spread, the transport, storage and
disposal of chemical, toxic and radioactive wastes will pose an increasingly serious challenge. The "polluter pays principie" has been applied
with good results in sorne countries, but in many others it is still not ap57 See lntemational Atom1c Energy Agency, Final Document,
Resolutions and Conventions adopted by the first special session of the
General Conference, 24-26 Seprember 1986, sects. 1-IV.

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

148

plied at ali, so that the source of environmental damage often is not held
accountable for the harm caused. In the pursuit of rapid industrialization, sorne polluting industries may be relocated from other countries. As
rnany developing countries do not possess the technical or institutional
capability to analyse or monitor environmental implications of industrial
processes, products or wastes, they are vulnerable to industrial environrnental damage.
42. Many developed countries have successfully applied technology,
policies and institutional and legislative frameworks to deal with industrial pollution. Severa! have succeeded in innovating or applying lowwaste or clean technologies. The lndustry and Environment Office of the
United Nations Environment Programme has produced publications
with extensive and detailed information on environmentally sound technologies in specific industries. Thus, although environmental hazards of
industrial processes, products and wastes persist, there is available considerable experience, expertise and technology to preven! industrial accidents and implement environmentally responsible practices.
43. Technical innovation has opened up promising opportunities for
achieving mutually supportive economic and environmental objectives.
Properly guided technology can transform patterns of industrialization
and improve the international division of labour. Innovation in microelectronics and opto-electronics has revolutionized information and
communications industries and could lead to geographical dispersa! of
industry. These innovations hold promise for developing countries suffering from the twin problems of excessive industrial concentration in urban areas and relative neglect of rural areas.
44. In the decades ahead, the developing countries will depend more
and more on industry, including processing of their own raw materials,
for incomes and employment. In contras!, in sorne developed countries,
the pattern of industry is changing in the direction of knowledgeintensive, energy-saving, and materials-saving activities. Moreover, leisure and service indus1ries have begun to play a significan! part in this
change.
45. Countries have been coming together to forge agreements on preventive measures to contain global, regional and transfrontier environmental impacts of industrial products and processes. Examples of this
encouraging trend include: conventions and protocols for the control of
land-based sources of marine pollution within the frameworks of various
regional seas programmes; the Vienna Convention for the Protection of
the Ozone Layer and the evolving international consensus on the control
of emission of chlorofluorocarbons; the Convention on Long-range
Transboundary Air Pollution and its Co-operative Programme for the
Monitoring and Evaluation of Long-range Transmission of Air Pollutants in Europe; and the Cairo Guidelines and Principies for the Environmentally Souhd Management of Hazardous Wastes,48 sponsored by
the United Nations Environrnent Programme. Such international cooperation can extend into man y areas of industrial environrnental management and many geographical regions. Moreover, industry itself, following the World lndustry Conference on Environmental Management
convened in 1984 by the United Nations Environment Prograrnme, is increasingly ready to undertake environmental responsibilities.
2.

Goal and recommended action

46. Goal: Sustaíned improvernents in levels of living in ali countries,
especially the developing countries, through industrial development that
prevents or minimizes environmental damage and risks.
47.

Recommended action:

Governments should implement policies to assist in the transition of economies characterized by the wasteful use of natural resources
and raw materials and dependence on their export, to environmentally
sound industrial developrnent. National elforts to plan and implement
environmentally sound industrial policies should be intensified. Governments should introduce incentive schemes to help establish facilities for
recovery and recycling of scarce raw materials. The transfer of industrial
technology and skills from developed to developing countries to arrest
environmental degradation associated with industry should be intemationally supported. The United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Environrnent Programme, the Economic Commission
for Europe, and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization should intensify efforts in this direction;
(a}

(b) Governrnents should introduce programmes to monitor air, soil,
fresh water and coastal pollution from industrial emissions and effluents,
and hazardous industrial activities, where such programrnes do not already exist;

(e) Governments should establish and enforce environmental standards, and should provide fiscal and other incentives to industry for the
retro-fitting of equipment for pollution control. They should also ensure
penalties for non-compliance, in conformity with the "polluter pays principie". International organizations should co-operate with Governments
in establishing global or regional standards;
(el) Governments should require periodic reports by industries on
measures implemented to protect and improve the environment, especially those industries involving high environmental and health risks;
(e) Industrial enterprises should carry out environmental impact and
social cost-benefit analyses prior to the siting and design of industrial
plants. Govemments should ensure that such analyses are carried out
and made public. Governmental policies should facilitate the location of
industries in areas which would relieve urban congestion and encourage
rural development. Industries which use each other's products and
wastes should be located near each other;
(j) Governments and industrial enterprises should be receptive to the
views of citizen groups, community associations, labour organizations
and professional and scientific bodies in arriving at and implementing
decisions on industrial siting, design and technologies to meet the environmental, economic and social needs of the people;
(g) Chambers of commerce and federations of industry should collaborate actively in implementing emissions standards and pollution control measures. They should establish mechanisms to bridge the gap in environmental management knowledge and capabilities among their
members. Such co-operation should also be encouraged among smallscale producers;
(h) Transnational corporations should comply with the environmental legislation ofthe host country, while respecting similar legislation of
the home country. Legislation could include requirements for public environmental audits of the activities of transnational corporations and local enterprises. In accordance with proposed international codes of conduct, transnational corporations should establish progressively in the
host countries !he skills and lechnological capabilities needed for environmentally sound management of industry, even in the absence of legislation on desirable environmental standards;
(1) lnternational industrial collaboration, like national industry,
should be subjected to environmental impact assessments;

(j) Countries, especially developing countries, should, as a matter of
urgency, design and implement research, training and manpowerplanning programmes to strengthen the management of hazardous industrial processes and wastes;
(k) International organizations, including the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the World Health Organization, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the World Meteorological Organization and the International Labour Organisation, and intergovernmental organizations, such as the Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development, and the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance,
should ensure that their programmes will progressively strengthen the
capacities of the developing countries for designing and implementing industrial operations along environmentally sound lines. They should also
assist in establishing or strengthening information services on environmental and health implications of industrial processes, products and
wastes. In addition, access of the developing countries to information
and data on environmentally benign technologies should be promoted,
including risk management techniques;
({) International co-operation for the monitoring of the accumulation of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse ga">Cs and of their impacts
on climate and sea levels must be strengthened to encompass both the
conclusion of international agreements and the formulation of industrial
strategies to mitigate the environmental, economic, and social impacts of
potential changes. Intergovernmental negotiations, based on the Vienna
Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer, should lead to agreements on the reduction of ozone-depleting substances;
(m) Within the framework oftheir existing legal and technical activities, United Nations organizations, especially the United Nations Environment Programme, in closer co-operation with regional organizations,
should progressively establish international agreements and monitoring
mechanisms to deal with spills and other industrial accidents, particularly chemical; to control the transportation, storage, management and
disposal of hazardous industrial wastes; and to settle disputes involving
damages and claims for compensation. United Nations and regional organizations should encourage Governments to extend the "polluter pays
principie" to transboundary problems;

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee
(n) The International Register of Potentially Toxic Chemicals programme of the United Nations Environment Programme should maintain and improve its assistance to Govemments in assessing whether producing, marketing, distributing or disposing of any industrial substances,
including chemicals and wastes, are potentially damaging to health and
environment.
E.
l.

Health and human settlements

lssue and outlook

48. lssue: Despite considerable advances in dealing with problems of
health and human settlements, the environmental basis for further improving the situation is deteriorating. Inadequate shelter and basic
amenities, rural underdevelopment, overcrowded cities and urban decay,
lack of access to clean water, poor sanitation and other environmental
deficiencies continue to cause widespread disease and death, ill-health
and intolerable living conditions in many parts of the world. Poverty,
malnutrition and ignorance compound these problems.
49. Outlook: Human ability to prevent disease has grown greatly
over the last few decades, mainly owing to scientific achievements and
better access to sanitation, clean water and safe waste disposal. In many
developed countries better living conditions have helped prevent disease
and have enhanced average life expectancy. In the developing countries,
however, achievements have lagged behind what is technically feasible.
50. More than 4 million children under the age of five die of diarrhoea in the developing countries annually. Even when it does not cause
death, diarrhoea saps vitality and stops physical and mental growth.
Malaria is another water-borne disease which infects about 100 million
annually. Typhoid and cholera are similarly endemic in the developing
countries. Bilharzia and river blindness are other common diseases
caused by mismanagement of water. Sleeping sickness, caused by the
tsetse fly, elfectively denies the use of vast tracts of land in Africa for pastoral or settlements development. The buming of coal, oil, wood, dung
and agricultura! wastes builds up dangerous concentrations of toxic
gases in houses and factories, and chronic heart and lung diseases, bronchitis, emphysema and asthma are the result.
51. In warm, humid countries where storage is inadequate, aflatoxins
in food cause liver cancer. On the other hand, over-use of fertilizer has
caused excessive nitrate levels in ground water, endangering children's
health, and nitrate run-off's have led to eutrophication of suñace waters
and contamination of shellfish. Phosphates in fertilizer have caused high
concentrations of cadmium in food. Further, pesticides, herbicides and
fungicides pose a direct threat to health in the rural arcas when their use
is not properly guided. Over-use of pesticides has also led to high levels of
pesticide residue in food.
52. About a billion people do not have adequate shelter, and millions
practically live on the streets. By the year 2000, about 2 billion people, or
40 per cent of the developing countries' population, will live in cities and
towns, thereby putting pressure on city planners and Govemments. Most
developing countries already do not have the resources required to provide housing and services to the people who need them. The influx of refugees in sorne developing countries has exacerbated health, shelter and
environmental conditions. Also, where rural settlements are widely dispersed, health, housing and infrastructural services become practically
unattainable.
53. About one third of ali city and town dwellers in the developing
countries live in slums and shanties, with no help or infrastructural support whatever, and often under adverse conditions. The inexorable trend
towards urbanization will ensure that by the year 2000, 15 ofthe world's
20 largest urban metropolitan arcas will be in the developing countries.
Simultaneously, rural environmental degradation reinforces migration to
urban arcas even when people are unable to eam incomes high enough to
ensure decent housing and there is no prospect of meeting their infrastructural needs.
54. There are three main environmental aspects of urbanization:
characteristics of the dwelling -living space, ventilation, sanitation, water supply, waste disposal, recreation space, domestic energy; ambient
environmental situation -air pollution, water pollution, environmental
risks and hazards, noise, stress and crime; and environment of the arca
surrounding the urban centres -iieforestation, soil erosion, changes in
micro-climate. Between a quarter and a half of ali urban residents in the
developing countries live in unhealthy and degraded dwellings. Consequently, diarrhoea, dysentery and typhoid are common, and there are
periodic outbreaks of cholera and hepatitis. Tuberculosis and other respiratory diseases spread easily in ill-ventilated, damp and crowded surroundings.

149

55. Excessive concentrations of industry and commerce in a few urban centres often reflect a dualistic development pattern, implying a relative neglect of rural and agricultura! development. Concentrations of
people, settlements and income and employment opportunities often
become mutually reinforcing in such a situation. People continue to migrate to the urban arcas even if their expected incomes are not high
enough to ensure decent housing, or there is no prospect of their infrastructural needs being met. Thus, the problems of safe disposal of toxic
and hazardous wastes, control of air and water pollution, collection and
disposal of domestic wastes and provision of clean drinking water assume
gígantic proportions, requiring enormous finance and great organizational and technical capabilities. Photochemical smog, oxides of nitrogen
and sulphur, hydrocarbons, lead, mercury, cadmium poisoning, carbon
monoxide, polychlorinated biphenyls, asbestos and other particulate
matter along with the respiratory and gastroenteritic diseases and malnutrition, cause serious damage to public health. The consequent stress of
living in such conditions contributes to social tensions and outbreaks of
violence and unrest. When industrial accidents or natural disasters occur, loss of life and human suff'ering follow on a large scale because of the
congestion, lack of organizational and technical capacities and vulnerability.
56. Heavy urban concentrations have also placed excessive demands
on natural resources and polluted and degraded surrounding arcas. High
land prices have caused good agricultura! land to be used for construction and speculation. Urban firewood demand has led to widespread
deforestation, soil erosion and even changes in micro-climate.
57. The congestion of settlements near factories multiplies the health
risks of chemicals production in the developing countries. The accumulation of toxic wastes and their inappropriate disposal similarly endanger
the health ofmillions. Awareness ofthe risks to human health posed by
environmental contamination has increased greatly. Such risks arise
partly through an absence of environmental regulation and management
capability. Most developed countries have succeeded in reducing environmental pollution and its risks and impacts. International co-operation
has also progressed on severa! fronts: national programmes launched under the International Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation Decade, the
World Health Organization/United Nations Children's Fund Programme on Primary Health Care, the Onchocerciasis Control Programme in Africa in the Volta River basin, the United Nations Environment Programme/World Health Organization/lntemational Labour
Organisation lnternational Program111C on Chemical Safety, the dissemination of information on chemicals of environmental concem through
the lntemational Register of Potentially Toxic Chemicals of the United
Nations Environment Programme, the Intemational Code of Conduct
on the Distribution and Use of Pesticides of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and its accompanying technical
guidelines, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations/United Nations Environment Programme Panel of Experts on Integrated Pest Control, the United Nations Development Programme/
World Bank/World Health Organization Special Programme for
Research and Training in Tropical Diseases, the World Health Organization/Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations/
United Nations Environment Programme Panel of Experts on Environmental Management of Disease Vector Control, the specification of
radiation dose limits by the International Commission on Radiological
Protection, and the two recent intemational Conventions adopted under
the auspices ofthe Intemational Atomic Energy Agency on exchange of
information and assistance in the event of a nuclear accident, 57 are sorne
examples.

2. Goal and recommended action
58. Goal: The provision of improved shelter with access to essential
amenities in a clean and secure setting conducive to health and to the prevention of environment-related diseases, which would, at the same time,
alleviate serious environmental degradation.
59. Recommended action:
(a) Governments should make health and settlements development
an integral part of environmental management of natural resources and
geographically-balanced development. They should address systematically the issue of equity in development to ensure provision of basic
health, housing and amenities for their people;
(b) International co-operation should be intensified in the field of
scientific research to deal with the environmental conditions underlying
tropical diseases;

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

150

(e) Rural development, including natural resources management
and provision of drinking water and sanitation, should receive systematic
attention in public policies. Governments should design and implement,
with the participation of the communities concerned, integrated programmes to improve water supply and management, sanitation and
waste disposal;
(e/) Governments should set targets at national, provincial and district levels for such priority areas as housing, access to clean water and
sanitation, and control of air pollution in urban areas;
(e) To reduce adverse environmental impacts of transportation,
especially in highly populated areas, Governments should give priority
to facilitaring commuting between residen tia] and working areas, enforcing emission standards for vehicles, encouraging fuel efficiency and improving rraffic management policies and urban planning;

(fJ Intermediate-sized towns should receive particular attention in
programmes of industrial and settlement development;
(g) Governments should create an "enabling environment", in which
the creativity and resources of people are mobilized to improve the health
conditions, shelter and environmental information at local levels. This
should include collection and disposal of domestic, agricultura( and human wastes, land use planning, area development and self-help construction. Eff'orts should be made to encourage the participation ofthe prívate
sector and non-govemmental organizations;
(h) Industrial, agricultura!, energy, irrigation and land development
and resettlement projects should include a componen! which addresses
environmental and health impacts, including risk assessment, which, in
tum, should be inftuential in guiding the location, scale and choice of
technology for the projects. Regulations should be established to prevent
settlements development in high environmental-risk areas, such as those
proximate to chemical or nuclear plants. Responsibility for enforcing
such regulations should be shared with the prívate sector;
(1) Primary and occupational education should include information
on the environment. The mass media should regularly make available information and know-how to enable people to improve sanitation, waste
disposal and drinking water quality. Deterrents and incentives should be
introduced at local levels to encourage people to keep their immediate
environment healthy;

Scientific research should be geared to the immediate improvement of the health and environmental situation of degraded settlements.
T echnologies for the safe disposal of wastes with minimum use of water
in arid and semi-arid areas, improvement ofwater quality, reuseofwaste
water, and harvesting of rain should be developed. The United Nations
Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat), the World Health Organization and the U nited N ations Children 's Fund should intensify eff'orts to
promote the application of such technologies in the developing countries;
(j)

(k) Urban planning should receive priority attention, together with
the rational management of natural resources. Staffing, finance and organizational eff'orts should reftect the high priority given to this issue. Urban centres should systematically provide areas to meet the needs of various income categories, for industry, business, recreation and open spaces.
T echnical co-operation in this field has to expand greatly under the leadership of the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habita!);
( 1) Countries hosting a Iarge number of refugees should receive more
international assistance through the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and other bodies to improve environmental
conditions of refugee settlements.
F.
l.

International economic relations

Issue and outlook

60. lssue: Inequalities in international economic relations, coupled
with inappropriate economic policies in many developed and developing
countries alike, continue to atfect adversely sustainable development and
cause environmental degradation. Deteriorating terms of trade, chronic
trade deficits, which are partly caused by growing protectionism, heavy
debt-service payments, and inadequate financial ftows have made it very
difficult to allocate resources to environmental protection and improvement, particularly in developing countries. Specific problems include: insufficient consideration of environmental impacts in development cooperation; insufficient control of trade in scarce natural resources and
hazardous substances; and transnational investment and transfer of technology without adequate observance of environmental standards or information on environmental management.

61. Outlook: Awareness of the environmental aspects of international economic relations has increased, but it has not yet found adequate
expression in institutional practices and national policies.
62. Development co-operation projects have not helped build significantly national capabilities to avert environmental disasters. The environmental damage resulting from the execution of sorne large-scale projects is now better understood than in the past. There is also a growing
awareness of the need for additional resources to rehabilitate degraded
environments.
63. Long-term declines in commodity prices, coupled with their
inequity and instability, have adversely affected environmental management of natural resources. Furthermore, these prices do not fully reftect
the environmental costs of depletion of the resource base. Good quality
land, fishing areas and other natural resources are being overworked, and
tropical forests are being encroached u pon in order to achieve additional
income. The substitution of export crops in place of subsistence crops has
displaced small farmers and pastoralists from good quality land and has
led to excessive pressures on marginal land and natural resources.
64. There is a growing awareness of the hazards associated with
trade in chemicals, pesticides and sorne other products, but international
practices for controlling the transport of hazardous chemical goods do
not yet provide for a systematic consideration of the environment.
65. Mounting debt burdens, repayment obligations, austerity measures and reductions in financia! ftows to developing countries have endangered and, in sorne cases, blocked sustainable development, and this
has had negative economic, environmental and social impacts.
66. Recen! years have seen a sharp worsening of the international
economic situation. lts impact has been particularly severe on developing
countries. Lack of economic growth in developing countries could have
devastating consequences.
2.

Goal and recommended action
67. Goal: The establishment of an equitable system of international
economic relations aimed at achieving continuing economic advancement for ali States, based on principies recognized by the international
community, in order to stimulate and sustain environmentally sound development, especially in developing countries.

68.

Recommended action:

(a) In the ongoing search for concerted action to deal with intemational economic problems, the urgent need to improve the world environmental situation and to ensure a salid environmental foundation for sustainable development has to be recognized. Correcting the deteriorating
terms of trade and stabilizing intemational commodity prices at equitable levels, through international commodity agreements such as the Integrated Programme on Commodities, in conjunction with appropriate environmental management practices in the producing countries, should
play an importan! role in this regard;
(b) Especially in situations of environmental stress, development cooperation should aim at long-term improvement of natural resource productivity and environmental health. Projects that focus on the alleviation
of poverty and improve the environment should receive greater attention
in development co-operation. Such co-operation has to increase substantially, keeping in view the growing need for environmental rehabilitation;
(e) Development co-operation institutions should increase significantly their assistance to the developing countries for environmental restoration, protection and improvement;

(e/) Country programmes and policy papers prepared by multilateral
and bilateral development co-operation institutions for allocation of aid
resources should provide for analyses of the environmental needs of
recipient countries, with particular focus on major problems, such as
desertification, deforestation and pollution. Developing countries should
be assisted where necessary in preparing environmental accounting and
relating it to the reporting on national economic well-being;
( e) The system of appraising development co-operation projects
should provide for assessments of environmental and socio-economic impacts of altemative designs and locations. Area development programmes, in particular, should seek to establish mutual support between
environmental and socio-economic objectives. Development cooperation institutions should train their staff' according to these objectives;

(fJ Trade in hazardous industrial products, such as toxic chemicals
and pesticides, and in sorne other products, such as phannaceuticals,
should be subjected to regulations to ensure sharing by the contracting
parties, Govemments and consumers of information on their environ-

V.

151

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Commíttee

mental and health implications and on methods for their safe use and disposal. Labelling of products should be in local languages. Governments
of the exporting as well as the importing countries should collaborate in
this regard. They should also agree on the selection of chemicals for priority testing;
(g) International trade and commodity agreements should provide
environmental safeguards, where applicable. They should also encourage
producers to take a long-term view and provide for assistance for diversification programmes, where appropriate. Governments should study
the environmental impacts of their trade practices and make the findings
available to their agencies responsible for trade negotiations, which
should take them into account. The United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
should develop and apply effective policies and instruments to integrate
environment and development considerations in international trade;
(h) Environmentally related regulations and standards should not be
used for protectionist purposes. The International Trade Centre should
assist countries in meeting such requirements. The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development should make available information
on such regulations and standards as they apply to commodities and
manufactured products;

(¡) Host Governments should institute policies and regulations to ensure sound environmental management of transnational investments. In
agreements on transnational, including corporate, investments, Governments, through appropriate controls, should ensure that information and
technology on environmental management will be provided specifying
the responsibilities of the parties concerned. In accordance with
proposed code of conduct on transnational corporations of the Commission on Transnational Corporations, transnational corporations should
implement programmes in the host countries to minimize the environmental hazards of their activities. These programmes should include
training of personnel. The United Nations Centre on Transnational Corporations should play a role in facilitating this process;
(j) The transfer of clean, low-waste and pollution control technologies should be promoted through international co-operation. The possibility of making such technologies available at conc~sional prices to the
countries in need should be explored. Governments of recipient countries
should establish procedures for ascertaining the environmental implications of imported technologies;
(k) lnternational financia! institutions, while dealing with questions
of structural adjustment in developing countries and world economic reform, should link short-term financia! stabilization to sustainable development.
III. ÜTHER ISSUES OF GLOBAL CONCERN
69. This section discusses briefly the major environmental issues of
global concern that have not been adequately dealt with in previous sections.
A. Oceans and seas
Oceans and seas are being polluted extensively. The rising pollution levels and degradation of coastal ecosystems threaten the lifesupport capacities of oceans and seas and undermine their role in the
food chain. Efforts to monitor the state of oceans and seas, including
those ofthe United Nations Environment Programme and other international organizations, confirm that there is cause for concern. This problem is particularly serious for coastal waters and semi-enclosed seas that
border highly populated and industrialized zones. The situation will gel
much worse unless concerted action is undertaken now. The ongoing
monitoring effort is far from comprehensive and, where it has advanced,
it has not yet led to adequate change in the practices causing environmental damage.
70.

71. The challenge is to control and decrease marine pollution, and
establish or strengthen régimes of environmental management of oceans
and seas through intemational co-operation and national action.
72. A comprehensive data base should be established over time on
which action programmes to restore and preserve the environmental balance in the world's oceans and seas can be based. Among others, the Global Environmental Monitoring System, Global Resource lnfonnation
Data Base and the oceans and coastal areas programmes of the United
Nations Environment Programme should intensify elforts towards this
~d.
73. Conventions and agreements to monitor and manage human activities with a view to ensuring environmental protection of the seas and
oceans should be ratified and implemented by aII concerned countries.

Where such legal instruments do not exist, they should be negotiated.
Governments should strengthen or introduce policies and measures
aimed at preventing practices harmful to marine ecosystems and ensuring environmentally sound development of inland areas. Such policies
and measures should include control of the discharge of industrial effiuents and sewage, dumping of wastes, including hazardous and radioactive materials, disposal of hazardous residues and operational wastes
from ships, incineration at sea, and oil spills from tankers and off-shore
platforms. Environmentally sound land-based technology for the disposal of hazardous wastes should be developed and promoted. The
United Nations Environment Programme should continue to collaborate
in this work with the Intergovemmental Oceanographic Commission,
the International Maritime Organization and other appropriate international organizations.
B.

Outer space

74. Outer space has now become a recognized area of human activity. As activity in this area develops over the coming decades, sound
management of outer space will become increasingly importan!. To this
end, international co-operation exclusively for the peaceful use of outer
space is essential, especially on the part of those countries that now have
the capacity to undertake outer space activities.
75. All countries, in particular those with a major capacity to exploit
the benefits of outer space, should create conditions, including specifically the maintenance of its non-militarization, for broad international
co-operation in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes. This should include the use oí space technology to monitor Earth's
environment. The benefits of the peaceful use of outer space, including
weather forecasting, remole sensing and medica! benefits, should be
made readily available to the world community, particularly through assistance to the developing countries.
C.

Biological diversity

76. Traditional crop and livestock species are giving way to highyielding varieties and breeds. As the genetic base of plants, animals and
micro-organisms becomes narrower, sorne genetic material is being irretrievably lost at such a rate that the world could lose one tenth to one
fifth of its 5 to 10 million species by the year 2000.
77. Over 100 countries are collaborating in the global programme
co-ordinated by the International Board for Plant Genetic Resources for
conserving crop genetic resources, and the global gene banks network
contains over I million samples of crop germ plasm. Yet, in man y countries, national efforts for conservation are still ill-organized and underfinanced, and often do not attend systematically to the components of
planning, training, education and research. International co-operation
and technical assistance in this field should be further developed.
78. An international network of protected areas for conserving animal and plant genetic resources, encompassing about JO per cent of the
world's land area, should be established to reverse the trend towards depletion of species. Management plans for conserving ecosystems as reservoirs of species diversity have to be prepared.
79. Efforts to conserve crop genetic resources and the global data
banks network have to be extended to cover adequately germ plasm with
economic potential for providing food, fodder, fibres, waxes, oils, gums,
medicines, energy and insecticides. In situ and ex situ components of
conservation have to develop in a complementary manner in the light of
the interdependence of nature conservation and genetic diversity.
80. Mechanisms should be established to provide information on
rates of exploitation of genetic resources to facilitate selection of those to
be conserved.
81. The gap between conservation of species and economic access to
them should be bridgcd through maximum international co-operation.
Agreements invoiving rights of possession of and access to genetic
material, including research results, should facilitate such co-operation.
Conserved genetic resources should be regarded as a common interest of
mankind.

D. Security and environment
82. The accumuiation and deployment of weapons of war and destruction present very grave risks to the environment. The use of weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons, could bring about far-reaching, even irreversible, changes in
the global environment.

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

152

83. The development and stockpiling of nuclear arms and de!ivery
systems at curren! levels have made the human race technically capable
ofputtíng an end to its own existence. In additíon, the growmg capacíty
of some States to undertake delibera te manipulation of the environment
represents an immense poten tia! danger. If the material, financia! and intellectual resources devoted to armaments were to be used to solve prohlems such as those of the human environment. food security and shelter,
prospects for sustainable development would be considerably enhanced

92. Countries, particularly developing countries, should be assisted,
through international co-operation on environmental assessment, wíth
the participation of the Uníted Nations system and with the United Nations Environment Programme playing a leading role, in establishing effecti ve national monitoring systems, geographic information systems and
assessment capabilities, and ímprovíng data compatibility. In order for
this to take place, technical co-operation among countries regíonally and
globally has to increase significantly.

84. The World Charter for Nature proclaims that "Nature shall he
secured against degradation caused by warfare or other hostile activities". 58 A comprehensive system of international security is essential in
order to ensure rhat this declaration is implemented.

93. Notable environmental assessments have been carried out recently and related to socio-economic factors by non-governmental organizations in sorne countries. These have helped expand awareness and
stimulate action to protect and improve the environment. Governments
should encourage such efforts.

85. Progressive disarmament through détente, negotiation, and
avoidance of the use of force a, a means of resolving conflicts should he
pursued to minimize the environmental risks associated with armed cnnflicts. Governments should continue to pursue, in relevan! negotiating
forums, efforts to ban weapons that have the effect ofmodifying the environment.
86. One ofthe roles ofthe Umted Nations Env1ronment Programme
is to promote environmentally sound development in harmony with
peace and secunty, and towards this end, issues of disarmament and
security, in so far as rhey relate to the environment, should continue ro
receive appropnate attention.
JV.

[NSTRUMENlS OF ENVIRONMENTAL ACTION

87. Sections !, 11 and 111 above largely sought to indicate how to deal
effectively with environmental problems by addressmg their policy
sources. However, such actions need to be reinforced by the performance
of certain overarching functions. This section deals with those functions
A.

Assessmenl

88. Environmental rehabilitation and management depend upon the
availability of organized information on the state of the environment, its
trends, and their relationship to social and economic factors. Decisions,
however, continue to be made in ignorance of the changing state of the
environment and its implications for human well-being, It is essential,
therefore, that reliable environmental information, obtained and
analysed using modern technology, is made avaílable to planners and
managers in a usable form. Most developing countries face the constraint
of lack of access to modern technology and to the necessary expertise to
collect and interpret environmental data
89. Environmental and resource data are being collected at global
and regional levels by the United Nations and international organizations working with Governments. Additional data also exist at the national leve], although often in a fragmented form. The institutional mechanisms needed to relate such data sets to each other and to analyse them
in the context of existing practices and policies are often lacking. Governments and intergovernmental organizations at the regional leve! should
intensify efforts to collect and analyse data, especially data relating to
common environmental problems.
90. The United Nations Environment Programme, working through
the United Nations system, co-ordinates the collection, monitoring and
assessment of selected environmental variables and distributes this information worldwide through: the Global Environmental Monitoring System, encompassing the monitoring and assessment systems relating to
climate, health and natural resources and the Global Resource Information Data Base; data bases and systems for the conservation and management of genetic resources; the International Register of Potentially Toxic
Chemicals, which operates a global information exchange network to
provide information and data on chemicals and their effects on health
and environment through a query-response service and evaluations ofthe
effects of chemicals on the environment; INFOTERRA, the International Referral System for sources of environmental information; and the
state of the enviromnent reports of the United Nations Environment
Programme, which address major issues of topical environmental con-

cem.
91, Through improved collection and analysis of data and its wide
distribution to potential users, which should be a service to countries as
well as intemational organizations, the United Nations Environment
Programme should become, and come to be accepted as, a leading
authority in environmental assessment,

58 Resolution 37/7, annex, sect. 1, para. 5.

B.

Planning

94. Environmental planning should provide a conceptual, methodological and instítutional framework within which to ínternalize progressively the consideration of the environment in development decisionmaking. Every country should define its national environmental
objectives and make them par! of its plans for socio-economic development. Just as each country sets targets for sectoral growth, it should set
time-bound targets in respect of environmental resources and índicators
of major concern. Plans and policies at sub-national levels should also
provide for the simultaneous pursuit of the specified environmental and
development objectives,
95. Governments should establish mechanisms and procedures to
facilitate interdepartmental co-ordínation of policies and unified direction for integrating environmental concems ín development planning.
Use of analytical methods to ascertain the environmental and socioeconomíc implications of alternative courses of actíon should inform
decisions on projects and programmes. lt should also help resolve conflícts of interest among departments, among population groups and
among regmns.
96. The allocation of investment resources of a national plan among
regions and sectors has to reflect a sensitivity to environmental constraints and objectives. This should be facilitated by periodic analyses of
the socio-economic significance of the changing state of natural resources
and the environment at national and provincial levels. Efforts should also
be made to prepare an accounting of the use of scarce natural resources,
focusing particularly on the country's major environmental problems,
for example desertification, and to relate it to the periodic reporting on
national income and well-being.
97. Sectoral ministries should be encouraged to apply environmental
impact assessments and social cost-benefit analyses in decision-making
regarding development projects and programmes. Taxation and cconomic policies should encourage sectoral decisions that favour environmentally benign technologies and locations, recycling and safe disposal
of wastes and conservation of natural resources, and should establish
mutual support between environmental and economic objectives. Land
and water use plans should be prepared and their implementation monitored. Already sorne countries have made progress in planning at the district leve! to reflect environmental needs,
98. There have been advances ín the analytical methods of environmental impact and risk assessment, social benefit-cost analyses of environmental measures, physical planning and environmental accounting.
Theoretical work on decision models with multiple objectives and constraints has also progressed. The United Nations Environment Programme, the Scientific Commíttee on Problems of the Environment and
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development have
played a useful role. This work should be strengthened so that it will have
a greater impact on decisíon-making,
99 Environmental action and economic planning remain insufficiently related to each other in most countries, Efforts must be intensified
at national and intemational levels to promote the application of suitable
methods, procedures and institutional arrangements to make economic
planning fully responsive to environmental constraints and opportunities, The guiding role ofthe United Nations Environment Programme in
this field should include technical assistance to the developing countries,
Collaborative arrangements should be made at the working leve! between
the United Nations Environment Programme, the United Nations Development Programme, the Department of Technical Co-operation for
Development of the United Nations Secretaria! and the World Bank.
They should set up, or strengthen, units to conduct environmental analyses of their projects and programmes and, in collaboration with the
United Nations Environrnent Programme, assist Governments in systematically considering the environment in development planning.

V.

153

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

C. Legislation and environmental law
100. Increasingly, environmental legislation has been providing
practica) frameworks at the national level for implementing environmental standards and regulating the activities of enterprises and people in the
light of environmental objectives. At the intemational leve!, conventions,
protocols and agreements have been providing a basis for co-operation
among countries at bilateral, regional and global levels for the management of environmental risks, control of pollution and conservation of
natural resources.
101. There is a need to expand the number ofaccessions to and ratifications of these conventions and to institute mechanisms at the national
leve! to ensure their application. The present momentum should be maintained of concluding conventions on questions such as hazards relating
to chemicals, treatment and intemational transport ofhazardous wastes,
industrial accidents, climate change, protection of the ozone )ayer, protection of the marine environment from pollution from land-based
sources and protection of biological diversity, in which the United Nations Environment Programme has been playing an active part.
102. Groundwork has been prepared over the last 15 years under the
aegis of the United Nations Environment Programme to establish legal
frameworks to manage regional seas. Govemments should intensify their
efforts to implement legislative measures and other policies at national
levels so that the policy sources of the environmental problems of the regional seas are effectively tackled. Increasingly, environmental management of rivers, lakes and forests has been posing a challenge to intemational co-operation. Governments, with the collaboration of the
Programme and concemed intemational organizations, should accelerate action to establish legal régimes at international and national levels to
improve significantly the environmental management of rivers, lakes and
forests. The new programme for environmental management of freshwater systems, sponsored by the United Nations Environment Programme,
is a promising start.
103. The Montevideo Programme for the Development and Periodic
Review of Environmental Law, 59 prepared under the auspices of the
United Nations Environment Programme, should be implemented fully.
Development of intemational environmental law should continue, with a
view to providing a strong basis for fostering co-operation among countries. The progressive emergence of general environmental norms and
principies and the codification of existing agreements could lead to a global convention on protection and enhancement of the environment.
104. Govemments should settle their environmental disputes by
peaceful means, making use of existing and emerging agreements and
conventions. The Intemational Court of Justice, the lntemational Court
of Arbitration and regional mechanisms should facilitate peaceful settlement of environmental disputes.
D. Awareness building and training
105. The participation ofpeople in environmental protection and improvement depends upon their being aware of the environmental problems and possibilities, of how the changing state of the environment affects their well-being, and how their lifestyles affect the environment.
People's effectiveness in dealing with environmental problems depends
upon their technical and organizational capabilities to design and implement the needed measures.
106. Since the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, held at Stockholm in 1972, awareness of the interrelationship between human activities and the environment has steadily grown. Voluntary action groups at the community level, national and global nongovemmental organizations, scientific bodies, schools and universities,
mass media and Governments ali have played a part in this process. Also
the United Nations Environment Programme, through its programme
and through its information activities, has helped build environmental
awareness.
107. In a large number of developing countries, knowledge of proper
environmental management practices still does not reach millions who
suffer as a result of environmental degradation. People are the most valuable resource in development, but in order for them to participate constructively in accelerating and sustaining development, environmental
information must be made available in languages they understand and in
a form that can help them relate it easily to their own situation. Governments should intensify efforts to make this possible. Non-governmental
organizations, with appropriate support from the United Nations Envi-

59 UNEP/GC.10/5/ Add.2 and Corr. l and 2, annex, chap. 11.

ronment Programme, should play an increasingly active role in this field,
especially by way of provision of requisite materials.
108. The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, in collaboration with the United Nations Environment Programme should ensure systematic coverage of environmental education
needs at ali levels of schooling, especially in the developing countries.
They should also prepare and promote course materials which would inelude environmental components in professional training given to selected occupational groups, for example, engineers, builders, foresters,
farm extension workers and managers. Training in analysing environmental considerations in relation to economic and other goals also has to
receive growing attention. Govemments should make environmental
education and training an integral part of their education and communication policies and programmes.
109. Intemational support for the training of personnel in environmental assessment and management, especially in the developing countries, has grown steadily. It is essential, however, to ensure that the content and modality of such instruction is relevan! to the needs of the
countries where it is intended that the skills be applied. International cooperation and governmental efforts should also help ensure a progressive
strengthening of institutional capabilities within the developing countries
themselves to make available such training.
E.

Jnstitutions

110. Consideration of the environment must be intemalized in sectoral policies and practices to ensure that environmental objectives are
met and sustainable development is achieved. Sectoral bodies should be
made accountable for such internalization. Existing environmental problems also have to be dealt with through concerted action and allocation
of resources. This is true at both national and intemational levels.
111. At the national level, the mandates of sectoral ministries and
other governmental institutions should explicitly state their responsibility and accountability for sustainable development and environmental
protection within their sectors. Their policies, functions, structures and
budgetary allocations should be consistent with this. As appropriate, the
same should apply at provincial and local levels. Authoritative mechanisms and procedures are needed to oversee and ensure that national environmental objectives are met throughout the Government. Governments should establish or strengthen environmental ministries to
stimulate, guide, support and monitor actions to achieve these objectives.
To this end, essential functions should include: environmental assessment, planning and incentives, legislative and regulatory advice, awareness-building and training, stimulation of research and application of its
results. Environmental ministries should also provide leadership and coordination for direct action to deal with environmental problems, including rehabilitation. Bilateral and multilateral institutions and international organizations should assist developing countries in this regard.
112. International institutions, both inside and outside ofthe United
Nations system, dealing with such areas as food and agriculture, health,
industry, energy, science, trade, finance and development assistance,
should reorient their policies and programmes to make steady progress
towards environmentally sound development.
113. These institutions should be accountable for integrating the objectives of sustainable development into their policies, budgets and staffing strategies. Governments should ensure, through consisten! policy
guidance to these institutions, that their mandates and programmes meet
this objective.
114. The governing bodies of ali United Nations organizations
should report regularly to the General Assembly on the progress made in
achieving the objectives of sustainable development. Such reports should
also be submitted to the Governing Council ofthe United Nations Environment Programme for that body to provide comments on matters
within its mandate to the General Assembly. The Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, under the chairmanship of the SecretaryGeneral, should oversee effectively the inclusion of the concept of sustainable development in ali programmes of the United Nations system,
by reviewing and co-ordinating the efforts of ali organs, organizations
and bodies of the United Nations system in this field, and by including
this in its reports to the General Assembly and the Governing Council of
the Programme.
11 S. The inter-agency mechanism of Designated Officials for Environmental Matters should guide, support and monitor more effectively
activities within the United Nations system to ensure consistent policy.
116. In parallel with the institutional arrangements al the national
level, the United Nations Environment Programme should promote,

154

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

guide, support and monitor actions to achieve enviranmentally sound development and stimulate and co-ordinate action to deal with enviranmental prablems.
117. The majar priorities and functions of the United Natíons Environment Pragramme should be:
(a) To pravide leadership, advice and guidance in the United Nations system on restoring, pratecting, and impraving the enviranmental
basis for, and in general act as a catalyst in the pramotion of, sustainable
development;
(b) To monitor, assess and report regularly on the state of the enviranment and natural resources and emerging enviranmental issues;
(e) To support priority scientific and technological research on majar enviranmental and natural resource pratection issues;

(á) To make available, in co-operation with other agencies where apprapriate, guidance for environmental management, including the development of management techniques, criteria and indicators for enviranmental quality standards and guidelines for the sustainable use and
management of natural resources;
(e) To initiate and support the programmes and activities worked
out by the developing countries for dealing with their serious enviranmental problems;

(f) To initiate and facilitate the development and, upon request, the
co-ordination of the implementation of action plans in the developing
countries for the management of ecosystems and critica) environmental
problems. Such plans should be implemented and financed by the Governments concerned with appropriate externa! assistance;
(g) To encourage and promote intemational agreements on critica!
environmental issues and to support and facilitate the development ofintemational laws, conventions and co-operative arrangements for environmental and natural resource conservation and protection;
(h) In co-operation with other concerned institutions, to establish
and strengthen the institutional and professional capacity of developing
countries, with a view to integrating environmental considerations into
their development policy and planning;

(!) To promete awareness of environmental matters through education and the mass media;
(J) To co-operate with the United Nations Development Programme
and other United Nations agencies, the World Bank and regional development banks, to strengthen the environmental dimensions oftheir programmes and technical assistance projects, in ter alia, through training
and personnel secondments.

118. Specialized agencies, organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system should more speedily assume full operatíonal and financia) responsibility for environmental programmes supported by the
United Nations Environment Programme in their sectors íncluded in the
system-wide medíum-term environment pro¡Jramme and the Environment Fund. The human and financia] resources which will become available to the Uníted Nations Environment Programme as a result should
be concentrated on the priority areas listed above.
119. Environmentally sound development cannot be assured solely
by actions of govemmental, intergovernmental or íntemational organizations. 1t requires the participation of other entities, particularly industry, non-govemmental environmental and development organizations
and the scientific community. Non-govemmental organizatíons have importan! contributions to make in various areas, íncludíng envíronmental
education and awareness, as well as design and implementation of programmes at the grass-roots levels. The scientific community should continue to play an important role in environmental research and risk assessment and international scientific co-operation.
120. Regional and continental co-operative arrangements are being
established to deal with common environmental problems. For example,
the first session of the African Ministerial Conference on the Environment, held at Cairo in 1985, adopted the Cairo Programme for African

Co-operation and modalities to implement it. Govemments and development co-operation agencies should support such institutional arrangements and programmes.

42/187.

Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development

The General Assembly,
Concerned about the accelerating deterioration of the

human environment and natural resources and the consequences of that deterioration for economic and social development,
Believíng that sustainable development, which implies
meeting the needs of the present without compromising
the ability of future generations to meet their own needs,
should become a central guiding principie of the United
Nations, Governments and prívate institutions, organizations and enterprises,
Recognizíng, in view of the global character of major environmental problems, the common interest of all countries to pursue policies aimed at sustainable and environmentally sound development,
Convinced of the importance of a reorientation of national and international policies towards sustainable development patterns,
Recalling that, in its resolution 38/161 of 19 December
1983 on the process of preparation of the Environmental
Perspective to the Year 2000 and Beyond to be prepared
by the Governing Council ofthe United Nations Environment Programme, it welcomed the establishment of a special commission, which later assumed the name World
Commission on Environment and Development, to make
available a report on environment and the global problématique to the year 2000 and beyond, including
proposed strategies for sustainable development,
Recognizing the valuable role played in the preparation
of the report of the World Commission by the Intergovernmental Inter-sessional Preparatory Committee of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme, as envisaged by the General Assembly in its
resolution 38/161,
Reca/ling that in resolution 38/161 it decided that, on
matters within the purview of the United Nations Environment Programme, the report of the Commission
should in the first instance be considered by the Governing
Council of the Programme, for transmission to the General Assembly together with the comments of the Council
and for use as basic material in the preparation, for adoption by the Assembly, of the Environmental Perspective,
and that on those matters which were under consideration
or review by the Assembly itself, it would consider the
relevant aspects of the report of the Commission,
Taking note of Governing Council decision 14/14 of
19 June 198746 transmitting the report of the Commission
to the General Assembly,
Notíng that the Environmental Perspective to the Year
2000 and Beyond 51 has taken account ofthe main recommendations contained in the report of the Commission,
Recognizing the instrumental role of the Commission in
revitalizing and reorienting discussions and deliberations
on environment and development and in enhancing the
understanding of the causes of present environmental and
development problems, as well as in demonstrating the
ways in which they transcend institutional frontiers and in
opening new perspectives on the interrelationship between
environment and development as a guide to the future,
Emphasizing the need for a new approach to economic
growth, as an essential prerequisite for eradication of poverty and for enhancing the resource base on which present
and future generations depend,
