General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

184

37/50.

Channels of communication between the United
Nations and youth and youth organizations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/135 of 16 December 1977
and 36/17 of 9 November 1981, in which it adopted guidelines for the improvement of the channels of communication between the United Nations and youth and youth
organizations,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolutions
1980/25 of 2 May 1980 and 1981/25 of 6 May 1981 concerning co-ordination and information in the field of youth,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General of
8 September 1982, 40
Convinced of the need to improve further the efforts of
the United Nations and the specialized agencies with regard
to the participation of youth in achieving the objectives of
the Charter of the United Nations,
Equally convinced of the valuable contribution that you!h
can make in promoting co-operation among States and m
implementing the new international economic or~er and. the
International Development Strategy for the Third Umted
Nations Development Decade, 41
Bearing in mind the importance of the existence of channels of communication between the United Nations and
youth and youth organizations for the proper information
of youth ana youth organizations and their effective participation in the United Nations and the specialized agencies
at the national, regional and international levels,
Taking note of the efforts in interagency co-operation to
promote and strengthen channels of communication between
the United Nations and youth and youth organizations within
the context of International Youth Year: Participation, Development, Peace,
Convinced that the existence and the proper functioning
of channels of communication between the United Nations
and youth and youth organizations form a basic prerequisite
of the active involvement of young people and thus of the
successful preparation for, celebration of and follow-up to
International Youth Year,
1. Requests Member States, specialized agencies and
other intergovernmental organizations to promote, in cooperation with youth organizations in consultative status
with the Economic and Social Council and other youth organizations concerned, further implementation of the guidelines adopted in General Assembly resolution 32/135 and
the additional guidelines adopted in its resolution 36/ 17;
2. Requests the Advisory Committee for the International Youth Year to continue to promote the implementation of the additional guidelines, together with the guidelines adopted in resolution 32/135, during the preparation
for and celebration of International Youth Year;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to give full cooperation and support to interagency co-operation and coordination in promotional and information activities within
the context of International Youth Year;
4. Invites Member States, specialized agencies, regional commissions, intergovernmental organizations and
non-governmental youth organizations to communicate and
further promote the guidelines and additional guidelines for
the improvement of channels of communication between
the United Nations and youth and youth organizations and
to offer additional suggestions for their further development;
40
41

A/37/401.
Resolution 35/56, annex.

5. Requests the Secretary-General to give special_ att~ntion to developing additional channels of commumcat1on
through such means as the mass media a~d educational
institutions in order to reach the largest possible number of
young people in different regions of the world;
6. Invites youth and youth organizations to act as disseminators of and contributors to the formulation of United
Nations policies and programmes directed to youth;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to strengthen a_nd i_mprove the functioning of existing channels of communication
between the United Nations and youth and youth organizations, such as the quarterly publication Youth Information
Bulletin produced by the Secretariat;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, on the basis of the
reports of Member States, specialized agencies and other
intergovernmental organizations, as well as non-governmental youth organizations, to report to the Gener~l Assembly at its thirty-eighth session on the implementation of
the guidelines and additional guidelines for the improve~ent
of the channels of communication between the United
Nations and youth and youth organizations, and to include
information on measures being taken to strengthen those
channels of communication.
90th plenary meeting
3 December 1982

37/51.

Question of aging

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/52 of 14 December 1978. in
which it decided to convene a World Assembly on Aging
to call world-wide attention to the serious problems besetting
a growing portion of the population of the world and to
provide a forum to launch an international programme of
action aimed at guaranteeing economic and social security
to older persons, as well as opportunities for them to contribute to national development,
Recognizing that increasing longevity is an achievement
of biology and a sign of progress, and that the aged are an
asset and not a liability to society because of the invaluable
contribution they can make by virtue of their accumulated
wealth of knowledge and experience,
Bearing in mind that the States gathered in the World
Assembly on Aging, held at Vienna from 26 July to 6 August
1982, reaffirmed their belief that the fundamental and inalienable rights enshrined in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights 38 apply fully and undiminishedly to the aging, and recognized that quality of life was no less important
than longevity, and that the aging should therefore, as far
as possible, be enabled to enjoy in their own families and
communities a life of fulfilment, health, security and contentment, appreciated as an integral part of sociely, 4 ~
Convinced that the International Plan of Action on Aging 1 '
adopted by the World Assembly on Aging must lead to
developing and applying, at the international, regional and
national levels, policies designed to enhance the lives of the
aging as individuals and to mitigate, by appropriate measures, any negative effects resulting from the impact of the
aging of populations on development,
Recognizing that the Plan of Action should be corn,idercJ
an integral component of the major international. regional
42 See Report of the World Assembl_v on A11ing. Vienna. 2f> J11/_1· 1,,
6 Au11ust /982 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.82.1 It,), chap
VI, sect. A.
4
' Ibid.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

and national strategies and programmes formulated in response to important world problems and needs,
Recalling its resolution 35/129 of 11 December 1980, in
pursuance of which the United Nations Trust Fund for the
World Assembly on Aging was established to finance preparatory and follow-up activities in connection with the
World Assembly, and its resolution 36/20 of 9 November
1981, in which it requested the Secretary-General to use the
Trust Fund to encourage further interest in the field of aging
among developing countries, particularly the least developed among them, within the context of the conclusions
and recommendations of the World Assembly on Aging,
Acknowledging the role played by the United Nations and
the specialized agencies through their efforts in the field of
aging and the need to strengthen this role in order to make
the implementation of the recommendations of the Plan of
Action effective,
Emphasizing the importance of the Plan of Action and
stressing the spirit of co-operation that prevailed during the
World Assembly on Aging,
Expressing appreciation to the Government of Austria
for acting as host to the World Assembly on Aging,
Having considered the Report of the World Assembly on
Aging, 44
1. Takes note of the Report of the World Assembly on
Aging;
2. Endorses the International Plan of Action on Aging,
adopted by consensus by the World Assembly on Aging;
3. Affirms that aging should be considered in the context
of economic, social and cultural development, as well as in
the context of international strategies and plans;
4. Calls upon Governments to make continuous efforts
to implement the principles and recommendations contained
in the Plan of Action in accordance with their national structures, needs and objectives;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary
steps to ensure that sufficient resources within reasonable
limits are made available for effective implementation of,
and follow-up action to, the Plan of Action, as well as to
maintain the momentum generated by the World Assembly
on Aging; in doing so, the Secretary-General should make
every effort to reallocate existing global resources;
6. Also requests the Secretary-General to take such steps
as may be appropriate for the necessary strengthening of
activities in the field of aging at the central and regional
levels of the United Nations, as set forth in the Plan of
Action;
7. Further requests the Secretary-General to strengthen
the international network of existing information, research
and training centres in the field of aging in order to encourage and facilitate the exchange of knowledge, skills and
experiences, as well as technical co-operation between
countries within the various regions;
8. Urges the Secretary-General to implement the recommendations concerning international co-operation with
respect to aging, as well as those concerning the assessment,
review and appraisal of the implementation of the Plan of
Action, using the Centre for Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat as the focal point;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to use the
United Nations Trust Fund for the World Assembly on Aging to meet the rapidly increasing needs of the aging in the
developing countries, in particular in the least developed
countries;
44

United Nations publication, Sales No. E.82.1.16.

185

10. Also requests the Secretary-General to use the Trust
Fund to encourage greater interest among developing countries in matters related to aging and to assist Member States,
at their request, in formulating and implementing policies
and programmes for the elderly; further requests the Secretary-General to use the Trust Fund for technical cooperation and research related to the aging of populations
and for promoting co-operation among developing countries
in the exchange of relevant information and technology;
11. Appeals to Member States to make voluntary contributions to the Trust Fund;
12. Urges the United Nations Fund for Population Activities, in co-operation with all organizations responsible
for international population assistance, to strengthen its assistance, within its mandate, in the field of aging, particularly in developing countries;
13. Requests the Economic and Social Council, through
the Commission for Social Development, to review the implementation of the Plan of Action every four years, beginning in 1985, and to transmit its findings to the General
Assembly;
14. Invites the specialized agencies concerned to cooperate with the Secretary-General in the implementation
of the Plan of Action within their fields of competence;
15. Invites the intergovernmental organizations and nongovernmental organizations concerned to continue to give
attention to major issues related to aging and to co-ordinate
their work with the United Nations, particularly in view of
the need for well co-ordinated activities for the implementation of the Plan of Action;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session on the progress
achieved in implementing and following up the Plan of
Action and to include in his report an account of project
activities financed by the Trust Fund;
17. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session a single item entitled "Question of
aging'' to replace the items entitled ''Question of the elderly
and the aged" and "World Assembly on Aging".
90th plenary meeting
3 December I 982

37/52.

World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 31/123 of 16 December 1976,
by which it proclaimed the year 1981 International Year of
Disabled Persons, 32/ 133 of 16 December 1977, by which
it established the Advisory Committee for the International
Year of Disabled Persons, 33/170 of 20 December 1978,
341154 of 17 December 1979, in which it, inter alia, decided
to expand the theme of the International Year of Disabled
Persons to "full participation and equality", 35/133 of
11 December 1980 and 36/77 of 8 December 1981 ,
Deeply concerned that no less than five hundred million
persons are estimated' to suffer from disability of one form
or another, of whom four hundred million are estimated to
be in developing countries,
Reiterating the continuing need to promote the realization
of the right of disabled persons to participate fully in the
social life and development of their societies and to enjoy
living conditions equal to those of other citizens, as well as
to share equally in improvements in living conditions resulting from social and economic development,
