S/PV.9399

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9399th meeting

Thursday, 17 August 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wood. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. França Danese
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Mr. Anyanah
Mr. Hamamoto
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Chanda
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Phipps

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-24324 (E)
*2324324*

S/PV.9399

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, Under-Secretary-General and
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, and
Mr. Danny Haiphong, journalist.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: Since the previous briefing to the
Security Council on this topic in June (see S/PV.9364),
the provision of military assistance to the Armed
Forces of Ukraine has continued in the context of a fullscale invasion of Ukraine by the Russian Federation.
Information from Governments about their transfers of
weapons systems and ammunition is available through
open sources. The transfers have reportedly included
heavy conventional weapons, such as battle tanks,
armoured combat vehicles, combat aircraft, helicopters,
large-scale artillery systems, missile systems and
uncrewed combat aerial vehicles, as well as remotely
operated munitions and small arms and light weapons
and their ammunition. In the past few months, reported
transfers of arms and ammunition to the Ukrainian
defence forces have expanded. There have also been
reports of States transferring, or planning to transfer
weapons, such as uncrewed combat aerial vehicles
and ammunition, to the Russian armed forces for use
in Ukraine.
In that regard, I would like to emphasize that the
reports on the transfer and use of cluster munitions are
very concerning. The Spokesperson of the SecretaryGeneral has called for those types of munitions to be
consigned to history and not to be used. An influx of
weapons and ammunition into any armed conflict can
contribute to its escalation and presents significant
risks of their diversion and proliferation even after
the conflict has ended. Measures aimed at addressing
2/18

17/08/2023

the risk of the diversion of weapons and ammunition
to unauthorized end users or for unauthorized uses are
essential to preventing further instability and insecurity
in Ukraine, the region and beyond. Such measures
include the enhancement of marking practices,
comprehensive pre-transfer diversion risk assessments,
end-user certificates, including non-transfer clauses,
effective legal and enforcement measures and postshipment verifications.
The requirements for preventing the diversion
of weapons include supply-chain transparency and
cooperation and information-sharing among importing,
transit and exporting States, as well as concrete measures
such as marking and tracing, effective accounting and
comprehensive record-keeping practices, the physical
safeguarding of arms and ammunition, customs and
border control measures and diversion monitoring
and analysis. Transparency in arms transfers is yet
another confidence-building measure that can serve
to reduce tensions, ambiguities and misperceptions
between Member States. The United Nations Register
of Conventional Arms remains a key tool in that regard.
In order to prevent the diversion of conventional arms
and regulate the international arms trade, States have
also established a number of arms-control treaties
and instruments, including the Arms Trade Treaty,
the Firearms Protocol and the Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and
its International Tracing Instrument.
I would like to take this opportunity to commend
the work of the Open-ended Working Group to
Elaborate a Set of Political Commitments as a New
Global Framework That Will Address Existing Gaps in
Through-Life Ammunition Management and applaud
the successful adoption of its final report (see A/78/111)
containing the Global Framework for Through-life
Conventional Ammunition Management, which is
a much-needed instrument for addressing both the
safety and security risks associated with conventional
ammunition to prevent diversion and unplanned
explosions. I call on States to consider joining the
relevant treaties and agreements and to fully implement
their legal obligations under conventional arms-control
instruments to which they are party, as well as their
political commitments, in order to minimize the risk of
the diversion of arms and ammunition.
Beyond addressing arms safety and security risks
across all stages of their life cycle, including arms
23-24324

17/08/2023

Threats to international peace and security

transfers, all parties to the armed conflict have a duty
to protect civilians in armed conflict and to ensure
compliance with the applicable international law,
including international humanitarian law. The impact
of the intensifying violence on civilians remains
an area of great concern. From 24 February 2022 to
13 August 2023, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights recorded 26,384
civilian casualties in Ukraine, with 9,444 people killed
and 16,940 injured. The actual figures are likely to
be considerably higher. The vast majority of civilian
casualties are a result of the use of explosive weapons
with wide-area effects, including by shelling from
artillery, tanks, multiple-launch rocket systems and
cruise and ballistic missiles, as well as by air strikes. The
Secretary-General has unequivocally urged all sides to
avoid the use of explosive weapons in populated areas,
as such use is highly likely to result in indiscriminate
harm. I take this opportunity to refer to the Political
Declaration on Strengthening the Protection of Civilians
from the Humanitarian Consequences Arising from the
Use of Explosive Weapons in Populated Areas, which
was adopted in November 2022. It falls on Member
States to implement the Declaration in a broad and
meaningful manner.
The continued and intensified attacks against
critical infrastructure and services, including energy
infrastructure, health and educational facilities,
ports, roads and bridges, are alarming. Mines and
explosive remnants of war have caused widespread land
contamination, rendering land unusable for agriculture,
while impeding the movement of people. I encourage all
the relevant parties to abide by their obligations under
the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons
and not to transfer or use any mines prohibited by its
Amended Protocol II. Under international humanitarian
law, parties to an armed conflict are prohibited from
targeting civilians and civilian objects, including
civilian infrastructure, and have the responsibility to
take all feasible precautions in the conduct of military
operations to avoid or at least minimize incidental
loss of civilian life, injury to civilians and damage to
civilian objects. The United Nations strongly condemns
attacks against civilians and civilian infrastructure and
calls for their immediate cessation.
Russia’s military offensive in Ukraine, in violation
of the Charter of the United Nations and international
law, is hitting the most vulnerable the hardest. It is
imperative to put an end to this brutal war. I appeal

S/PV.9399

to all Member States to make every effort for peace.
The United Nations stands ready to support all
genuine efforts to bring a just and sustainable peace
to Ukraine, in line with the Charter of the United
Nations, international law and the relevant General
Assembly resolutions.
The President: I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Haiphong.
Mr. Haiphong: Today I am here as a journalist who
has dedicated the last 10 years of my life to writing
about and speaking out against the long record of
human rights abuses and war crimes committed by my
country of birth, the United States. I do not consider it
a hobby or even a profession, but rather a duty to all of
humankind and those who want to see a better and more
peaceful future. I am here too as a United States citizen
who has witnessed tens of billions of United States tax
dollars go to funding and arming a proxy war against
Russia, while ordinary people in the United States suffer
from rising levels of poverty, homelessness, suicide and
economic insecurity. As Martin Luther King Jr. said in
1958, true peace is not merely the absence of tension
but the presence of justice.
On 2 June, United States Secretary of State Antony
Blinken gave a speech in Helsinki, in which he stated
that military support for Ukraine must be prioritized
over diplomacy. The argument goes that a steady
supply of arms to Ukraine will turn the tide on the
battlefield and force Russia to come to the negotiating
table. Blinken is supposed to be the United States’
top diplomat, not a champion of escalating conflict.
However, the sentiment he communicated has been a
foundational feature of the justifications given for the
West’s continued flow of arms to Ukraine. The facts,
however, undermine Blinken’s assertions.
First, United States and Western arms are anathema
to resolving conflict. The United States is the biggest
arms exporter in the world, accounting for approximately
40 per cent of all global arms sales. Those arms have
been instrumental in some of the bloodiest wars of the
past two generations, including the United States-led
invasions of Iraq, Afghanistan, Libya and Syria. United
States arms play a major role in escalating tensions in
the Korean peninsula and in the military encirclement
of Russia and China, which has ushered in a new Cold
War and all the risks that come with it.

23-243243/18

S/PV.9399

Threats to international peace and security

Secondly, it was never Russia that needed to be
forced to the negotiating table. Members of the Security
Council may remember that back in December 2021,
Russia provided draft proposals of security guarantees
to the United States and NATO that were meant to
serve as the basis for dialogue and negotiation. They
were summarily rejected. By late January 2022, the
United States announced 200,000 pounds of what was
deemed “lethal aid” to Ukraine in an obvious signal of
escalation. In April 2022, both United States Secretary
of State Antony Blinken and Secretary of Defence Lloyd
Austin travelled to Ukraine just weeks after a peace
deal fell through and admitted that the United States
was all in on winning the current fight in Ukraine.
What they meant by that was that the United States was
fully committed to corralling its own military arsenal
and that of its NATO partners in a proxy war against
Russia, to the last Ukrainian.
The absence of diplomacy in times of conflict can
lead only to escalation. That Russia’s security, and for
that matter, the security of the entire world, has been
dismissed so summarily by the West is proof enough
that the ceaseless supply of arms to Ukraine endangers
peace. The weapons sent to Ukraine therefore do not
represent some kind of “arsenal of democracy”, as some
in the United States foreign policy establishment tout.
NATO countries have already provided $40 billion in
weapons to Ukraine over the span of the conflict, and
we have witnessed those weapons become heavier,
deadlier and more provocative, stymying the possibility
of a negotiated settlement to the conflict. Many of those
weapons have landed on the black market and into
the hands of drug cartels, criminal organizations and
indeed neo-Nazi and fascist elements, many of which
now make up parts of Ukraine’s armed forces.
Furthermore, NATO has essentially armed
Ukrainian army after Ukrainian army at the expense of
its own arsenal. The New York Times sounded the alarm
eight months ago that Ukraine is the location of an
artillery and tank war, the likes of which the West was
not prepared to fight in the long term. If that is the case,
then rational minds may assume that the West would
cease its supply of deadly weaponry. But the opposite
has occurred. The United States approved the sending
of cluster munitions to Ukraine last month — the same
munitions that continue to explode on and kill civilians
in Laos, decades after the United States invasion there,
and which have long been condemned by more than 100
countries worldwide.
4/18

17/08/2023

I am a journalist and a geopolitical analyst, not a
military expert. But such experts have in recent months
come clean about the limitations of Western firepower.
Camille Grand, former Assistant Secretary General
for Defence Investment at NATO, stated that “a day in
Ukraine is a month or more in Afghanistan”. He was
referencing the fact that Ukraine burns through nearly
half of the artillery produced in the United States
per month in a single day. Former Supreme Allied
Commander of NATO James Stavridis acknowledged in
May that analysts were correct to assume that Ukraine
is burning through a year’s worth of United States
production monthly. NATO Secretary General Jens
Stoltenberg and United States President Joe Biden have
both acknowledged those weapon shortages, with Biden
admitting during his announcement of cluster munitions
for Ukraine that “[t]his is a war relating to munitions.
And they are running out of that ammunition, and we
are low on it.” I am not even touching on issues of
personnel, training and other logistical problems here.
All of those problems have come to a head in the
past several months, in which there has been much
discussion of Ukraine’s spring counteroffensive. For
months, political and military officials in the West made
regular mentions in broadcasts to media outlets about
an oncoming victorious offensive that would take large
amounts of territory from Russia. Yet at the same time
Ukraine, and in particular its Head of State, Volodymyr
Zelenskyy, has repeatedly demanded that the West
increase its supply of heavy weaponry, including air
power. Zelenskyy has blamed the West again and again
for its lacklustre supply of arms in conjunction with
the months-long delay in the counteroffensive against
Russia. That counteroffensive is now in its third month
and the results have been disastrous. Around 30 per
cent of the weapons that NATO has supplied to Ukraine
has been destroyed. The death toll on the battlefield
is staggering, with an estimated 43,000 members of
the Ukrainian forces killed and reports surfacing that
local morgues in Ukraine are seeing nearly double the
numbers of bodies since the counteroffensive began.
And for what? The optimism of Western officials and
diplomats has waned, with many now acknowledging
that Ukraine has not even penetrated Russia’s first
defensive line.
The better question, then, is cui bono? Who or
what benefits from Western arms being poured into
Ukraine? Certainly not Ukraine, if the results of the
counteroffensive and the conflict overall are the measure,
23-24324

17/08/2023

Threats to international peace and security

and certainly not global peace and stability, either. For
all the benefits that come from an emerging multipolar
world, the incessant militarization of Ukraine that the
West is pushing is helping fuel a worldwide economic
slowdown and the potential for conflict between major
Powers conflict that could very well take on a nuclear
character. A simple answer to that question, therefore,
is the arms industry and those corporations that have
profited mightily from the conflict. Shareholders of the
largest military contractors have been paid handsomely
since the conflict began, as profits have soared. The
top 25 Western military contractors have seen their
revenues increase by 11 per cent over the past year to
$212 billion. Arms sales are expected to increase to a
total of $450 billion by the end of 2023, an increase
of $47 billion, thanks to the Ukraine conflict. That
bonanza is therefore making the slim minority of the
richest people richer, while the rest of the world is
left to resolve the myriad problems left in the wake of
the conflict.
One of the primary responsibilities of the Security
Council, as stated in the Charter of the United Nations,
is the maintenance of international peace and stability.
The ongoing Western arms sales to Ukraine are not
only a violation of the Charter of the United Nations,
but they also reveal the geopolitical realities that
undergird the conflict. Indeed, it would be simplistic
to claim that it is the profits from Western arms sales
alone that are driving a wedge into the cause of peace.
The United States, where I live, has a long record of
waging unilateral military conflict on a global scale
in contravention of the Charter, with more than 800
foreign military bases, 11 command structures and a
public military budget of nearly $1 trillion. There is
now an open conflict within the United States foreignpolicy establishment over whether arming Ukraine to
maximum effect is a good idea or whether other military
matters deserve more attention. A leaked memorandum
from Air Force top brass claims that the United States
must prepare to go to war with China by 2025.
Ukraine therefore finds itself in the eye of a much
larger storm, one created by a policy of great Power
competition, or what is better termed great Power
confrontation led by the United States. Peace and
stability are not possible as long as the West pursues a
foreign policy of unilateral interventionism in Ukraine
to fulfil its larger geopolitical goal of unipolarity. That
policy runs completely counter to the principles of the
Charter, and the continued flow of arms to Ukraine

S/PV.9399

is a violation of Article 2, paragraph 3 of the Charter,
which requires Member States to resolve conflicts in a
peaceful manner. Those weapons are only prolonging
the conflict, with devastating consequences. The
United States and its Western partners — and anyone
else who goes along with them — must learn to operate
within the framework of international law, like all
other Member States. Otherwise the world will face the
continued threat of instability and war, whatever the
efforts of the Security Council and other organs of the
United Nations.
The President: I thank Mr. Haiphong for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank today’s briefers, and Mr. Haiphong
in particular, for his brave testimony as a representative
of civil society. His position is shared by many
Europeans and Americans whose voices, however, are
nowhere to be found in Western media.
For three months now we have been witnessing
the death throes of the Kyiv regime in the context of
Ukraine’s so-called strategic counteroffensive, which
according to Western propagandists was supposed to
yield a military victory. The entire NATO war machine
has been focused on that end, using billions of dollars
from the pockets of Western taxpayers. But in the end,
as the saying goes, the mountain gave birth to a mouse.
Even the West has been forced to admit that the only
result of the Ukrainian counteroffensive is tens of
thousands of dead Ukrainian soldiers and hundreds of
destroyed units of expensive Western equipment. And
as the entire world has seen, that equipment is not just
hardly unique or invulnerable to Russian weapons but in
many cases even inferior to Soviet equipment produced
50 years ago. The military training for troops and
operational planning by the Armed Forces of Ukraine
further reflect that sad state of affairs, as attested to
by captured Ukrainian servicemen who were trained
according to Western standards.
The complete collapse of Ukraine’s military
command system, along with widespread corruption
and disorganization, are now repelling even Western
mercenaries, who are beginning to realize that they
have been assigned roles not as valiant fighters for the
freedom of Ukraine but as mere cannon fodder. Against
that backdrop, the main intelligence directorate of

23-243245/18

S/PV.9399

Threats to international peace and security

Ukraine’s Ministry of Defence has begun recruiting all
over the world — including, we have learned, in Latin
America — for asocial elements who are prepared to
fight for much less money. Due to the total corruption in
the Ukrainian army, Western weapons are proliferating
uncontrollably around the world, surfacing on the
black market in conflict zones in the Balkans, Africa
and Latin America, directly undermining regional
security. It is Ukraine’s Western suppliers who are fully
responsible for that and who are ignoring all of their
obligations to track the end users of their weapons.
But the Western political establishment has not
been stopped by any of this. Last week, United States
President Joe Biden asked Congress for more than
$24 billion for Ukraine on top of the $113 billion already
spent in official aid. That amounts to approximately
$900 for every American family. Ordinary Americans,
as polls by the American media itself have shown, are
quite rightly asking why, given that the United States
itself is facing acute socioeconomic problems, such
colossal sums of money are not being spent on resolving
them. Why should the American people pay out of their
own pockets for the military ventures of the Democratic
Party? Public opinion in Germany and France is also
against supplying Taurus and SCALP cruise missiles
to Ukrainian nationalists. Yet the Western authorities,
despite their claims to “democracy”, are completely deaf
to the calls of their own citizens. They are demanding
that the Kyiv regime continue its suicidal “offensive” so
that they will see at least some results and can justify
new shipments of arms and equipment.
Who is the main beneficiary of such a policy? It
is certainly not ordinary Americans and Europeans.
By emptying out the military arsenals of their satellite
States and promising them discounted Western military
equipment in return, the United States military has
cleared the market for the American military industrial
complex’s products, so that they can sell those to their
own partners, following the scheme that has been
successfully used as far back as after the Second World
War. And these new weapons are once again being paid
for by Europe — not only with money, but also with
its sovereignty.
The independent defence policy that the European
Union had once been so assiduously building for
years has been completely subjugated to Washington’s
interests, just as it was during the cold war. As for
ordinary Ukrainians, neither Kyiv nor Western capitals
care about their fate. With chilling cynicism, Polish
6/18

17/08/2023

President Duda remarked the other day that “right
now, Russian imperialism can be stopped cheaply,
because American soldiers are not dying”, meaning
that in London, Warsaw, Paris and Berlin the lives of
Ukrainian soldiers, who are being sent into so-called
human wave attacks, are considered to be cheaper
than not just American lives but also expensive NATO
military equipment. It does not get any more obscene
than that.
There is no doubt that in its proxy war with Russia
to the last Ukrainian, the West is deliberately turning
Ukraine into an uninhabitable testing site contaminated
by radioactive elements and unexploded ordnance, which
are inhumane. The decision by London and Washington
to deliver depleted uranium and cluster munitions has
shocked not only the international community but even
their NATO allies. The Polish media are already saying
that radiation levels in the Western regions of Ukraine
and Eastern provinces of Poland have increased
following the destruction in May of depleted uranium
munitions at a storage site in Khmelnytskyi. However,
Britain and the United States do not care about
continental Europe, just as they did not care about the
consequences of the NATO bombardment of Yugoslavia
with depleted uranium. Cluster munitions, if used in
violation of international humanitarian law in civilian
areas — which is what Kyiv is doing — pose a severe
and long-term threat to civilians. That is why Laos and
Cambodia asked Ukraine not to use those weapons,
as those two countries had experienced first-hand the
dire repercussions of their use in the context of United
States aggression. Washington itself has for decades
moralized about and branded as war criminals all those
who have used those weapons. It seems that according
to their own logic, Zelenskyy and his henchmen are
war criminals, while Washington is directly aiding and
abetting them, and it bears full responsibility for their
past and future crimes.
We have heard assurances from the West that the
cluster weapons it supplied to Ukraine will not be used
in violation of international humanitarian law. That
is a blatant lie. The Kyiv regime has been carrying
out daily strikes with cluster munitions against
northern areas in Donetsk, where no military targets
are located. Their only aim is to terrorize the civilian
population — an act that is also expressly prohibited
under international humanitarian law but that is fully
in line with the tactics of the Kyiv regime, which has
long since resorted to open terrorism. Moreover, cluster
23-24324

17/08/2023

Threats to international peace and security

bombs do not afford any real military advantage, and
Washington understands that very well. Unlike that of
the United States, Russia’s position on the use of cluster
munitions is consistent and hews fully to the norms and
requirements of international humanitarian law.
In this very Chamber, our former partners from
the United States have foamed at the mouth, denying
that they developed biological weapons in laboratories
on Ukrainian territory, and they blocked a Russianinitiated investigation into the matter in the context of
the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention. What
will they say now that Robert Kennedy Jr., a Democrat
candidate for president, has confirmed those facts?
There is no doubt that going forward, the people of
Ukraine will definitely want to learn about how the
United States has effectively used them as guinea pigs
for their own military and biological experiments.
All persons responsible for those and many other
crimes against civilians committed by the Kyiv regime
with Western backing since 2014 will be identified
and receive the punishment they deserve. That process
is already well under way. I will give you just a few
recent examples. Anatoliy Kilyushyk, the commander
of a branch of the neo-Nazi Azov battalion, was
recently sentenced to 25 years in prison. Azov soldiers
Pavel Artemenko and Anton Rokanyuk, who shelled
residential buildings in the Donetsk People’s Republic
as their forces retreated last spring, were sentenced to
24 years in prison. Vitaliy Minenko, who had admitted
to the murder of a civilian in Mariupol, was sentenced
to 21 years in prison, while Ukrainian serviceman
Vasily Shitrya, who killed four civilians in Mariupol,
was sentenced to life imprisonment. Ukrainian marines
Vladimir Pafitsevich and Yevgeny Vakhnenko have
also been convicted and sentenced to 22 years in prison
for the murder of a Mariupol resident.
Since our previous meeting (see S/PV.9390), we
have seen an increase in the number of civilian sites
struck by Ukrainian anti-aircraft missiles. We all
remember how those hit the Transfiguration Cathedral
in Odesa, and recently Ukrainian missile crewmen also
burned down a supermarket there. Ukrainian social
networks are calling upon citizens to beware of their
national anti-aircraft systems deployed in residential
areas in contravention of international humanitarian
law. The Ukrainians understand very well that Russian
high-precision weapon strikes on the facilities related
to Ukrainian military capabilities in and of themselves
pose no threat to the civilian population.

S/PV.9399

Meanwhile, the Russian military are making
substantial progress in the Kharkiv oblast and are
preparing to liberate Kupyansk. The Kyiv regime. That
regime, which is covering up this disadvantageous
trend, however, has announced the forced evacuation of
37 towns and villages, including Kupyansk. That is not
surprising, as a substantial share of the local population
express an affinity with Russia and would prefer to await
the arrival of Russian troops. That said, Zelenskyy’s
regime has not hesitated to take children away from their
parents, who have been hiding them from Ukrainian
patrols in basements. In Kupyansk alone, more than
500 children face that threat. We draw the attention of
the United Nations and our colleagues on the Security
Council to those numerous flagrant violations of
international humanitarian law being committed by
Ukraine. We have been documenting and consolidating
them in order to find those responsible later.
The people of Ukraine are starting to understand
more and clearly that the Kyiv regime is driving it
down a suicidal path to serve the interests of Western
countries. This understanding is growing stronger
at all levels. One clear example is that, according to
the Ukrainian media, approximately 60 per cent of
diplomats have not returned from Ukrainian embassies
abroad since the beginning of 2022. If we are to believe
Ukrainian journalists, approximately 20 embassy staff
were supposed to return from the United States last
year, but only one did.
The Ukrainian leadership cannot help but realize
that its aggressive Russophobic policy has failed, yet
Volodymyr Zelenskyy, who has driven his country
into an impasse, has no other choice but to continue
going to foreign summits and begging for aid. The
supply of Western weapons is not bringing peace any
closer, as Western delegations claim, but they are the
only thing keeping Zelenskyy’s regime afloat for now.
However, no matter how hard they try, sooner or later
the Ukrainian people, which has paid too high a price
for the promotion of Western geopolitical interests, will
start asking the right questions and will want to hold to
account the true architects of this crisis. Many of them,
as all are well aware, are represented in this Chamber,
and today they will again repeat their unconvincing
mantra that there is a need to continue military
assistance to Ukraine as a “victim of aggression”. The
number of those still believing it is steadily dwindling,
as recent international contacts show. More and more
our international partners are becoming aware of the

23-243247/18

S/PV.9399

Threats to international peace and security

real causes of the Ukrainian crisis and the fact that
the supply of Western weapons to the Kyiv regime is
hindering the search for ways to resolve the crisis and
compounding the suffering of ordinary Ukrainians.
That trend is a direct result of, among other things, our
efforts to draw attention to this narrative in the Security
Council. We will therefore continue that effort, whether
the Western backers of the Kyiv regime like it or not.
Mrs. Chanda (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank the High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu,
for her statement. I have taken note of Mr. Danny
Haiphong’s remarks.
Since the last meeting on Ukraine (see S/PV.9390),
Russia has continued its relentless attacks on its
neighbouring country. We have expressed our concerns
about the impact of the Russian military aggression
on civilians in Ukraine on numerous occasions,
and we reiterate them today. Civilians are protected
by international humanitarian law and must not be
targeted. However, our appeals have not been heeded.
To the contrary, according to the United Nations
Humanitarian Coordinator in Ukraine, the number
of indiscriminate attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure has reached “unimaginable levels”. Since
the beginning of this month alone, we have received
many reports of the destruction of homes, restaurants,
shops and other civilian infrastructure in every region
of the country. Waves of attacks are affecting dozens
of civilians, including children, and are tearing whole
families apart. Strikes against Ukrainian port facilities
continue to increase the risks to global food security.

17/08/2023

Our position remains unchanged: we condemn
Russia’s military aggression against Ukraine, which
constitutes a serious violation of international law. Like
all States, Ukraine has the right to defend its territorial
integrity and ensure its security.
Switzerland calls for strict compliance with
international humanitarian law. The principles of
distinction, proportionality and precaution must be
respected in the conduct of hostilities. It is essential that
those responsible for serious violations of international
humanitarian law are held accountable for their actions,
in order to render justice to the victims and prevent the
recurrence of such violations in future. We recognize
the indispensable work of humanitarian actors who
provide aid in extremely difficult circumstances.
Switzerland welcomes the diplomatic efforts being
made to achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
in Ukraine, in accordance with the principles of the
United Nations Charter. We are ready to play an active
part in achieving this goal. If a diplomatic solution is
to be achieved, we call on Russia — once again — to
de-escalate the situation, cease all combat operations
and withdraw its troops from Ukrainian territory.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu,
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for her
valuable briefing, and I welcome the participation of
the representative of Ukraine in today’s meeting.

In addition, people helping the victims, including
medical personnel and humanitarian aid workers,
have been affected. Sometimes the same target is hit
twice within the space of minutes, endangering rescue
workers. Places where representatives of humanitarian
organizations are staying have also been targeted. The
means deployed to help the victims of the conflict are
therefore jeopardized. We recall that international
humanitarian law protects the wounded and medical
missions, as well as humanitarian personnel and
their activities.

The United Arab Emirates reiterates its adamant
call to the parties in Ukraine to make further proactive
efforts aimed at avoiding the dangers of weapons
diversion and at preventing weapons from falling into
the hands of terrorists or criminal groups during the
storage, transfer or distribution of such weapons and
munitions. In this context, we have expressed our
support for the United Nations and its Member States
in establishing criteria that would prevent, combat and
eradicate illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects, which was done through the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects and the International Tracing Instrument,
which are among the most valuable United Nations
initiatives designed to counter and mitigate those risks.

The list of atrocities suffered by the Ukrainian
people continues to grow. Switzerland disputes the
allegations that Ukraine and its partners are responsible
for the worsening of the current situation.

The responsibility of preventing weapons diversion
in conflicts is that of national authorities. We therefore
encourage the authorities to take all the steps necessary
to avoid any unforeseen consequences. In this regard,

8/18

23-24324

17/08/2023

Threats to international peace and security

we also stress that it is important to respect international
law, including international humanitarian law, for it
applies equally to all Member States, regardless of the
weapons source. The United Arab Emirates urges the
parties to the conflict in Ukraine to fully comply with
international law, including international humanitarian
law, and make every effort to ensure the protection of
civilians and the civilian objects necessary for their
survival, as well as to respect the basic principles of
necessity, proportionality and distinction.
The United Arab Emirates is extremely concerned
about the consequences of war on the civilians and the
worsening of the humanitarian crisis in Ukraine. There
have been more than a thousand attacks against healthcare facilities in the country, an average of two attacks
a day. Last week, rocket shrapnel fell on a children’s
hospital in Kyiv. Reports also refer to the killing or
injuring of three children a day as a result of the war.
In addition, nearly 2,000 educational institutions have
been destroyed due to the ongoing fighting.
The most important demand we can make,
therefore, is that the legal and moral responsibility for
the protection of civilians be assumed, that the suffering
of civilians be alleviated, and that the war be brought
to an end in line with international law, the Charter of
the United Nations, and the principles of sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity. The United Arab
Emirates expresses its full readiness to work with all
partners worldwide to set a serious path forward that
would lead to achieving a just and sustainable peace
in Ukraine.
Mr. Hamamoto (Japan): I thank UnderSecretary-General Nakamitsu and the other briefer for
their briefings.
Today’s meeting was called by Russia to discuss
the increasing Western arms transfers to Ukraine and
the undermining of efforts to find a peaceful solution.
Japan finds itself obliged to repeat its position. Russia’s
unprovoked war of aggression against Ukraine is the
origin of this war. Furthermore, Russia has repeatedly
attacked Ukrainian ports and held the world hostage.
We emphasize Ukraine’s right to self-defence against
Russian aggression. The supply of arms to Ukraine is
driven by the necessity for Ukraine to protect itself.
Japan has been stating this same position in the
Security Council since January. The support of the
international community for Ukraine has not changed
since the beginning of Russia’s aggression.

S/PV.9399

The Security Council is discussing Russia’s
aggression against Ukraine in this month of August
not only because of the immediate developments on the
ground, but also because the continuing aggression is a
matter of international peace and security. We expected
meetings on Ukraine to take place at the beginning
of this month. In this sense, it is difficult to see a
substantive difference between this and other meetings
that are scheduled in August.
Justice must be the cornerstone of any diplomatic
endeavour to end this war. Rather than suggesting that
support for Ukraine will imperil diplomatic efforts,
Russia should immediately withdraw all its troops and
military equipment from Ukraine. Russia must uphold
Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders.
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault (France) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
Today Russia is calling for a meeting to spread its
propaganda, but it is not fooling anyone. It was Russia,
on 24 February 2022, that deliberately undermined our
collective security with its war of aggression against
Ukraine — an illegal, unjustified and unprovoked
war. It was Russia alone that illegally decided to use
force and violate Ukraine’s territorial integrity and
sovereignty. It alone is guilty of war crimes and even
crimes against humanity.
Russia has the opportunity to put an end to the
war it has single-handedly unleashed by ceasing its
aggression and withdrawing its troops from Ukrainian
territory, without any prejudice to its security, as
demanded by the International Court of Justice as early
as 16 March 2022. But it refuses to do so.
There is no alternative to this withdrawal, if a just
and lasting peace that complies with international law
is to be ensured. The vast majority of the members of
the United Nations General Assembly have repeatedly
deplored this aggression and condemned Russia’s
attempt to illegally annex territory.
In the face of this act of aggression, Ukraine is
exercising its right to self-defence, recognized by Article
51 of the United Nations Charter. Consistent with its
principles, France has unflaggingly chosen to support
Ukraine in the exercise of its right. We will continue to
do so bilaterally and via the European Union to help the
Ukrainian people defend their freedom, sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity.

23-243249/18

S/PV.9399

Threats to international peace and security

France has pledged, together with its main
partners, to maintain its military support for Ukraine
for as long as necessary and to strengthen its defence
system, in particular by supporting its air defence
capabilities. In that way, France is helping Ukraine
to defend itself against Russian strikes against its
civilian infrastructure, which are in flagrant violation
of international humanitarian law, while Russia is
continuing to deliberately target those that enable grain
to be exported from Ukraine.
By supporting the Ukrainian counter-offensive,
we hope to shift the balance of power and create the
conditions for a diplomatic settlement of the conflict.
It is on that basis that credible negotiations can be
envisaged, when Ukraine so decides, leading to a just
and lasting peace.
Russia is pointing to Western arms deliveries to
Ukraine but let us not forget the facts: it was Russia
alone that decided on this war, and it is also Russia that
is violating international law and in particular Security
Council resolutions. In particular, it is obtaining combat
drones from Iran, in violation of resolution 2231 (2015).
It is also acquiring missiles and munitions from North
Korea, despite the resolutions and sanctions adopted by
the Council.
This war of aggression is having catastrophic
consequences for the Ukrainian people and for the
entire world, especially among the populations of the
most vulnerable countries. It is also a dead end for
Russia, after almost 18 months of conflict.
Our support for Ukraine will not waver. There is
only one way out: a peace consistent with the Charter of
the United Nations, which respects the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Mr. Anyanah (Ghana): I thank High Representative
Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing. We have also taken
note of the remarks of Mr. Danny Haiphong.

17/08/2023

defend its territorial integrity, political independence
and sovereignty.
As expected in conflict settings, arms proliferate.
The aggression against Ukraine is not an exception,
and it is in that context that we reiterate the importance
of the Russian Federation heeding the many calls made
across different parts of the world for it to withdraw its
troops from the internationally recognized borders of
Ukraine. The negative impact that the proliferation of
arms poses to international peace and security affects
different parts of the world, with civilian populations
bearing the greatest brunt, including the loss of lives
and the displacement of thousands of men, women and
children whose only chance of survival is to escape and
seek refuge elsewhere under deplorable conditions.
We re-emphasize the need to respect the regime of
arms control aimed at preventing the diversion of arms
and regulating international arms trade. Adherence
by States to their obligations under those global
arrangements, such as the Arms Trade Treaty, the
United Nations Register of Conventional Arms and the
European Union Common Position on arms exports,
as well as national regulations, can help mitigate
illegal proliferation.
We re-emphasize the point we have consistently
made that the continuation of the war is not the solution
to achieving the desires of the parties and strongly urge
the cessation of hostilities and the resort to dialogue and
diplomacy to agree on a political and just settlement on
the basis of the Charter of the United Nations and the
tenets of international law.
We reiterate our call on the parties to fulfil their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
human rights law and to ensure that their military
actions do not harm civilians or civilian infrastructure.

The consequences of war are grave, and it is in
that regard that the Charter of the United Nations has
clearly proscribed the use of force or threat of force in
State relations except in the limited instances when
it is necessary for self-defence or required under the
mechanisms of collective security.

With the myriad challenges facing the world at the
present moment, the Russian war against Ukraine adds
another painful layer to prevailing global hardships. We
re-emphasize the importance of ending this unjustified
war as a matter of urgency through the immediate and
unconditional withdrawal of the Russian Federation’s
troops from the internationally recognized borders
of Ukraine.

As we know, Ukraine did not start the present war
and has no choice in stopping hostilities or withdrawing
its troops. It has a duty and a legitimate right to

Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank High Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing,
and I thank Mr. Haiphong for his briefing.

10/18

23-24324

17/08/2023

Threats to international peace and security

The Security Council has considered in multiple
meetings the issue of arms supply to Ukraine, and
China has expressed its position and propositions many
times. In particular, we find the dire consequences of
the continuous provision of weapons to the battlefield
worrisome and disconcerting. Currently, the massive
influx of weapons and equipment to the battlefield
persists with an expanding spillover effect, making the
hope of achieving an end to the hostilities more remote.
Weapons may be used to win the war, but they
cannot win peace. Restoring peace requires dialogue
and consultation. For some time now, an increasing
number of countries have raised their voices of
reason and proposed peace initiatives. We hope that
relevant parties will respond positively to the call of
the international community, keep calm and maintain
restraint, refrain from the escalation of tensions, step
up engagement, galvanize consensus and gradually
create conditions for the final settlement of the crisis.
On the issue of Ukraine, China has remained
consistently on the side of peace and dialogue and
actively promoted peace talks. We are firmly convinced
that, in the face of difficulties, it is all the more
necessary to leave space for peace and, especially when
divergences are acute, efforts to promote dialogue must
not be renounced.
Saudi Arabia recently hosted an international summit
on the issue of Ukraine. The Special Representative of
the Chinese Government on Eurasian Affairs attended
the summit, engaged and communicated extensively
with all parties and elaborated on China’s position
and propositions.
China will continue to work on the basis of its
position paper entitled “China’s position on the political
settlement of the Ukraine crisis”, step up dialogue and
communication with all parties and play a constructive
role in promoting the political settlement of the
Ukraine crisis.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I thank High Representative
Nakamitsu for her updates.
Malta strongly condemns Russia’s invasion of
Ukraine, which is a blatant violation of the Charter
of the United Nations and international law. We are
unwavering in our support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity within its internationally recognized
borders and its inherent right to self-defence.

S/PV.9399

I reiterate that Russia bears the sole responsibility
for its war of aggression in Ukraine. Russia is seeking
to subdue a sovereign neighbouring country through
the use of force to expand its territory and extend
its borders.
The grave humanitarian crisis resulting from
Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine must be at
the centre of our deliberations. The Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights has recorded more
than 26,000 civilian casualties in Ukraine since the start
of the war. An estimated 5.1 million people have been
internally displaced and more than 6.2 million have
crossed into neighbouring countries. Of those figures,
90 per cent represent women and children, who are at
risk of gender-based violence and sexual exploitation
and abuse, while facing perilous health conditions.
Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine
continues to pose serious and direct threats to the safety
and security of Ukraine’s nuclear facilities. Nuclear
incidents should be avoided at all costs. Unfortunately,
we are all too familiar with the indiscriminate and
devastating effects that would have on lives and
the environment.
The war not only threatens the security of the region,
but is having a serious impact on the entire world.
By withdrawing from the Black Sea Grain Initiative,
the Russian Federation has consciously weaponized
food security. The naval blockade and attacks on
Ukrainian ports, as well as the illegal boarding of ships
by the Russian armed forces, is further evidence of
Moscow’s strategy to use food security to create global
disruption. That is unacceptable. The attacks on critical
infrastructure have also continued unabated, including
most recently in the Kharkiv region. Malta strongly
condemns Russia’s actions, in particular the vile attacks
on civilians and civilian infrastructure, which should
never be targets, and we reiterate our call on Russia
to cease such attacks immediately. On a related note,
we would like to point to our commitment to holding
Russia accountable for all its crimes and violations.
We support the ongoing efforts of the International
Criminal Court and the International Court of Justice
and welcome the Register of Damage Caused by the
Aggression of the Russian Federation Against Ukraine
and the International Centre for the Prosecution of the
Crime of Aggression Against Ukraine.
Ending this war and its negative consequences
depend exclusively on this permanent member of the

23-2432411/18

S/PV.9399

Threats to international peace and security

Security Council. We also want to remind members
of Ukraine’s legitimate and sacrosanct right to selfdefence, enshrined in Article 51 of the Charter of the
United Nations.
In conclusion, we once again urge the Russian
Federation to end its hostilities, withdraw its military
forces and proxies from the entire territory of Ukraine
within its internationally recognized borders and
embark on constructive dialogue and diplomacy as the
means to establish lasting peace, stability and security.
Mr. Fernandes (Mozambique): I would like to start
by thanking the presidency for convening this briefing
at the request of the Russian Federation. I would also
like to thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, Under-SecretaryGeneral and High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, for her insightful briefing, and Mr. Danny
Haiphong for his presentation.
The ongoing conflict between Russia and Ukraine,
coupled with the increase in weapons transfers, poses
a serious threat to global peace and security. As
Mozambique has repeatedly done previously in this
Chamber, we call urgently for an immediate cessation
of hostilities as the most desirable and significant step
towards ending this worrisome armed conflict. In
that context, we welcome the recent peace initiatives,
including those led by African States and the summit
held in Jeddah.
As the military hostilities continue into their
nineteenth month, there are no clear prospects for a
settlement. Mozambique is deeply concerned about
the prevailing reliance on a military solution in lieu of
diplomatic engagement. With the intensification of the
conflict and the continued proliferation of arms, our
apprehension is growing along with the likelihood that
the region will turn into a ticking time bomb. Even a
minor miscalculation could potentially ignite a fullscale confrontation with unimaginably devastating
global repercussions.
Mozambique is deeply worried about the possibility
that the continuing escalation of military rhetoric and
arms acquisition could drive us to the most perilous of
thresholds — the deployment of troops by allied parties
and the potential use of tactical nuclear weapons. As
the High Representative highlighted in this Chamber in
April (see S/PV.9301), the illicit and unregulated transfer
of arms can instigate, fuel and prolong armed conflict
and violence, terrorism and crime. We have stated clearly
that public announcements of arms deliveries outside
12/18

17/08/2023

the United Nations arms-control and disarmament
framework will lead to further confrontation and take
us further away from de-escalation and compromise. At
a time when the world is facing existential challenges,
recovering from a crippling pandemic and battling the
repercussions of climate change, the looming threat of
global terrorism and mounting humanitarian needs, this
conflict is diverting essential resources and deepening
divisions. Money for weapons procurement means
fewer resources for tackling critical global challenges.
As a guardian of global peace and security, over
the years the Security Council has adopted numerous
resolutions addressing arms control, disarmament and
non-proliferation in the context of armed conflicts
and broader security concerns, including its landmark
resolution 1540 (2004). The Council must therefore
remain a central player in advocating for peace,
reminding all the parties to the conflict of the need to
adhere to the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and its pledge to avert the scourge of war.
We therefore reiterate our urgent call on the parties
to the conflict to make use of diplomatic channels
and dialogue in order to seek a negotiated and lasting
solution in accordance with the purposes and principles
of the Charter.
Mr. Phipps (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu for her
briefing today.
Last week Russian missiles targeted hotels in
Pokrovsk and Zaporizhzhya. As people rushed to
rescue the wounded from the rubble, further missiles
hit both locations — a double-tap strike, deliberately
timed to kill first responders. On Sunday, a baby, just
22 days old, her 12-year-old brother and their parents
were among seven people killed by Russian shells in
Kherson. On Tuesday, a Russian missile ripped through
a playground in Lviv. That is how Russia’s leaders
conduct their war of choice, and it is why we are proud
to support Ukraine as it defends itself in line with
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
The United Kingdom wants peace. Ukraine
wants peace. Indeed, the whole world wants peace.
But President Putin has shown that he is not serious
about any peace that respects international law. While
last week Ukraine and international partners from all
over the globe discussed the importance of a just and
sustainable peace underpinned by the Charter, Russia
continued to drop bombs on Ukrainian ports and grain
23-24324

17/08/2023

Threats to international peace and security

silos, targeting the world’s food supply. Russia now
claims that it is under assault from the West. But it
was President Putin who chose to invade Ukraine in
February of last year, despite calls from within the
Security Council to withdraw Russian troops from
Ukraine’s borders. It was Putin who ordered hundreds
of thousands of Russian troops to go their deaths on the
soil of another country to which they should never have
been sent. It is his choices that have diminished Russia’s
standing in the world and destroyed the trust of Russia’s
neighbours. It is President Putin who is hurting Russia.
The Russian authorities estimate that as many as
a million people left the country in 2022. Many have
spoken of their concerns about the war and its impact.
Others fled to avoid being conscripted to fight. Those
who have stayed face dire consequences for speaking
out. It is telling that our Russian colleagues can rely
only on fringe journalists to defend their war in this
Chamber. Let me be clear. An unstable Russia is in
none of our interests, and we have the highest respect
for the Russian people. President Putin could end the
suffering of the Ukrainian people and Russia’s own
soldiers tomorrow by withdrawing all Russian forces
from within Ukraine’s internationally recognized
territory. Until then we will continue to help Ukraine
defend itself.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): Let me start by thanking
High Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing.
Here we are at another meeting on Ukraine, on a
topic that we have discussed many times before. The
Security Council was unable to adopt a programme of
work for this month because of the meeting planned
on Ukraine. At least for now, two meetings have been
scheduled on a subject that according to Russia cannot
be allowed to be included in our programme of work.
We wonder if this is not just a tactic to create a kind
of inflation in the work of the Security Council on
the issue and create a derogatory sense of Ukraine in
the United Nations. It will not work. An unprovoked
and unjustified military aggression against a United
Nations Member State is not routine. And a threat to
European security, with a worldwide economic and
humanitarian impact, cannot be taken lightly. That is
what 143 United Nations Member States have strongly
and clearly spelled out — more than once.
As we have heard several times here and just heard
again from Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu, the
arms transfers to Ukraine are open data. Everything is

S/PV.9399

legal, justified and for the right cause. The Ukrainian
people are fighting fiercely, defending their country and
its sovereignty, freedom and independence. Those are
the core principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and the Helsinki Final Act, including that borders may
not be changed by force. The international community
is helping Ukraine in that regard, based on international
law and the United Nations Charter. We reiterate that
Article 51 of the United Nations Charter provides a
very clear legal basis for individual States to offer any
kind of assistance to a country exercising its inherent
right to self-defence in protecting its sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
The arms transfer to Ukraine has been conducted
in accordance with national legislation and the Arms
Trade Treaty, and with the obligations that arise from
conducting it, as well as an assessment of the risk of
diversion. An ad hoc commission, established by the
Ukrainian Parliament, is responsible for monitoring the
entire process, so that weapons are used for defence
purposes and do not fall into the wrong hands. On
the other hand, Russia, a permanent member of the
Security Council, is using weapons illegally procured
from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and
Iran, thereby blatantly violating the resolutions of the
Security Council. Let me emphasize that Albania has
aligned itself with the decision of the Council of the
European Union (EU) of 20 July on a new sanctions
framework in view of Iran’s military support to Russia,
which prohibits the export from the EU to Iran of
components used in the development and production
of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). It also provides
for a travel ban and asset-freeze measures that could be
imposed against persons responsible for supporting or
involved in Iran’s UAV programme.
No distorted narrative — however hard one tries
to impose it — can change the reality in Ukraine. It
cannot disguise the killing and suffering of innocent
civilians. According to the recent report of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, 48 civilians have been killed and another 210
injured as a result of the aggression during the first
two weeks of this month alone. Russia continues its
attacks on Ukraine’s civilian infrastructure. After
withdrawing from the Black Sea Grain Initiative, Russia
is deliberately attacking ports and grain warehouses in
order to make grain exports from Ukraine impossible
in the future. It knows that those acts constitute war
crimes, but they fit with its aims. If the war continues,

23-2432413/18

S/PV.9399

Threats to international peace and security

calculations show that in the next three to five years,
Ukraine will lose approximately 2 million tons of
agricultural production each year, which will amount
to approximately $1.5 billion in losses.
There are many ways to inflict pain on civilians
during a war. Russia is using them all: killing them in
their houses, destroying vital infrastructure and now
assaulting their food. In that way, Russia is punishing
not only Ukrainians but also many around the world
who risk not having enough food for their families.
Global prices are rising, and food security problems will
only worsen in the short term. Countries with a heavy
dependence on imports will continue to experience
shortages, which could cause political instability in
many parts of the globe through geopolitical conflicts
and famine. While Russian missiles are destroying
hundreds of thousands of tons of grain in the Odesa
region, which should have been shipped through the
grain corridor, hunger and poverty will hit the most
vulnerable countries in Africa and South-East Asia.
That is why this war must end. That is why Russia should
put an end to it. Until then, the support for Ukraine
should continue, with the hope that Russia will realize
that the best solution is for it to withdraw all its troops
from Ukraine and engage seriously in peace talks.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I thank UnderSecretary-General Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing. I
welcome the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to
this meeting.
It is disturbing to see that some of the worst
predictions about the conflict’s trajectory seem to be
coming true. Brazil recognizes the right of all States
to self-defence under Article 51 of the Charter of
the United Nations. However, the increasing flow of
weapons into the conflict in Ukraine is based on the
doubtful assumption that there is a military solution
to this conflict. Indeed, the introduction, threat of use
or use of certain weapons in the conflict can erode
the potential for a peaceful resolution to the conflict,
spiralling into further acts of violence and making a
de-escalation of hostilities even less likely. We share the
concern about the risk that weapons and ammunition
transferred to any conflict zones can end up in the
hands of non-State actors, including criminal and
terrorist groups, which becomes an additional factor of
instability in the long term. Brazil endorses the call for
all Member States to adhere to the Arms Trade Treaty
and other international instruments in order to prevent
the diversion of arms.
14/18

17/08/2023

It is imperative to reflect on the consequences of the
current escalation. In addition to the risk of diversion,
it is necessary to bear in mind the suffering inflicted
on the civilian population and the impact of the current
trends on our collective security. We remind all States,
in particular those directly involved in the conflict, of
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
Innocent civilians should never be targets of military
operations. We urge the parties to prevent harm to
residential areas, to energy and transport infrastructure,
including port facilities, and most important of all to
human lives.
Brazil believes that only a political solution, taking
into account the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine and the legitimate security concerns of all the
parties, will bring a lasting peace. We renew our call
for a de-escalation of hostilities and the establishment
of negotiations, either directly or through the other
peaceful means described in Article 33 of the United
Nations Charter.
Ms. Koumby Missambo (Gabon) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Izumi
Nakamitsu for her briefing. I also paid close attention
to Mr. Haiphong’s briefing.
We are concerned about the announcements of
additional arms deliveries and the rhetoric with regard
to offensives, counter-offensives and new military
alliances, at a time when many voices around the world
are calling for de-escalation and for solutions to be
sought to end the war. We are all the more alarmed
that the fighting continues to uproot the lives of
more than 7 million innocent civilians and that 9,444
civilians have been killed. One of the most dreaded
scenarios is unfolding — namely that of massive
rearmament — which clearly demonstrates a reversal
of the direction of progress expected and desired by
most United Nations Member States, which have made
remarkable efforts in favour of disarmament, marked
in particular by the adoption of important treaties on
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, the creation
of nuclear-weapon-free zones and, more recently, the
entry into force of the Treaty on the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons.
The risks associated with the massive circulation
of conventional weapons are just as worrisome, given
their long-term effects on civilian populations, whether
through the insecurity driven by small arms and light
weapons or the delayed effects of cluster munitions. The
23-24324

17/08/2023

Threats to international peace and security

parties must take the necessary precautions to prevent
such risks, notably through existing mechanisms, such
as the International Tracing Instrument and the Arms
Trade Treaty.
We are concerned that the scenario that is taking
shape will lead to prolonging the war, in contradiction
of the obligations of every member of the Security
Council and every member of the United Nations to act
in favour of international peace and security. In that
regard, I would like to emphasize and reiterate our
shared commitment, in the spirit of the Charter of the
United Nations, to protecting the peoples of the world
from the scourge of war. I also reiterate my country’s
opposition to war.
The immediate consequence of the intensified
fighting is an exponential worsening of the humanitarian
situation, with civilian infrastructure and populations
being the primary targets of bombardments, including in
the latest attacks in Odesa. Humanitarian organizations
are struggling to raise the $4.3 billion expected for
the humanitarian response, which has received only
30 per cent of the funding pledged, according to the
latest statistics from the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. At the same time, military aid is
at an all-time high, estimated by some sources to have
reached nearly $160 billion.
I would like to conclude by stressing the urgency of
bringing the conflict to an end. We call on all parties
to activate the channels of dialogue and negotiation
to silence the guns and pave the way for peace and
peaceful coexistence.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
What kind of resistance to a military invasion is
possible without weapons and military means? That has
not generally been the case in the wars of this century
or the previous one. When has war not been a voracious
driver of increased arms production and supply or of
an arms race? The former Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics — whose historic role in the victory against
the Nazis we of course recognize — received supplies
of armaments and military equipment for its campaigns
from third countries. Today we deem it contradictory
that on the one hand a neighbouring country has been
militarily invaded and occupied, while on the other,
on the diplomatic side, it is claimed that equipping the
invaded and occupied country militarily undermines
peace. Which provision of the Charter of the United

S/PV.9399

Nations undermines the right of peoples to legitimate
self-defence?
I thank the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, for her briefing. I
want to reiterate Ecuador’s position whereby we reject
armed violence, militarization and armaments. I also
reiterate our continuing concern about the threats to
peace, security and stability posed by large-scale flows
of arms and ammunition into any conflict situation. It
is therefore essential to intensify and uphold standards
of marking, record-keeping and traceability of arms
and ammunition. We support any measures aimed at
preventing the diversion and spread of weapons and the
escalation of conflict, efforts that will be key to postconflict recovery.
We will continue to insist on the need to prioritize
the protection of civilians and the objective of global
stability over any other logic of industry, production
or distribution. We recognize that the supply of certain
defence materials and systems, including air defence,
will contribute to reducing the destruction of civilian
infrastructure and the numbers of casualties. To that
end, it is essential to focus on the question of use.
Any supply of arms or ammunition must be subject to
guarantees of respect for the principles of distinction,
proportionality and precaution in their use. For that
reason, Ecuador will continue to reject the production,
transfer and use of cluster munitions. Likewise, the
supply of weapons must serve the purposes of security
and protection alone and should never be used merely
for testing new materials in a theatre of confrontation.
In conclusion, we urge the Russian Federation to
stop its attacks on civilian infrastructure, including
ports and food supplies, especially considering that a
year and a half has already elapsed since the invasion
began. We insist that it definitively cease its military
aggression in order to make way for a peaceful
solution that is based not on the logic of domination or
neocolonial aggression but on that of the Charter of the
United Nations and of peace and diplomacy, and that it
is always guided by the principle of justice established
by the General Assembly, which underpins a just and
lasting peace in Ukraine.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
Let me first thank High Representative Nakamitsu
for her briefing today. Her continued leadership in the
global effort to counter the diversion of weapons, and

23-2432415/18

S/PV.9399

Threats to international peace and security

the steadfast efforts of the Office for Disarmament
Affairs in that regard, is critical.
The United States will continue to demonstrate its
enduring commitment to supporting Ukraine’s selfdefence, including through the provision of arms and
equipment that enable Ukraine to defend its territory
and protect its people from Russia’s unprovoked and
unjustified aggression. Russia continues to falsely
allege that it is the unified support of Ukraine’s defence
from more than 50 nations that is exacerbating the war
and hindering peace discussions. Think about that.
Russia is telling us that it is not the invading country
that is responsible for the crisis, but rather alleging that
it is the country that is doing everything in its power
to defend itself from an illegal invasion that is at fault.
That narrative is hypocritical and preposterous, and it
strains credulity to breaking point. It is Russia’s fullscale invasion of its sovereign neighbour that violates
the Charter of the United Nations and constitutes a
threat to international peace and security. Russia’s
efforts to insinuate otherwise are farcical.
Again, Russia’s illegal invasion and continued
aggression inside Ukraine’s borders, including daily
rocket and drone attacks that hit civilian infrastructure
and kill innocent people, are the undeniable cause
aggravating the crisis and undermining efforts to
find a peaceful solution. Every day Russia continues
those violations in Ukraine, which have united the
international community in support of Ukraine and
in support of the principles of sovereignty, territorial
integrity and the right to self-defence — all in the
Charter. Russia’s decision to call yet another of these
wasteful meetings instead is a clear tactic intended
to distract from the Kremlin’s actions undermining
international peace and security. While Russia attempts
to brazenly rewrite history, we cannot be distracted
from the truth of its destabilizing activities in Ukraine
and elsewhere. Russia’s irresponsible nuclear rhetoric
and its announced stationing of its nuclear weapons
on the territory of Belarus risk further aggravating an
already highly dangerous situation.
The Russian Federation is seeking increased
military cooperation with the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, including by pressing Kim Jong
Un to sell additional arms to Moscow to fuel its war in
Ukraine. Such arms transfers are a violation of Security
Council resolutions that Russia voted in favour of. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea already made
an initial delivery of weapons to the Kremlin-backed
16/18

17/08/2023

Wagner Group last November, in violation of Security
Council resolutions. On 16 August, the United States
Treasury Department designated three entities
connected to the Slovak national Ashot Mkrtychev,
whom we previously designated for attempting to
facilitate such arms transfers. Last month, on 20 July,
the Department of State designated two individuals
involved in the shipment of those munitions to Russia,
including one Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea national.
Furthermore, in clear violation of Security
Council resolution 2231 (2015), Russia has procured
armed drones from Iran and then deployed those
uncrewed aerial vehicles in cruel, lethal attacks
against civilians in Ukraine. The United States renews
its call on the Secretary-General to investigate those
serious violations.
We have seen reports that a Russian warship fired
shots at the Sukru Okan cargo vessel headed towards
a Ukrainian port through the Black Sea on Sunday,
13 August. We strongly condemn such actions. Russia
is once again acting recklessly in the Black Sea, and the
effects of its unlawful war of choice are having ripple
effects in terms of shipping safety and commercial
activity, in addition to impeding the international
community’s efforts to deliver food to those who need
it most. Russia must comply with its international legal
obligations and respect freedom of navigation. Further,
Russia continues to use food as a weapon of war. Just
yesterday, we awoke yet again to reports of Russian
strikes on grain facilities and ports along the Danube.
Those attacks are inexcusable.
We cannot forget Russia’s brutal, unrelenting
attacks against Ukraine and its people for the last 18
months. Putin has shown no interest in meaningful
diplomacy since first starting this unprovoked war
nearly one and a half years ago. In fact, since we last
discussed this topic in June (see S/PV.9357), it is Russia
that has escalated its brutalization of Ukraine’s people
and weaponized food through its unilateral withdrawal
from the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
Let us be clear: Western weapons provided to
Ukraine to prevent Russia’s brutalization of Ukraine’s
people are not the cause of this war, nor are they
prolonging this war. That responsibility is the Kremlin’s
alone. Russia remains the sole obstacle to peace in
Ukraine. The Government of Ukraine and the United
States continue to work together to maintain safeguards
23-24324

17/08/2023

Threats to international peace and security

against diversion, while responsibly providing for
Ukraine’s ability to exercise its inherent right of
self-defence against Russia’s brutal war. Ukraine has
been a transparent and willing partner, as we stress
accountability and ensure robust processes to counter
any attempts at illicit diversion. Battlefield losses occur
in every conflict, and we cannot speak for what Russia
does with the arms it captures. Pro-Russia forces pose
the greatest risk of onward trafficking. Russia has even
stated publicly that it will supply captured weapons to
non-State actors. The best way to address that risk is for
Russia to end its war of aggression.
If Russia were concerned about reducing conflict
and mitigating the potential diversion of illicit
weapons, it would choose to end the war it started and
withdraw its forces rather than escalate with nuclear
rhetoric, barrages of missiles, human rights abuses and
war crimes, crimes against humanity and violations of
various Security Council resolutions and of the Charter
of the United Nations. We once again renew our calls
for Russia to do so immediately.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Dvornyk (Ukraine): I recognize the
representative of Putin’s regime in the permanent seat
of the Soviet Union.
It is a matter of concern that that seat is still
being misused to turn the Council into a platform for
disseminating propaganda and justifying the war of
aggression. Akin to an experienced criminal before a
jury, Putin’s envoy attempts to shift responsibility by
blaming the victim for provocations, inappropriate
behaviour — you name it. We have heard so
many falsehoods meant to whitewash the Russian
aggression — secret biolabs, dirty bombs, war
mosquitoes — that one could hardly expect something
more bizarre and insane. However, every time we
think Russia can no longer surprise us, it hits a new
low. This time, Russian intelligence chief Naryshkin
shared with the audience of the so-called Moscow
security conference the most recent revelations about
the so-called “biomechanoids” that the West is going
to replace human beings with. I wonder why Putin’s
envoy has not brought this interesting fairy tale to
the Council’s attention — perhaps he felt too shy or
decided to request a special Security Council meeting
on the matter. The latter would not be surprising, as

S/PV.9399

it would be in line with Russia’s deliberate practice of
undermining the Council’s credibility.
It seems that Russia’s greatest outrage — which
is also the reason for this meeting – is caused by the
fact that Ukraine and Ukrainians have not accepted
the role of helpless victim. On the contrary, they have
opted for resistance and are fighting for their lives and
dignity. Ukraine has faced a cruel and unprovoked
attack that targets not only our statehood, but also the
very existence of the Ukrainian nation. Just tune into
Russian television or watch Russian movies, browse
Russian social media or open new Russian schoolbooks,
and everywhere you will find narratives portraying
the Ukrainian people as inferior and suggesting that
Ukrainians do not have the right to their own State.
The occupied territories bear the heaviest burden of
those neocolonial practices, suffering from enforced
assimilation and repressive measures for manifesting
Ukrainian identity, in addition to changes to the
population’s demographic composition, wrought by
deporting local Ukrainian residents and bringing in
migrants from Russia instead.
For my nation, this is an existential battle for
survival. It was Russia’s choice to attack, and it is our
response to defend ourselves, in strict accordance with
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations. We will
persevere in our fight until every Ukrainian citizen
and every parcel of our sovereign land is liberated and
Russia faces a military defeat in Ukraine. All weapons,
whether produced by Ukraine or received from our allies,
serve this goal: to survive and to stop the dictatorship
infected with insane imperial sentiments. To that end,
Ukraine will continue targeting all legitimate military
objectives, including enemy troops, storage facilities,
military hardware and logistical routes used to resupply
the Russian occupying forces.
That approach stands in stark contrast to the
terrorist methods of warfare employed by the Russian
forces, which raze to the ground the towns within
their reach and use their missiles and drones to kill
civilian populations and destroy critical infrastructure
throughout the country. Among the most recent tragic
examples is the killing of an entire family — a husband,
a wife, a 12-year-old boy and a 23-day-old girl in the
village of Shyroka Balka in the liberated part of the
Kherson region on 13 August. Two days earlier, on the
opposite side of the country, in the western region of
Ivano-Frankivsk, a Russian missile killed an eightyear-old boy.

23-2432417/18

S/PV.9399

Threats to international peace and security

Yesterday Russia again struck grain export
infrastructure in the Odesa region, damaging grain
warehouses and foodstuffs at the river port of Reni on
the Danube. That was Russia’s seventh massive attack
in a month, since its attempt to undermine the Black Sea
Grain Initiative. The port of Reni, the port of Izmail,
the port of Pivdennyi, the port of Odesa, the port of
Chernomorsk, Mykolayiv — every Russian attack on
them is a blow to global food prices and a blow to social
and political stability in different parts of the world. As
follows from the examination of the remnants of the
Kh-101 fired at Ukrainian cities on 15 August, Russia
is able to produce them because there are still ways to
circumvent the sanctions. These loopholes should be
closed, and the sanctions strengthened, so that Russia
cannot obtain from abroad critical components for
missile production.
Despite the fierce Russian attacks against
my country, which continue unabated, Ukraine
is extremely active on the peace track, seeking a
just, comprehensive and lasting peace based on the
principles of the United Nations Charter, as outlined
in General Assembly resolution ES-11/6, adopted on

18/18

17/08/2023

23 February 2023, and the peace formula plan proposed
by President Zelenskyy. The recent meeting in Jeddah,
Saudi Arabia, has contributed to translating this vision
into reality, and we will build on the dialogue that the
representatives of more than 40 countries engaged
in there.
In his statement, the representative of Ecuador
mentioned the victory over Nazism, which was the
shared achievement of the Allied forces. The truth is
that, starting with the attempted annexation of Crimea,
the Russian Federation has cosplayed Nazi criminals,
employing their practices of protecting compatriots,
making territorial claims based on fake history and
bombing Kyiv at the same early hour. The Third Reich
never made a resurgence because it was militarily
defeated and its political, economic, and military
leadership was brought to justice. A similar fate is
expected for Putin’s regime. The sooner this comes to
pass the better, not only for Ukraine, but for all of us, as
well as for the integrity of this body, which increasingly
erodes with each passing day that Putin’s Russia sits
in it.
The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.

23-24324
