VI.

--

--

ea! and international, in Somalia, in the planning and implementation of refugee projects and refugee-related development activities;
12. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme to apprise the Economic and
Social Council at its second regular session of 1988 of the
progress made in their respective fields of responsibility
with regard to those provisions of the present resolution
which concern them;
13. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the United Nations High Commissioner and the
United Nations Development Programme, to submit a report to the General Assembly at its forty-third session on
the progress achieved in the implementation of the present
resolution.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987
42/128.

Emergency assistance to voluntary returnees
and displaced persons in Chad

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 41 / 140 of 4 December 1986 on
emergency assistance to voluntary returnees and displaced
persons in Chad, as well as all its previous resolutions on
this question,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
emergency humanitarian assistance 10 voluntary returnees
and displaced persons in Chad, 148
Deeply concerned about the persistence of the drought
and the invasion of locusts and predators, which are compounding the already precarious food and health situation
in Chad,
Conscious that the large number of voluntary returnees
and displaced persons resulting from the war and the
drought in Chad poses a serious problem of integrating
them into society,
Considering the mass return to their home villages of
persons displaced as a result of war and drought in the
northern region of Chad,
Bearing in mind the many appeals made by the Government of Chad for international emergency assistance to
the voluntary returnees and displaced persons in Chad,
who are victims of the war and of natural disasters,
1. Endorses the appeals made by the Government of
Chad for emergency assistance to the voluntary returnees
and displaced persons in Chad;
2. Reiterates its appeal to all States and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to support,
by generous contributions, the efforts being made by the
Government of Chad to assist and resettle the voluntary
returnees and displaced persons in Chad;
3. Takes note with satisfaction of the action undertaken
by the various organizations oft he United Nations system
and the specialized agencies with a view to mobilizing
emergency humanitarian assistance to the voluntary
returnees and displaced persons in Chad;
4. Again requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator to mobilize emergency humanitarian assistance to the voluntary returnees and displaced persons
in Chad;

---··

--

5.

Calls upon the Secretary-General to continue his ef-

forh t,, mobilize special humanitarian assistance for the

resettlement of displaced persllllS in the northern region of
Chad.
6. Rt'quests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator, to
report to the General Assembly at its forty-third session
on the 1mplernentation ,,f the present resolution.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December /987
42/129.

Situation of refugees in the Sudan

Illl' (i,,neral Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 41/ 139 of 4 December 1986 and
its other previous resolutions on the situation of refugees
in the Sudan,
Hav1nf.!. considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral149 on the situation of refugees in the Sudan and
the report of the inter-agency mission annexed thereto,
Appreciating the important measures that the Government (lf the Sudan is taking in order to provide shelter,
protection, food, education and health and other
humanitarian services to a very large and persistent number of refugees in the Sudan,
Recognizing the heavy burden placed on the people and
Government of the Sudan and the sacrifices they are making in caring for the refugees and the need for adequate international assistance to enable them to continue their efforts to provide assistance to the refugees,
Gravely concerned at the continuing serious social and
economic impact of the massive presence of refugees, as
well as its far-reaching consequences for the country's development, security and stability,
Expressing its appreciation for the assistance rendered by
Member States and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations in support of the refugee programme in the Sudan,
Bearing in mind the tindings and recommendations of
the inter-agency mission to the Sudan reported to the General Assembly at its forty-first session, particularly the
suggestion that the international community should explore new and effective approaches to ensure that the burden ,1f dealing with refugees is shared more equitably, 150

Recognizing the need to view refugee-related development projects within local and national development
plan ...,
I Take.~ note of the report of the Secretary-General 149
on the implementation of resolution 41/139 and welcomes
the report of the inter-agency mission annexed thereto;
2 Commends the measures that the Government of
the Sudan is taking to provide material and humanitarian
assistance to refugees, in spite of the effects of the drought
and the serious economic situation it faces, and stresses
the need for additional resources to lessen the impact of
the presence of refugees on the economy of this least developed ,·ountry;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General,
the l 1nited Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
do1101 countries and intergovernmental and non-

A·42/646.
'·o '>e<' 1\/41 /264. annex. l'ara. ~.1

1-1''

148 A/42/506.

223

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
