------·----·-··-···"""-·- ... --------·--------------

5Z

Genenal -'-bl:,-Foarteeada Seui-

with General Assembly resolution 1340 (XIII)
of 13 December 1958;
(ii) $527,988 being the balance of surplus account
available for credit to Members as at 31 December 1958;
2. Members shall make cash advances to the Working Capital Fund as required under paragraph 1 (a)
above in accordance with the scale adopted by the
General Assembly for contributions of Members to the
budget for the financial year 1960;
3. There shall be set off against this allocation of
advances the amounts paid by Members to the Working
Capital Fund for the financial year 1959 under General
Assembly resolution 1340 (XIII), provided that, should
such advance paid by any Member to the Working
Capital Fund for the financial year 1959 exceed the
amount of that Member's advance under the provisions
of paragraph 2 above, the excess shall be set off against
the amount of contributions payable by that Member
in respect of the budget for the financial year 1960, or
any previous budget ;
4. The Secretary-General is authorized to advance
from the Working Capital Fund:
(a) Such sums as ~ay be necessar:,- to finance :mdgetary appropriations pending receipt of contributions ;
sums so advanced shall be reimbursed as soon as receipts from contributions are available for the purpose ;
( b) Such sums as may be necessary to finance commitments which may be duly authorized under the provisions of General Assembly resolution 1444 (XIV)
of 5 December 1959, relating to unforeseen and extraordinary expenses ; the Secretary-General shall make
provision in the budget estimates for reimbursing the
Working Capital Fund ;
( c) Such sums as, together with net sums outstanding for the same purpos~, do not exceed $125,000, to
continue the revolving fund to finance miscellaneous
self-liquidating purchases and activities; advances in
excess of the total $125,000 may be made with the prior
concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;
( d) Loans to specialized agencies and preparatory
commissions of agencies to be established by intergovernmental agreement under the auspices of the
United Nations to finance their work, pending receipt
by the agencies concerned of sufficient contributions
under their own budgets ; such loans shall normally be
repayable within two years, and the Secretary-General
shall obtain the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions for
any cash issues which would increase the aggregate
balance outstanding (including amounts previously advanced and outstanding) at any one time to an amount
in excess of $250,000;
(e) Such sums not exceeding $35,000 as may be
required to finance payments of advance insurance
premiums where the period of insurance extends beyond
the end of the financial year in which payment is made; ·
this amount may be increased with the prior concurrence
of the Aclvisory Com,mittee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions; the Secretary-General shall make
provision in the budget estimates of each year, during
the life of the related policies, to cover the charges
applicable to each such year ;
(f) Such sums as may be necessary to finance supplementary payments made to the United Nations Joint
Staff Pension Fund in accordance with paragraph 5

of General Assembly resolution 1310 (XIII) of 10 December 1958 dealing with the pensionable remuneration
of the staff ;
(g) Such sums as may be necessary to enable the
Tax Equalization Fund to meet current commitments
pending accumulation of credits ; such advances shall
be repaid as soon as credits are available in the Tax
Equalization Fund.
846th plenary meeting,
5 December 1959.

1446 (XIV). Organization and management of
work of the Secretariat of the United
Nation■

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 886 (IX) of 17 December
1954 on the organizational structure of the Secretariat
of the United Nations,
Bearing in mind that there has been no general review
of the organization of the work of the Secretariat since
the year 1954-1955,
Recognizing the utility of conducting periodic general
reviews of the structure and functioning of United
Nations bodies,
Taking into consideration that an over-all review of
the programmes of the United Nations and specialized
agencies for the next five years, being carried out by
the Economic and Social Council, will be completed
in 1960,
Taking further into account the view of the SecretaryGeneral that the organization of the Secretariat should
be subject to constant scrutiny and adjustment in order
to meet changing requirements and achieve maximum
economies and efficiency,
Noting the suggestion of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions that consideration should be given to the desirability of having
an over-all review of the organization of the Secretariat,
Noting the work of the Administrative Management
Unit established in 1958 in the Office of the Controller,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to appoint a committee of experts, composed of six persons with broad
and practical experience in the various aspects of administration and chosen•with due regard to geographical
distribution in ·consultation with the respective Governments, to work together with the Secretary-General in
reviewing the activities and organization of the Secretariat of the United Nations with a view to effecting
or proposing further measures designed to ensure maximum economy and efficiency in the Secretariat;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to consult with
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the arrangements to be made under
paragraph 1 above ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, having considered
a report of the committee of experts, to present .to the
General Assembly at its fifteenth session provisional
recommendations thereon together with the committee's
report, bearing in mind that the Secretary-General's
final recommendations together with further reports
of the committee shall be presented to the General
Assembly at its sixteenth session ;
4. Requests the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to submit its observa-

Reeolatiom adopted on the reporta of the Fifth Committee

tions on the review and on the reports of the SecretaryGeneral.
846th plenary meeting,
5 Decembr,r 1959.

1447 (XIV). Modernization of the Palais des
Nations
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the SecretaryGeneral86 and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions37 concerning changes
which have become necessary in the programme for the
modernization of the Palais des Nations, approved
under General Assembly resolution 1101 (XI) of
27 February 1957,
1. Approves the revisions in the programme for the
modernization of the Palais des Nations as set out in
the report of the Secretary-General together with the
proposals for financing the entire programme, as modified, at a cost not to exceed $1,790,000;
2. Authorizes the Secretary-General to proceed with
the execution of the programme ;
3. Authorizes the Secretary-General for these purposes:
(a) To include in the budget estimates for the years
1960 to 1962, as for the years 1957 to 1959, annual
instalments of $121,000, an instalment of $131,000 in
1963 and instalments of $311,000 annually for the years
1964 to 1966;
(b) To advance from the Working Capital Fund the
sums which may be required from time to time to finance
actual requirements, such advances to be repaid from
budgetary appropriations in accordance with the schedule shown in annex II to the Secretary-General's report;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions informed of developments in the progress of
the modernization programme.
846th plenary meeting,
5 December 1959.

1448 (XIV). Amount of the Working Capital Fund
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1341 (XIII) of 13 December
1958 on the amount of the Working Capital Fund,
Having examined the report of the SecretaryGeneral88 and the recommendations thereon contained
in the thirty-sixth report of the Advisory Committee
36 Jbid., agenda item 44, document
87 Ibid., document A/4157.
88 /'/Jid., document A/C.5/809.

A/C.5/775.

53

on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to the
General Assembly at its fourteenth session,89
1. Urges the Member States concerned to give attention to the payment of the outstanding arrears of
their contributions ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in addition to
continuing his efforts to obtain earlier payment of co_ntributions in keeping with regulation 5.4 of the Financial
Regulations of the United Nations, to address a special
communication on this matter to Member States and
to report on the replies received to the General Assembly at its fifteenth session ;
3. Decides to increase the level of the Working
Capital Fund from $23.5 million to $25 million in 1960,
by the transfer to the Fund of the balance of surplus
account still available for credit to Members as at
31 December 1958 ($527,988) and by direct additional
advances in the amount of $972,012;
4. Decides:
(a) To continue in 1960, under the same conditions,
the authorization granted to the Secretary-General in
par;:igraph 4 of General Assembly resolution 1341
(XIII) to borrow, on payment of normal current rat~s
of interest, cash from special funds and accounts in his
custody, for purposes which normally relate to the
Working Capital Fund;
( b) To extend the authorization to cover short-term
loans from Governments.
846th plenary meeting,
5 December 1959.

1449 (XIV). Budget estimates for the financial
year 1960
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1096 (XI) of 27 February
1957 on the submission of revised estimates,
Desiring tc restrict to a minimum additions to a total
programme d work which has already been formulated
for a given year and reflected in the main budget estimates submitted by the Secretary-General,
Requests all organs of the United Nations to consider ways and means whereby new projects might be
deferred until suitable provision for them can be made
by the Secretary-General in the main budget estimates
for a subsequent financial year, unless they are of major
and urgent importance or unless they can be accommodated within approved expenditure levels by the
postponement of projects of relatively low priority.
846th plenary meeting,
5 December, 1959.
39 Ibid., document A/4317.
