TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR

rd
MEETING:

22 AUGUST

1968

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/1443)

. . . . . . . . I . .. . . . . . . . . .. . I ,. . .. .

1

-Adoption

of the agenda

. . .. . ., . . . , . . .. . . . . . . . , , . . . . , .. .. . . . . .

1

Letter dated 21 August 1968 from the representatives
of Canada, Denmark,
France, Paraguay, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America addressed tn the President of the Security
Council (S/8758)
, . . , . . . , , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . , . , . . , a. . . .

1

SlPV.1443

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appearsor in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

AND FORTY-THIRD

Held in New York on Thursday,

MEETING

22 August 1968, at 9 pm.

President: Mr. Jolao August0 DE ARAUJO CASTRO
(Brazil).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

3. In the light of this request,I would propose,if I hear no
objection, to invite the representativeof Poland to take a
seatat the Council table in order to participate, without the
right to vote, in the discussionof this item.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1443)

4. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now
continue its considerationof the question before it. The
first speakerinscribed on my list is the representativeof
Czechoslovakia,on whom I now call.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. I!,. Kasprzyk
(Poland) took a place at the Council table.

I. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 21 August 1968 from the representatives
of Canada, Denmark, France, Paraguay, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8758).

5. Mr. MUZIK (Czechoslovakia):Mr, President,I have the
honour*to inform you, aswell asthe other membersof the
Security Council, that the situation in the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic has been deteriorating asa result of the
occupation by foreign armed forces. This morning, we
received from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs-I underline:
from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs-of the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic the following press cable about the
situation in the country.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted,
letter dated 21 August 1968 from the representatives of
Canada, Denmark, France, Paraguay, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8758)

“Today no newspapershave been issued with the
exception of special issuesof Svobodn6 Slovo and
Zemedelski noviny which have been distributed free of
charge and the public hasbeeninformed only by the free
radio stations of the local committeesof the Communist
Party of Czechoslovakia in Prague, Plzen, Budejovice,
Hradec Kralovb, Usti nad Labem. In addition to the
clandestinestations, the positions of which are secret,on
the air is from time to time alsothe occupation radio
station Vltava. Dubcek, Kriegel, Spacek, Smrkovsky
continue to be interned. President Svoboda surrounded
on the castle.Destiniesof Minister Pavel, Prime Minister
Cernik and other ministers unknown. Yesterday seventeen membersof the Government met under the chairmanshipof Machacova-Dostalovi.The Governmentissued
an appeal to the nation and the requirement that the
interned functionaries be released,that the occupation
armies be withdrawn and that the activities of constitutional officials be enabled. Yesterday evening President
Svoboda spoke in the official radio station. He condemned the occupation as an act of force and madean
appeal to maintain fidelity to the principlesof the action
programme. He had talks with the Government and
advised that he would meet with it also today and
probably also personally with Prime Minister Cemi’k.
Today, the Extraordinary Congressof the Communist
Party of Czechoslovakia is to be convened. Today at
9 a.m. the National Assembly will meet with the free
members of the Government. The occupation units

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
taken yesterday and this morning, I propose now, if there is
no objection, to invite the representatives of Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria to take seats at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. J. i&zik (&echoSlovakia) and Mr. M. Tarabanov(Bulgaria) took places at
the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT: In addition, I shouldlike to inform
the membersof the Security Council that I receiveda letter
this morning from the Deputy PermanentRepresentativeof
Polandwhich readsasfollows:
“I have the honour to request that I be invited in
accordancewith Article 31 of the Charter to participate
in the deliberationsof the Security Council, convenedon
the request of six Member States as contained in
document S/8758 of 21 August 1968.
“(Signed) LeszekKASPRZYK
“Minister Plenipotentiary
Deputy PermanentRepresentative
to the United Nations”
1

promised to enable the access to the building of the
National Assembly for this purpose. Transportation
paralysed in Prague. Regional functionaries negotiate with
the commanding officers of the occupation units and
they attained yesterday in Plzen, Budejovice and other
places that the units have been withdrawn from the
centres of the towns. In spite of our efforts we have not
so far succeeded in establishing any official contact with
the representative of the occupation armies. The statement of the military commander in Prague and the
Central Bohemian region has been distributed among the
population under which the commander of the occupation armies overtakes de facto the rights of the Govemment. Allegedly a fraction collaborationist Central Committee is being formed. Persons mentioned in this
connexion are Bilak, Kolder, Indra and Barbirek. A
majority of the population backs the Dubcek leadership
of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia, President
Svoboda and the.Cemik Government.”
6. I should like to add that we received this cable at 9 a.m.
today. Since that time we have had no other report through
this channel on the situation in Czechoslovakia. In spite of
this situation, it seems that the occupation forces have not
succeeded in imposing on the Czechoslovak people representatives whom it did not elect. The Permanent Mission
has received a message that, last night, a majority of
members of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of Czechoslovakia met in Czechoslovakia, fully
supported the position of the Presidium of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia of
21 August-about which I had the honour to inform you
yesterday-and decided to stay in meeting uninterruptedly.
7. Another message states:

full restitution of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic are imperative,
13. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic, Dr. Jiri Hajek, is on his way to New
York to attend the session of the Security Council, \~e
hope that he will have ample opportunity to explain the
position of our country in full detail.
14. In conclusion, I should like to make one thing
crystal-clear, namely, that the cause of socialism is the only
cause we stand for, and we would be the last ones V.&D
would like to see more damage done to this cause than ha
already been done. The ideas of socialism are sacred not
only to us, but to all progressive mankind.
15. Mr. BOYE (Senegal) (translated fi;om French}: The
delegation of Senegal has not yet spoken in this poignant
debate because it was anxious to be fully and objectively
informed of the facts involved, and to analyse them
thoroughly so as to then assess them better.
16. Having heard the various arguments presented, I
should like to set forth the views of the Government of
Senegal on this matter, fairly and dispassionately as I have
always done here in this chamber.
17. The Government of Senegal has closely followed the
development of the political events which have occurred
recently in Czechoslovakia. My Government took note of
the reply of the Czechoslovak Communist Party to the
Warsaw letter confirming the Czechoslovak ieaders’ desire
to remain true to the Communist ideal.
18. Following the conferences of Bratislava and Cierna,
the general feeling, as far as we could observe, was that the
Czechoslovak authorities had no intention of reconsidering
the question of co-operation within the socialist bloc. In
view of these facts, and of the statements of the constim
tional leaders of Czechoslovakia, it does not appear that the
constitutional Czechoslovak leaders did request armed
intervention, as has been stated here.

“An extraordinary Congress of the Communist Party of
Czechoslovakia is meeting in Czechoslovakia. The Congress has given an ultimatum to the Soviet and other
occupation forces to withdraw from the country and to
release all the Party and Government officials. If this
requirement is not fulfilled a general strike will be
declared in the whole of Czechoslovakia starting Friday
noon.”

Il. Third, all the acts of the foreign occupation forces in
the Ciechoslovak Socialist Republic are illegal,

19. The Government of Senegal shares the strong feelings
raised throughout the world by the military intervention of
the Soviet Union and other members of the Warsaw Treaty,
My Government regrets and condemns this intervention
which, despite the existence of the Warsaw Treaty, con.
stitutes an interference in the internal affairs of Czeclio
Slovakia, which was not threatened by any aggressionfrom
outside. This military intervention jeopardizes the policy of
ditente which seemed to have been initiated in the world
and of which we saw signs in the draft Treaty on
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. This military infer.
vention creates a new area of tension and deals a severe
blow to the concept of peaceful coexistence. It seriously
undermines the fundamental principles of the self-determination of peoples and of non-interference in the internal
affairs of sovereign States, thereby violating the most sacred
principles of human rights,

12. Fourth, complete and immediate termination of the
occupation, the withdrawal of all occupation forces from
the territory of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic and the

20. In the light of these considerations, my Government
fully associates itself with all initiatives and measuresaimed
at obtaining the condemnation of this armed intervention

8. In connexion with the deliberations of the Security
Council concerning the situation in Czechoslovakia, I
should like to stress the following points.
9. First, the occupation of the Czechoslovak Socialist
Republic by the Foreign armed forces is completely illegal.
10. Second, only the legally elected constitutional representatives are the true representatives of the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic and its people, and consequently must be
enabled to exercise freely their constitutional functions,
without illegal interference by the occupation forces.

2

by the Security Council and the immediate withdrawal
the foreign forces from Czechoslovak territory.

of

progressive forces; they could not help enjoying theniselves
over the increasing activities of counter-revolutionary forces
in that country and giving them advice. What were the main
points they tried to stress through their sinister allies in
Czechoslovakia? One, that Czechoslovakia should get rid
not only of the mistakes committed by the previous
leadership, but of socialism as well; two, that Czechoslovakia should get out of the Warsaw Pact and three, that
the Communist Party allegedly proved unable to lead the
country, and therefore should step aside in favour of other
parties.

&&lYlt is in this spirit that Senegal is acting as co-sponsor of
the draft resolution submitted [S/8761], in the hope that
the voice of reason will ultimately be heard and that
coexistence and co-operation will be restored in that area,
so that the policy of clktente may be resumed to the
greatest benefit of the entire world,
22. The Council must take action, without further delay,
and adopt the draft resolution before it, with the understanding that we shall continue to hold this important
question before us and shall lceep ourselves available to the
Council for any further action which may contribute to a
return to legality in Czechoslovakia.

28. As the Minister of Justice of the Federal Republic of
Germany put it in rin interview given to Der Spiegel, to the
Social Democrats:
“The counter-revolutionary forces took the advice they
were given. They attacked the Communist Party, the
army, the security forces and the people working in them.
They attacked the Warsaw Pact, the forces of defence of
socialists in Czechoslovakia. Thus there was a danger
which must be stopped.”

23. Mr. TARDOS (Hungary): Because of subversive
actions of external imperialist forces, led by the most
reactionary and aggressive elements of the United States
and by their revanchist ally in Europe, the Bonn rkgime,
acting in concert with counter-revolutionary forces within
Czechoslovakia, a situation has developed which has seriously endangered not only the lawful order and the
achievements of socialism in Czechoslovakia, but also,
because of efforts at adulteration of the status quo, has
very seriously ,threatened the peace and security of the
socialist and non-socialist European States, indeed the
peace and stability of the whole world. This problem,
which is the basic question of Europeti security, in our
view, would be a more suitable one for discussion in the
Security Council than the one we now have before us.

29. The Western Powers are making a big noise here about
subjugation, aggression, cheats and puppets. What is particularly distasteful in this respect is the role played by the
United States. Is it not rather grotesque that the country
which made itself infamous all over the world by armed
invasions, military interventions and open aggressions now
tries to play the role of the champion of freedom and
socialism? Has a country which continues the barbarous
bombardment of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Ngm,
killing innocent civilians by the thousands, which uses the
most inhuman weapons of war, napalm, anti-personnel
weapons and even chemical weapons, which made forty
armed aggressions in Latin America using United States
marines, which crushed without hesitation the progressive
forces in Guatemala, which committed a naked invasion
against Cuba have any right to raise its voice concerning
questions of the proper conduct of international policy and
principles of international law? The United States always
tries to play the innocent, but later we discover the role the
United States is playing through its various agencies
-especially the C.I.A.-in other countries, which can be
termed anything but helping to strengthen the independence of the countries concerned.

24. It is quite understandable that the United States
would like to distract the attention of the Council from the
real dangers in Europe resulting from the presence there of
the aggressive NATO alliance. It is timely to note here that
the United States, though it is thousands of miles from
Europe, as it is thousands of miles from Viet-Nam, plays
the role of the gendarme of the world, a role for which they
have invented a more convenient expression-“the
United
States of the global war”, or “world-wide commitment”, as
they impudently state.
25. The aims for which the United States maintains
military bases in Europe and sends nuclear bombers
through
the air-space of many European countries are
clearly not in the interests of the nations of our continent.
They serve only to maintain tension and they show the
arrogance of power.

30. Suffice it to note one of the recent examples in this
respect namely, the disclosure of the former Minister of the
Interior, of Bolivia who himself had to be an agent of the
C.I.A. It is the United States which supports explicitly or
implicitly the most reactionary Powers in the world, the
stubborn colonialists, Salazar in Portugal; the illegal racist
regime of Ian Smith in Rhodesia.

26. In this respect, a special relationship has developed
between the United States and the Federal Republic of
Germany with the aim of changing the European status
quo. The revanchist policy of West Germany is based upon
this partnership. It is this which enables them not to
recognize the present day realities, the existence of the two
German States, and this is why the Federal Republic of
Germany can wage campaigns for the alteration of existing
State boundaries and for the possession of nuclear weapons.

31. But beyond that they are creating crises, like the one
caused by their spy ship Pueblo and even more serious ones
directly affecting our continent. By lending their support to
the revanchist circles in the German Federal Republic they
breach the Potsdam Treaty; they tolerate the activities of
the neo-nazis, the von Papens, the Sudetan Germans, who
wish to reoccupy lands that are now parts of sovereign
socialist States:

27. Now these circles have made every effort to conceal
their real intentions with regard to recent developments in
Czechoslovakia, thereby, allaying the alertness of the
3

under the guise of charitable institutions, They carried
on a campaign of propaganda and agitation among the
Hungarian refugees and called upon them to overthrow
the Hungarian people’s democratic rdgime. Simultaneously they recruited agents from among them, who
were given a short course of training and sent to
Hungary to incite the people against the Hungarian
people’s democratic rbgime.

32. In his statement yesterday the representative of the
United States made reference to the counter revolution in
Hungary in 1956. Let me remind Ambassador Ball of the
role the Western Governments played in the counterrevolution. I quote from the Hungarian White Book
published in 1957 on the counter-revolutionary conspiracy
of the Hungarian Government.
“Foreign and domestic reaction very carefully prepared
the counter-revolution over a long period, both on the
political and the organizational levels. The preparations
were carried on without interruption from 1951 onwards,
after the adoption, that year, of the infamous Mutual
Security Act, which appropriated one hundred million
United States dollars for espionage purposes. They were
still further stepped up in 1956, when the 100 million
dollars were increased to 125 million.

“The same kind of activities could be observed on tiie
part of the other Hungarian Pmigrd organizations. , . . The
Berliner Zeitung in its 21 November 1956 issue carries
very important information on the West German preparations. Here is an excerpt from the article:
‘Following October 20 armed Hungarian groups
appeared in Munich and at fair fields around Munich
from Regensburg, Stuttgart and other West Gennafi
towns. In conversations with inhabitants of Munich
these Horthyites admitted that they were preparing to
return to Hungary as the “lords of the country” ‘.

“Radio Free Europe, which played a major role in the
work of preparing, organizing and directing the counterrevolution in 1956, was established and supported by
American funds, and the notorious balloon campaign and
the various counter-revolutionary 4migr6 organizations
were organized, aided and supported by such funds. . .

“The New York Herald Tribune on 25 October 1956,
printed a remarkable statement made by Christian
Ravndal, ex-minister of the United States in Budapest.
Mr. Ravndal, speaking of the uprising said that only the
timing had caused any surprise. Western observers had
counted on an anti-Russian uprising, but it had been
precipitated earlier than had been anticipated. They had
expected something of the kind around the end of the
year.

“In the summer of 1956 Mikl6s KQlay, former
Horthyite Hungarian Prime Minister, embarked on a tour
of South America. Before audiences consisting largely of
fascist rabble who had sought refuge there to escape being
called to account for war crimes, he declared:
‘Hungarian liberation may take place in the near
future; it is possible that we are on the threshold of that
liberation. The time is near when the Hungarians may
again take their fate into their own hands, and I believe
we may soon be able to go home,’ ”

“The documents listed in this white book show that the
Western imperialists did not ‘wait’ for the counterrevolution; they actually furnishedfunds for it, organized
it and incited it. The real senseof the words of the
one-timeU.S. minister to Budapestis, consequently,that,
originally, the outbreak of the counter-revolutionwas
plannedfor the end of 1956 but that the situationmade
it possibleto haveit explode evenearlier.

This was said in the summer of 1956. The document
continues:
“Naturally the counter-revolution could not be pm
pared by propaganda means alone. There was need for
wide-spread and ramified organizing activity and military
preparations, and, as part of this, most thorough intelli.
gence work, even the organization of armed units. The
testimony of disillusioned Cm&r&, of spies and diversionists captured before and after the counter-revolution, and
thk documents found on them also throw light on all the
preparatory tasks that were carried out.

“Radio Free Europe assumedthe actual roleof direct.
ing the counter-revolution, both fro,m a military and
political point of view. October 22, the eve of the
outbreak of the counter-revolution, this station practitally doubled the time of its Hungarian-language
broadcasts-increasingit to twenty hours a day, From that
point onwardsthe radio broadcastpolitical and military
instructions daily, hour by hour. The armed counter
revolutionary gangsexecuted thesemilitary orderswith
precision.

“The .4r@r~ organizations maintained close contact
with the imperialist intelligence organs. Sgndor Visnyei, a
spy arrested by the Hungarian security authorities on
9 December 1456, testified:

“In Newsweek of 1 November 1956, there was an
article which read: ‘As a Hungarianrebel put it: “The
Hungarianuprising wasentirely the makingof the people
in Hungary, but it wasthe radio link with theWestwhich
had told them which way to go, what to hopefor, what
to demand.” ’ ”

‘The Hungarian department of the United States
controlled West German Gehlen Intelligence organization , . . played a considerable role in preparing the
1956 October events. , . .

33. The HungarianWhite Book continues:
‘Even in the period preceding the events, all the
persons employed by the Hungarian department regularly visited the Hungarian refugee camps in West
Germany and Austria, and the other organs operating

“The leadersof the counter-revolutionwereconfronted
on several occasionswith the problem of keepingihe
counter-revolutionary gangsunder armsandmaintain@
4

I

I

‘their fitness for battle, Radio Free Europe issued ~~S~IUCtions in this respect on countless occasions, broadcasting,
for example, on October 28:

development in the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic is not
the business of the United Nations Security Council. It is
the concern primarily of the people of Czechoslovakia and
the fraternal socialist States. The submission of this draft
resolution serves only the interests of those who wish to,
make political capital out of the situation. What other aim
can one expect from the members of the aggressive NATO?
The draft resolution would seem to us rather as sheer
propaganda exercise, mainly for home consumption. It
certainly does not serve either the interests of the Czechoslovakian people or the cause of peace and security.

‘The announcement which has just been issued by the
Ministry of Defence in Budapest states that the centres
of resistance in Budapest have begun, under agreed
terms, to hand over their arms to Hungarian troops
coming to relieve Soviet army units. This part of the
communique is false and untruthful. It is impossible
that the Budapest resistance . , . would have laid down
its arms before the routed Red soldiery. . . . This piece
of news is improbable also because although the fight
for freedom has won a military victory, it is still far
from having achieved its political aims. . , if it were to
surrender its arms, that would be tantamount to the
continuation of despotism and the maintenance of the
nation’s misfortune.’ ”

37. The PRESIDENT: I now call upon the representative
of Poland.
38. Mr. KASPFZYK (Poland): At the outset I should like
to express to you, Mr, President, and to the members of
this Council my gratitude for enabling me to present the
views of my country on the matter under consideration. It
should be obvious by now that the discussion initiated in
this Council by the group of NATO countries was motivated by the desire displayed by some of them to bring
back the infamous spirit of the cold war. Under the
pressure of world public opinion because of their shameful
policy in Viet”Nam, the Middle East, Southern Rhodesia,
Namibia, and so on, they jumped at the opportunity to
divert the attention of the world from the real causes of
tension. Representatives of some of those countries, using
cold war vocabulary, worn-out cliches, myths which have
been exploded long ago and unjustified accusations, have
launched a slanderous campaign against a group of socialist
countries.

34. Concerning the extent of support of the counterrevolution from abroad, a border guard, Karoly Brencsak,
stationed at the Pornoapati outpost, testified about the
incoming groups:
‘$An armed group of about 130 men crossed the border
on October 29. They said they were Hungarians who had
fled to the West earlier and wanted to go to Budapest to
fight against the Soviet troops. They told the two sentries
on border duty to turn over the weapons of their station
by 10 pm. or they would attack the outpost. The group
was armed with pistols and sub-machine guns.” . . .
“The Foreign Ministry of the Hungarian People’s
Republic was compelled to send a note to the British
Legation in Budapest requesting that Colonel Cowley
leave the country. The note read, in part:

39. We would not allow ourselves to be drawn into an
exchange of epithets and empty oratory. The peaceful
policy of my Government has always been, and still is,
directed at the relaxation of tensions and the liquidation of
inflammatory situations which might lead to a new war.
Peaceful initiatives from Poland in the field of disarrnament, its participation in the international commissions in
Korea and Viet-Nam, as well as its policy of friendship and
co-operation with all peace-loving countries of the world
are well known, and I do not have to elaborate on them in
front of this distinguished forum.

‘Colonel James N. Cowley, Military Attache of the
British Legation in Budapest, during the events which
took place in the last months of 19.56, maintained
active and direct contact with several leaders of the
armed counter-revolutionary forces and a number of
persons who participated in the counter-revolution. In
the course of his activities-among others-he supported
with military and military-political advice the organizers
of acts aimed at overthrowing the state order of the
Hungarian People’s Republic, and the reactionary forces
attacking the interests of the Hungarian people. . . ,
After the counter-revolution
was crushed, Colonel
Cowley provided advice to his above-mentioned contacts to conceal their arms and equipment. . . .’ ”

40. But it is obvious that we could not remain passive
when the maintenance of the existing status quo in our part
of Europe was threatened, for such a threat is directly
endangering for not only one country, but all the commonwealth of socialist countries and consequently the peace of
the world. We are convinced that the endangering of the
socialist system in the fraternal Czechoslovak Socialist
Republic, with which we are linked by traditional friendship, constitutes a definite threat to the collective security
of all socialist countries, and that is why it was impossible
for the members of the Warsaw Pact treaty to remain
indifferent.

35. I think that those quotations are enough, although I
have a lot of others. But, finally let me add in regard to that
problem, that at that time-on 2 November-in order to
help the Hungarian people, the United States Government
was generous enough to pledge $20 million to Hungary to
overcome forthcoming economic difficulties. The Hungarian people were never given this money because the
United States Government did not want to help our people.
They were interested in keeping the counter-revolutionary
forces only.

41. The action undertaken by our countries in answer to
the appeal made by many patriots-leaders of party and
state organs of the socialist republic of Czechoslovakiaconstitutes nothing more than help and assistance for the
cause of socialism in this country. This action resulted from
the obligations which the socialist countries have mutually

36. As to the draft resolution before us, allow me to make
just a few remarks. The problem of strengthening socialist
5

49. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): Mr. President,I am somewhat
surprisedby your reaction. Why can we not considerrhe
request of the Bulgarian representativeand give him tie
opportunity of speaking tomorrow, if he has justified
reasonsfor wishing to do SO?Why is the initiative of t/e
Anglo-American group, supported by someof its partisanq
arbitrarily allowed to postpone the meetingof the Security
Council from 5 o’clock to the later hour of 9 o’clock? And
why, then, may we not at the same time consider the
wholly logical and justified wish expressedby the Algerian
representativeat this morning’smeeting?

undertaken and it is not directed against the fraternal Czech
and Slovak people, and under no circumstances does it pose
a danger to any other country. Quite the contrary. The sole
purpose of this action is to remove any threat to the
security in that region and at the same time it is aimed at
the strengthening of the world peace.
42. It is not purely by chance that the action of member
States of the Warsaw Pact treaty, aimed at eliminating the
dangerous situation in that region and at preventing old,
out of style right wing as well as West German revanchist
forces from making a breach within the socialist countries,
was met with the most ferocious action on the part of
countries forming the NATO bloc, for it is the NATO
countries that sensed this particular opportunity to weaken
the Warsaw treaty and it is their representatives who ate
trying here at this forum to discredit the action undertaken
by some socialist countries. It should be clear to everybody
that the display of hatred towards the socialist countries
presented here by some representatives, and especially by
the representative of the United States, will not serve the
cause of better relations between the East and the West. It
will poison the atmosphere of international relations and
impair the work of the United Nations.
43. The nonchalant remark of Ambassador Ball that
“Hitler’s oppression, savage though it was, lasted for the
comparatively brief span of seven years” (1441st meeting,
para. 1481 is taken much more seriously by those who were
victims of this savageness. Our country lost 6 million
citizens martyred by the Germanfascists,and38 per cent
of our national wealth was destroyed. That is why our
nation is particularly sensitiveto the threat to peacein the
world, and especiallyin our geographicalregionwhere the
German revanchistshave embarkedon a path which may
againlead to total catastropheto mankind.
44. The PolishPeople’sRepublicis therefore determined,
together with the other socialistcountries,to defend the
interestsof all WarsawTreaty countries,includingCzechoslovakia,and to prevent tearingawaythis country from the
community of the socialistStates.

50. I myself have also addresseda request to you,
indicating that I would prefer to speaktomorrow, andI
have well-justified reasonsand groundsfor doing this. Why
cannot this requestbe considered?Why arethe wishesand
reasonsof others considered, while the wishesof tllop
representativeswhom I have mentionedareignoredandnot
even considered? This is a most undesirableand, I might
say, unusualpractice in the work of the Security Council.
What is all this hurry? As a Russianproverb goes,hastein
useful only under one circumstance,but in the prcsentcas
hasteis pointless.And it would be reasonable
and logical10
grant the wishes of those who would prefer to speak
tomorrow. It would hardly make much difference, espec.
ially consideringthat it is very late now. Nothing serious
will happen in the next ten or eleven hours, and 11le
discussions
can be continued; especiallysince I intend to
resumeit tomorrow. If you have no speakerson the list, it
would be perfectly reasonableto postpone the meeting
until tomorrow and resume the discussionthen, all the
more so since the representativeswho spoke at this
morning’s meeting, especially those of the United States
and the United Kingdom, had, as usual, such a lot of
invented, slanderous, hostile things to say aboul the
socialist countries that an appropriately circumstantiated
reply is necessary,and this will take time.

51. On the strength of all these considerationsI suggest
that it would be reasonableand, I might say, courtcons,
alsoin conformity with the establishedpracticein the work
of the Security Council, to considerthe request of th!
45. The PRESIDENT: The next speakeris the representa- representativeof Bulgariaand grant it.
tive of Bulgariaon whomI now call.
52. The PRESIDENT: In reply to the point raisedby th
46. Mr. TARABANOV (Bulgaria)(translatedfromFrench):
representative of the Soviet Union, I should state very
Mr. President,I shouldlike at the outsetto expressmy desire clearly that 1 resent any insinuationsto the effect that the
to speaktomorrow rather than today, if possible.I have President has taken less than a fair attitude towardsa11y
certain reasonsfor making this request,I still needsome delegationor group of delegations.
tie for preparation.
53. Since it has been stated that the meeting of tilt
4’7. The PRESIDENT: In reply to the questionsubmitted Security Council was delayed from 5 o’clock to 9 o’clock,
by the representativeof BulgariaI can just say that the
and later to 10 o’clock; there is no mystery about that. 1
Chair cannot commit the Council to anything. I am in the
should state very clearly that a substantialnumberOr
h.ds of the Council. It will be up to the Councilto decide delegations-a majority of delegations,ten delegationswhether it will cometo a vote today. As a matter of fact, I
approachedme to signify their requestto havethe meeting
Cannotforetell the decisionwhich the Couhcilwill take on
convened at 9 o’clock. And I consulted the other fiie
this matter of procedure,so my reaction is to leave this
delegationson that,
question up to the judgement of the representativeof
Bulgariawho is free to proceedif he sowishes.
54. The President is only the presidingofficer of the
Council and should obey the feelings of the Security
48. I call on the representativeof the Soviet Union on a
Council. That is the only pressureI can accept-the pressure
point of order.
of the majority of the Council-becauseit is a decisionof
6

58. Mr. BALL (United States of America): The representative of the Soviet Union doesus all a very great disservice
becausehe indicates such a low opinion of our sophistication, of our understanding of what is really happening
tonight.

the Council and I am only its presiding officer. Because of
that, because of these formal requests and the informal
consultations that are usual, and after due consultation, the
meeting was delayed until 9 o’clock.
55. As the situation now standsI am entirely in the hands
of the Council. If the Council feelsthat it shouldadjourn
until tomorrow, or if the representativeof the Soviet Union
wishesto make a specialmotion to that effect, I shallbe
glad to considerit. And, of course,I have no objection to
the representativeof Bulgaria speakingtomorrow. I only
said that, asthe President,I cannot commit myself because
I cannot tell for surethat there will be a meetingtomorrow.
That dependson the Council’s decision. I am only the
presidingofficer of the Council.
56. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): Mr.‘President, I do not accept
your objectionsto what I have said.I wasperfectly justified
in saying that the meeting was postponed from 5 to 9
o’clock mainlyat the insistenceof the United Statesandthe
United Kingdom delegations. And with the support of
those who signedthe letter addressedto you asPresident,
asking for a discussionof this question in the Security
Council-a discussionwhich is wholly illegitimate, that is,
this question has no relation whatever to the Security
Council-with the support of thosewho joined the British
and Americandelegatesin presentingthe draft resolution, a
majority was,of course,obtained. We know that majority,
we have known it ever since the establishmentof the
United NationsOrganization and the Security Council. Yet
you and many of those who have spoken here are
championsof democracy. Why can’t democratic principles
be appliedin this case?When someask that the meetingbe
postponed for a few hours for somepersonalreasonsof
their own, then why not on the very samebasisand for the
samereasons,show courtesy and politenessto otherswho,
under the presentconcrete conditions, happen to be in a
minority? But asthere are no objectionsto the Bulgarian
deIegate’srequestnor, it appears,to my reasoningthat, in
accord with democraticprinciples,when the wishesof some
are taken into account, the request of others should be
consideredon the samebasis,then perhapswe may manage
without formalities, without any specially introduced proposals,without any specialvote, but simply accordingto
what is commonlyknown asa consensus.
Sincethere are no
objections, the meeting of the Council canend on this.
57. The PRESIDENT: I can assurethe representativeof
the Soviet Union that I will alwaysmeet him half way on
the question of the application of democratic principles.I
think it fallsupon the Presidentto put the questionbefore
the Security Council, for the representativeof the Soviet
Union has clearly indicated that he would prefer that this
meeting be adjourned and that we meet tomorrow, in
which casethe representative of Bulgaria would have the
opportunity to addressthe Council. No formal motion was
advanced by the representativeof the Soviet Union, but I
think I would like the advice of the members of the
Security Council. Of course,if there is no objectionI shall
be very glad to comply with his request. I shouldjust like
to put the question to the Security Council andaskfor the
commentsof members.

59. What we are witnessingis a shameless
and shoddy and
desperate effort on the part of the representative of the
Soviet Union, of the representative of Hungary, of the
representative of Bulgaria, to delay and frustrate the
proceedingsof this Council at a very critical moment in its
history.
60. The representative of Senegal, who spoke a few
moments ago, made clear, I am certain, what is the general
sentiment of the Council: that we should vote promptly
and tonight on the draft resolution now before us. But let
me assurethe representativeof Bulgariaand the representative of the Soviet Union, if they have any deep concern
about it, that they will have ample opportunity to speak
tomorrow, for even after this Council has tonight adopted
the draft resolution that is now before us we will not have
finished with them.
61. It was very heartening, it wasvery moving to all of us,
that a brave, decent, honest man camehere this eveningto
explain to the Council, in clear, straightforward and
unmistakable terms, the position of his Government, the
legitimate Government of Czechoslovakia. It is heartening
also that we heard the newsthat another brave, decent and
honest man, a man well known and respected by the
membersof this Council, was on his way to New York and
would speakto the Council tomorrow. And I know he will
be granted the opportunity to speak. It will be a privilege
for all of us to greet the Foreign Minister of Czechoslovakia, Jiri Hajek, when he comes before this body
tomorrow.
62. The question we face tonight, however, ishow will we
greet him, how shouldwe greet him-with the word that we
have embroiled ourselvesin sterile debate without result, or
with the word that we have acted tonight incisively and
effectively ?
63. There are times when human institutions, like human
beings, face not only crisesbut challenges,momentswhen
the world takes their measureand passesjudgement on
their quality. This is an evening, tonight, in the life of the
Security Council when the whole world is making a hard
appraisal as to whether this institution, which we have
developed and nourished for almost a quarter of a century,
is capable of facing up to a major and tragic anddangerous
event that has torn the fabric of world confidence and
brutally halted progresstowards a more securepeace.
64. In times like these, institutions, becausethey are the
creation of human beings, are subject to temptation-not
merely.the temptation of corruption from venality, but the
temptation to falter and to fail from lack of faith in
themselvesand from cynicism in their own high purposes.
It is not surprising,therefore, that in the courseof the day
we have heard the counsel of those who would have us
delay, proceed cautiously, await the movement of eventswe have just been listening to it-counsel given, I may say,

7

delay and impede our proceedings by long, meandering,
diffuse, polemical and irrelevant statements, and I 0 sure
we will have much more of the same tonight aswe already
have. In fact, I would not be at all surprised if in the course
of this evening the representative of the Soviet Union read
to us excerpts from the MOSCOWteIephone directory. Aad
quite likely, if he reads enough of them they will include
the names of some who are included in a new Cze&
Government.

by the two guilty Governments represented in this body
who are responsible for the tragic acts we are now
considering.
65. But tonight I am happy to say-and I say this with
feeling and with assurance-that this Council cannot be so
easily seduced or diverted, for the great majority of the
nations represented here recognize that what we have just
been listening to is not a counsel of prudence, but a counsel
of deception, advice given not in goodwill but for an eviI
purpose. Events we are told are evolving, and the situation
may change, but in what way? Tonight we know that the
Soviet Union is trying by force majeure to create a new
Government in Czechoslovakia, to replace the Government
it has sought to destroy. There is little doubt that it will, at
least on paper, at least on the surface, achieve its purpose,
since it has put the principal members of the legitimate
Government in jail, or at least under house arrest. In every
society, if the searchis continued long enough, there can be
found not one but a handful of Judas Iscariots, a handful of
quislings, a handful of craven and contemptible men
prepared to sell out their country for their own selfish even
though transient gain.

71. We have had enough of discussion. Rarely has infamy
been as clearly disclosed as the infamy of the Soviet Union
and its puppets in this unconscionable violation of evey
decent standard of international conduct. Rarely has any
defence been more empty, more frenetic, more futile, or
more downright insulting than the embarrassing defence
undertaken by the Soviet representative.
72. What we are told, in effect, is that the other Statesof
the Warsaw Pact are servile colonial possessions of the
Soviet Union and that it has the right, which no one can
challenge, to manipulate, direct and interfere in the interad
affairs of its colonies with complete impunity. What wearc
told is that if the Security Council or any of its membersor
any of the nations or peoples deeply concerned for the
protection of the principles of human rights, of sovereign
independence, of territorial integrity, seek in any way to
deter or deflect the Soviet Union from working its selfish
will with these colonial possessions, that body or those
missions or those peoples will be made to regret it. Whatwe
are told with the inimitable elegance and sensitivity of the
Soviet representative’s phraseology is that if this body
should, and I quote him: “stick its nose into the affairsof
the Soviet’s Eastern European colonial empire it would lose
its nose”.1 These are harsh, ominous, rude, vulgar wards,
words recalling earlier and more primitive chapters in the
long history of human society, words freighted with
menace which I know we have all been shocked to hearin
the proceedings of this Council.

66. It is to the credit of the people of Czechoslovakia that
the Soviet Union has not found this an easy task. Last night
the representative of the Soviet Union read to us a long,
amateurish, puerile declaration. Obviously it was a document made in Moscow. But the Soviet Union could affix no
names to it, no names at all, because the Soviet effort to
find traitors has not yet borne fruit. It was a document in
search of authors. Yet the portents are clear enough.
67. The suggestion of the Hungarian representative that
there would be news of a changed situation, the suggestion
that he gave to us earlier today, when put together with
reports from the Prague radio have made clear that an
Ersatz government of political hacks, of soiled secondraters, was at long last being put together.
68. What relevance does all this have to our proceedings
here? How should it affect the speedwith which we get on
with our business? The answer, I think, was very clearly
disclosed in the shamefully revealing statements of the
representatives of the two Powers sitting at this table whose
Governments participated in the rape of Czechoslovakia.
What they are quite obviously hoping is that this body will
delay its action, that they can frustrate its action long
enough for a new synthetic Government to send a message
or a representative to the Council to ask that the Council
not consider the question now before us.

73. I know that almost all of the representatives of the
Governments assembled around this table share my own
Government’s deep desire that the United Nations should
register and register tonight, in clear and unmistakable
terms its categorical rejection of the brutal abuse to which
the Government and people of Czechoslovakia have been
subjected and are being subjected by their arrogant
neighbours, that this Council should make clear to the Soviet
Union in unequivocal terms that it finds the colonialist
presumption of the Soviet Union abhorrent. I do not USA
the word “imperialist” because the currency of that word
has been debased by the Soviet representative.

69. What a shoddy performance. Yet it carries a message
for us sitting here tonight. We all know that the Council
will measure up to its responsibilities and that it will never
permit itself to be victimized by a trick of this kind which
can only delay and confuse its proceedings. We all recognize
the special urgency about getting on with our business.

74. We are at a point where we ought to stop tdking;we
ought to vote; we ought to declare ourselves; we ought to
“come clean” with humanity. We have been faced with a
problem; we have discussed it. The evidence has been pat
before us in clear and unmistakable terms. We have heard
tonight something which I think should have shamed
people who are capable of shame and who have been guilty
of the outrage that has been committed against Czech@
Slovakia.

70. The brutal assault on Czechoslovakia occurred the
night before last and the Security Council, charged with the
very special mandate that it has to protect the security of
the world and to protect world peace, has not yet spoken.
Every effort has been made by the Soviet representative to
--

1 Quotation from the interpretation.

8

75. We have heard the testimony of the Acting Permanent
Representative of Czechoslovakia, we have heard what he
has said. I think that the time has come when we have to
face reality and, more than that, we have to face our own
consciences, we have to face our own responsibilities. I
propose that we put to the vote the draft resolution which
is before this body. I am confident what the outcome of
that vote will be.

done something stupid-that’s how you can tell. The
substance of your praise is this: it is hypocritical, insidious,
having specific ends of its own, and is intended to lull and
lower the political vigilance of communists, praising them
so that you can then seizethem by the throat and strangle
them. These are the imperialists’ aims, and they are
well-known.
80. You have unveiled a.rather interesting secret to the
Security Council, Mr. Ball. You have announced that you’re
expecting somebody tomorrow, some guest. Where did you
get this news? Was it reported to you, or are you
organizing the guest’s arrival yourself! And you have even
decided in advance that he will speak in the Security
Council. Who is he? On whosebehalf? Whom is he going
to represent? You have already decided that beforehand.
It’s a very interesting communication, an interesting announcement. And, undoubtedly, it will be taken into
consideration. You know everything in advance.

76. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
Soviet Union on a point of order.
77. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated from Russian): Mr. President, I think the loss of

equanimity,
the irritation and the tone in which the
American representative delivered his speech, with its trite
anti-Soviet and anti-socialist tirades, speaks for itself.
Mr. Ball’s nerves are going to pieces. This is a visible proof
that American imperialism has lost its bet on counterrevolution in Czechoslovakia, and therefore this state of
affairs is driving Mr. Ball wild and he can not hide his
condition. In speaking here, in the Security Council, he has
used just such a tone and such gestures as though he were
speaking at a meeting of bank directors who are his
subordinates. Mr. Ball, this is not your office.4Therefore,
that tone won’t do here. It is about time that, in your new
capacity, you get out of the habit of dictating and giving
orders. I’m giving you useful advice.

81. You spoke of the guilt of Governments, but who is
guiltiest of acts of aggression, intervention, occupation,
violence? Read the statements in your own newspapersand
you’ll find the answerwhen, in the course of the electoral
campaign, the Viet-Nam problem is touched on. The whole
world knows who is to blame for the aggravation of the
international situation, for tension, for the slaughter and
death of millions of innocent people-children, women, old
men-for depriving them of shelter, food, means of livelihood, for destruction of their homes. There’s where the
shame lies, that’s who is “guilty”, and none of your efforts
to shift the blame from a sick head to a healthy one will
succeedhere.

78. We can see right away who it is who does not like the
idea that the Council should, at such a late hour, calmly
postpone the meeting until morning: it is the representative
of the United States, who is not used to considering the
opinions, wishes and just and legitimate requests of others.
He is used to commanding, to ordering, and he ended his
speech with an order: “put the draft I’ve introduced to a
vote, and let’s have no talk about it.” But as I said before,
things can only be put that way at bank directors’ and
boards’ meetings-not in the Security Council. You have no
right to forbid anyone who wants to have his say from
doing so. And you have no right to disregard requests and
legitimate wishes. While speaking on a particularly uncontroversial procedural matter, you have given vent to a whole
dunghill of insinuations, in your prepared speech. You have
unloaded the substance of everything you had accumulated.
I stress it again: you just can’t wait. That’s understandable.
In words you have often spoken here of democracy and
freedom. You have even spoken as a defender of socialism.
True, later on when confronted by concrete facts, you drew
back and admitted that you are not a defender of socialism
and communism. But then, nobody expected you to be.

82. Even in speaking on a purely procedural question, on
the most innocuous request of the representative of
Bulgaria that he be given the opportunity to speak
tomorrow, you all but pounded your fist on the table,
demanding that this be refused. Why? On what grounds?
In speaking about this absolutely innocuous question, you
referred to “Judases”. But Mr, Ball, the whole world knows
very well the enormous experience of your secret service
agencies in the selection, training and creation of
‘Judases”. On this score,we may therefore fittingly recall a
Russian proverb which says: “Though anybody else’s cow
may low, yours should keep quiet.“2
83. Only a few days ago the pagesof The New York Times
carried lengthy columns with the confessions of one of
these “Judases” in Bolivia, who had been a “Judas” and
worked for your secret serviceagenciesfor a long time, but
then, apparently, pangs of conscience made him think it
over and he revealed everything: how he had been a
“Judas”, how be became one and. how your “Judas”
organizers and creators directed him, trained and taught
him how to betray the interests of his own people,
Therefore it would be better if you left such a touchy
subject alone in your statements.

79. You have praised some communists here. Ah yes, it is
a sad fate for a communist to be praised by imperialists.
Such a communist is not to be envied, This reminds us of
the history of the social democratic movement in Germany,
when one of the outstanding fighters for the cause of the
working class, of socialism and the ideas of socialism, the
Marxist Bebel, a future member of the German Reichstag,
uttered the famous phrase: “Bebel, you old fool, if a
bourgeois praises you, it means you’ve done something
stupid.” Paraphrasing this famous historical phrase,, one
may bluntly say: communist, socialist, true patriot of your
homeland, if an imperialist praises you it means you’ve

84. Still, while we are on the subject of whose stitches are
showing, well, your statement today, with its tone, its
demands, and its loss of balance speaks for itself. In fact, it
2 “People who live in glasshouses shouldn’t throw

9

stones.”

is in your aims concerning Czechoslovakia that the stitching
is showing. Hiding behind hypocritical phrases about
democracy and freedom, the reaction was preparing a
counter-revolutionary coup in the Czechoslovak Socialist
Republic at the commands and with the sympathy of your
country, under active propaganda, under incitement, at
your directives, and with broadcasts through your radio and
through your propaganda organs giving instructions as to
how to proceed. It is perfectly obvious that your whole
endeavour to discuss this question here in the Security
Council is stitched together with basting thread: it gives
you away from head to foot, and your impatience today
speaks for itself.
85. You don’t use the words “imperialism” and “imperialist”, but that’s natural. These words grate on your ears, but
there’s no getting away from them.
86. Mr. President, I have been forced to react to all these
insinuations and falsehoods of the previous speaker, although I admit that everything he said has no bearing on
what is going on here in the work of the Security Council.
We are calmly discussing the legitimate, logical request of
one of the participants in the discussion that he kindly be
given the opportunity to speak tomorrow. Is there really
anything so extraordinary about this? Why has it worked
the American delegate up to such a frenzy, to the point of
raising his voice and ordering us: “vote, and let’s have no
more talk about it! “? Let’s think over the situation which
is arising, and perhaps we may grant the request of the
Bulgarian representative just the same, despite all the
impatience of the representative of the United States.
87. The PRESIDENT:
Bulgaria.

I call on the representative of

88. Mr. TARABANOV’
(Bulgaria) (translated from
French): Since I do not even represent a minority here, but
am alone, and since I have been allowed to participate in
the debate, I should like to ask you, Mr. President, whether
I might be authorized to speak tomorrow. I heard the
representative of the United States say that he did not agree
to this request, But I do not think he possesses the entire
authority of the Security Council. Therefore, I ask you
once again, Mr. President, to consult the Council, if you
can, and ask it whether I may speak tomorrow.
89. The PRESIDENT: In reply to the question that has
been asked by the representative of Bulgaria, I would say
that if the Council decides to meet tomorrow and if the
representative of Bulgaria inscribes his name on the list to
speak tomorrow, I shall be only too glad to allow him to do
so tomorrow. To make the situation quite clear, I would
point out that as far as the conduct of our business is
concerned and the future course of our actions, it will be a
matter for the Council to decide. Therefore to that extent I
commit myself to give the representative of Bulgaria the
floor tomorrow, subject to the decision of the Council to
meet tomorrow.
90. I now call upon the representative of the United States
in exercise of his right of reply.
9 1. Mr. BALL (United States of America): I should like to
exercise my right of reply very briefly indeed.

92. Obviously, the representative of the Soviet Union did
not listen to the Acting Permanent Representative of
Czechoslovakia, who spoke earlier this evening; otherwise
he would not have been at all confused as to where I
obtained the information that the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic is on his way
to New York to attend this session of the Security Council.
All I was reporting was what I heard this evening. I can very
well understand why the representative of the Soviet Union
did not listen to the Acting Permanent Representative, It
was because the Acting Permanent Representative spoke
the truth-the truth which was obviously very unpalatable
indeed to the representative of the Soviet Union.
93. I would also like to correct one misapprehension, or
one mis-statement. When the representative of Bulgaria
requested tonight the opportunity to speak tomorrow, I
tried to give him some comfort by indicating that I was
quite confident that we would have further business with
the Security Council tomorrow, that it would have other
matters to consider in connexion with this whole tragic
incident. But what I did not do, what I would like the
representative of the Soviet Union to understand, is that I
did not bang my fist, as he said, nor did I even bang my
shoe-if I may make reference to the departed.
94. The question arose a moment ago in the statement of
the representative of the Soviet Union as to how he, as a
communist, would react to a compliment from a capitalist.
I can only say to him that I think he misunderstands my
view of him. I am quite prepared to extend to him a very
enthusiastic compliment tonight: never have I heard such
an impossible, tawdry case stated with such diligence, if riot
with effectiveness.
95. I am a little astonished, I may say, at the manner in
which the Soviet representative has insulted two Heads of
State-Heads of two socialist States at that. One is President
Ceausescu of Romania-he is the head of a State allied with
the Soviet Union in the Warsaw Pact; the other is President
Tito, who certainly is not a newcomer to communism. Yet
the Soviet representative has told us that any communist
whose views parallel those of the imperialists-to use his all
purpose word-is a fool and should bide his head in shame,
It is quite apparent, if the representative of the Soviet
Union has been reading the newspapers in the last few days,
that these two Heads of State have expressed views which
are closely parallel to the views expressed by the represent&
tives of the capitalist Powers around this table, views which
deplore and condemn the rape of Czechoslovakia which has
been committed by the Soviet Union and its puppet States,
96. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I thought it
might be helpful to report to the Council that tomorrow
has almost come. I would wish further to be helpful by
saying, for my part, that I greatly look forward to listening
to the Ambassador of Bulgaria and I true1 that we shall all
agree that he may speak later tomorrow. We shall wish, I
am sure, to give him every facility to do so when he is
ready.
97. I would also go further to say what I believe is the
general wish of the members of this Council, all of whom
have an equal right to express their opinion. It is, I believe,

and has been the wish for many hours past of the majority
of the members of this Council that we should proceed to
vote on the important resolution which is before us and
that we should do so without delay.

vote? Why is it necessaryto give the Bulgarianrepresentative the floor only after the vote? On what grounds?It is
absolutely illogical, incomprehensible,unmotivated.He has
asked the Security Council and the Council’sPresidentto
allow him to participate in the discussionof the question
which was draggedhere into the Security Council by the
Anglo-Americans.As a representativeof a MemberState of
the United Nations Organization, he has a right, in
conformity with the rules of procedure of the Security
Council and with the Charter of our distinguishedOrganization, to expresshimself on the question under discussion
before the vote on the proposalintroduced in the courseof
the debate. Such is the more than twenty-year practice in
the work of the Security Council. Why, then, do the
representatives of the United States and the United
Kingdom want to break this practice and deprive the
representative of a Member State of the United Nationsinvited to take a seat at the Security Counciltable-of the
right, in conformity with the Charter and the rules of
procedure, to expressthe views and position of that State
on the question under discussion?Can he be deprived of
this right by the arbitrary and willful action of an
Englishmanandan American? On what grounds?

98. I, therefore, greatly hope that we need not spend
longer in exchanges between ourselves, but that we should
proceed now to vote on the draft resolution and that we
should also agree that the discussion of this matter which is
a continuing danger, a continuing problem, should continue
tomorrow, when we shall have the opportunity of hearing
the representative of Bulgaria whenever he wishes.
99. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Hungary who wishes to exercise his right of reply.
100. Mr. TARDOS (Hungary): The representative of the
United States this evening mentioned several times the
expression “shameless”, but I have to say that he succeeded
shamelessly in distorting my statement this morning. This
morning I made two short interventions that will appear in
the verbatim record of this morning’s meeting of the
Council and in neither of those statements did I say or
imply what he mentioned in connexion with the changes in
Czechoslovakia and the establishment of a new Government
and so on.

105. It would therefore be logical to grant his request,
meet him half-way and give him the opportunity to speak I
at the next meeting.And after that, to vote on the proposal II
which the representativesof the United Kingdom and the
United Stateshavein mind.

101. The PRESIDENT: I shall state the procedural situation as I see it. The representative of the Soviet Union has
suggested that we adjourn the meeting and continue our
deliberations tomorrow. I understand that objections have
been raised to that by the representatives of the United
States and the United Kingdom. I wonder whether any
member of the Council wishes to state his views on this
matter.

106. I should like to request, Mr. President, that you
considerall the circumstances,considerthe latenessof the
hour and, taking into consideration the request of the
Bulgarian representative, ask the representativesof the
United Kingdom and the United Stateswhether they might
perhaps restrdn their impatience, their wishesand their
eagernessto impose their will upon an official representative of a Member State of the United Nationshaving the
sameright as they have themselves,to expressthe opinion
and viewpoint of his Government on the question under
discussionat this table in the meeting of the Security
Council, naturally, without the right to take part in the
vote, in conformity with the rules of procedure of the
Security Council.

102. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): Even in his reply the representative of the United States betrays himself, his methods and
his way of thinking. I was still speaking specifically about
the term of his, which he used in his first statement today,
concerning “Judases”. In his second statement he used the
term so familiar to him, puppet States. When it comes to
the creation of puppet States, the United States is no less a
great master than it is in the creation and training of
Judases who betray the interests of their peoples, their
countries, and their convictions, going over to serve
American imperialism. That is why this kind of terminology
is on his mind and tongue, and he does not consider it
dishonourable or shameful to use such terms where they are
absolutely out of place. But as the representative of
monopoly capital he cannot conceive of any other relations
between a large Power and a small one, other than through
the intermediary of “Judases” and puppet States.

107. The PRESIDENT: I shouldlike to makethe situation
perfectly clear. There is no doubt in my mind-or in the
mind of anyone, I hope-as to the right that the representative of Bulgaria has, since he wasinvited to participate in
the discussionof this item. He is entitled to expressthe
opinions and the views of his Government.I ampreparedto
give him the floor now, if he so wishes,and I amprepared
alternatively to give him the floor tomorrow, if there is a
meeting tomorrow and subject to the decision of the
Council asto the order of business
today.

103. As for that modest and innocuous question, as I have
already called it, which arose some time ago, of whether we
may accede to the request of the Bulgarian representative
108. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): If I am allowed as a
and give him the opportunity to speak in the morning, after*
a good night’s rest, I am beginningto get the impression second-raterepresentativeof a second-ratePower-at least
that both the American andthe British representatives
who in the lexicon of one of our colleagues-tointervenein the
dialogue of a very entertaining character between two
spoke after him, do not object to his speakingtomorrow
first-rate Powers,may I recall that when we adjourned at
morning.
lunchtime yesterday,that wasthe day whenwe started our
104. But there is one thing I do not understand.Why is discussion-the question of procrastinationwasvery much ,
the representativeof the United States in sucha hurry to
in our minds and was indeed the subject of exchange
11

j
r
:
‘I

‘1

between representatives of the Council, an unheated and
deliberate exchange, and the reasons for and against
procrastination were clearly stated. The reason against
procrastination, I think, was better stated than I was able to
state it myself by the representative of Senegal at the
opening of the discussion this evening; he and I share the
view that when the fate of a small country, because of the
intervention of a powerful country in its internal affairs and
development is at stake, it is a matter which the Council
must take up with utmost seriousness and that it must
consider the question in its fullness. We have so done and
have before us a draft resolution. There is no motion before
the Council at the present moment under rule 33, but there
is a request for a vote on the part of several delegates, with
which I wish to associate myself, to proceed to the vote on
the draft resolution tabled in the name of eight delegations.
That is what you wished to consult us about, Mr. President,
and I am happy to express the opinion of the Canadian
delegation that we should cease to procrastinate and should
proceed to the vote at the earliest moment. The question of
right of speech, as you say Sir, is not in question. The
Council remains seized of the question, whatever we do
with this draft resolution, and the representative, our
colleague from Bulgaria, with whom we have been happy to
work in the past and whom we are always happy to hear
from-now
and in the future-is
already granted that
whenever he speaks it will be today.

112. The PRESIDENT: Well, I think that one thing on
which we should agree, if we cannot agree on anything else,
is perhaps not to use the expressions “today” or “tomorrow” as that merely leads to co<fusion. I would suggest
instead “this meeting” and “next meeting” as we are in the
early hours of the 23rd of August. I think we might agree
on that tentatively at this stage.
113. The representative of Poland has asked for the floor,
114. Mr. KASPRZYK (Poland): In exercise of my right of
reply, Mr. President, let me say some words in connexion
with remarks of the representative of the United States
which concerned some socialist countries, among them my
own country. In spite of the fact that Mr. Ball is represent.
ing a great Power here, he has no right to offend any
Member State by calling it in cold war language a “puppet
State”. I categorically protest against that and want to
stress that it is beneath our dignity to exchange such
epithets before this forum.
115. The PRESIDENT: At the moment I have no speakers
on my list. Two representatives had indicated their intention to address the Council after the vote is taken. This is
the situation as it stands now. The representative of the
Soviet Union maintains a suggestion that the Council
should adjourn and meet say ten hours from now. To this
course objections have been raised by several delegations.
The President is entirely in the hands of the Council, He
would like to have opinions which would permit him to
form a view, a judgement, on the intentions of the Council.

109. Mr, MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): Mr. President, since you have, by
mistake, given me the floor, I shall try to take advantage
of it.

116. Are there any other opinions? If there is no
consensus on the course we should take, the President will
have no alternative but to decide this question by vote.

110. The representative of Canada has spoken of procrastination. But, Mr. President, who was responsible for
today’s procrastination? Not we, not I, nor anybody else.
Your distinguished colleagues, an Englishman and an
American, and you along with them, insisted that the
meeting should start at 9 o’clock instead of 5 o’clock. So
whom should we blame for procrastination? If you were in
such a hurry to vote today at all costs, then why did you
lose four good evening hours? Your logic is incomprehensible. What were your criteria? If you had not been so busy
with procrastinating, we would already be asleep by now,
having finished our work and we would have voted, as you
wished. So please do not blame anybody but yourselves for
procrastination. You have wasted four hours, and now you
are in a hurry to vote. But since you have already been busy
procrastinating and have lost four hours after 9 o’clock and
have dragged it out until today, have a little patience and
hear the Bulgarian representative in the morning at
10 o’clock when your minds will be fresh, when you will
not be in a mood of procrastination but in one of good
sense.

117. Mr, MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): Mr. President, as I have understood the statements of the representatives of the United
Kingdom and the United States, they have no objections in
principle to the representative of Bulgaria speaking at the
next morning meeting. I requested that you ask them
whether they might perhaps go half-way in meeting this
modest, justified and logical request of the representative of
Bulgaria, and not insist on a vote on the proposal they
introduced. Otherwise, after the Bulgarian representative,
who is already entered on the list, other representatives
may ask for the floor, and they have a basis for doing SO.
And the meeting will turn into a night watch. Therefore, it
would be wiser to appeal to the representatives of the
United Kingdom and the United States not to insist OII an
immediate and quick vote because, evidently, all things
considered, unless they insist on it, the meeting will be
prolonged for several more hours and we shall have gone no
further anyway. It would be logical to take a practical
approach to this matter and come to an agreement without
any voting, without inflaming passions, but simply on the
basis of common sense and logic.

111. Mr. President, it has becoqe an established practice
that WC usually do not even discuss the next meeting, but
agree on it behind the scenes, so to speak. Perhaps we can
decide to do it that way: not continuing the discussion, but
reaching an agreement, behind the scenes, that the Bulgarian representative be given the opportunity to speak in
the morning, in about ten hours. Really, nothing extraordinary will happen before then.

118. The PRESIDENT: I repeat that there is no question
concerning the ri&t of the representative of Bulgaria to
address the Council, and I am prepared to give him the
floor either now or tomorrow, subject to a decision by the
Council on the course of business at this meeting.
12

119. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I think the
position is perfectly clear that it has been the intention for
many hours past of a majority of the members of this
Council that we should proceed to,a vote at this meeting.

I have understood him, he asked to participate in the
discussion before there is a vote, but asked that his
appearance be postponed until tomorrow. It is up to him to
decide what to do, but under the present circumstances
such a remark as you have just made seems to deprive him
of the possibility of speaking before the vote. I just wanted
to make clearhow mattersstand.

120. Many of us have felt from the beginning that this was
a matter of the greatest urgency. Nothing that has since
happened has altered that view. We, I believe, the majority
of the Council, are strongly of the opinion that we should
not be diverted or prevented from declaring our conclusion
at this meeting of the Council, and I have no reason to
believe that that view has been changed.

129. The PRESIDENT: I repeatthat I haveno doubt-and
no one has any doubt I hope-on the question of the
representative cf Bulgaria being entitled to addressthe
Council. I am preparedto give him the floor right away,
and I told him I would be preparedto give him the floor
tomorrow, subject to the decisionof the Council on the
courseof business
at this meet&g.

121. As to the request of the Ambassador of Bulgaria, we
are prepared to hear him now; we have been prepared to
hear him before; we shall be prepared to hear him in the
future. It is for him to decide. But the Council’s view-1 am
sure I know that a majority have been of this view-is that
we should not be prevented or delayed from coming to a
conclusion at this meeting of fhe Council, and as for myself
I am prepared to stay here until that conclusion is reached.

130. The situation is quite clearto me.The representative
of the Soviet Union has suggestedthat we adjourn the
meeting and that we meet tomorrow, that we allow the
representativeof Bulgariato speakand that we proceedto
the vote. To suchcourseobjectionshavebeenraised,and as
objectionshave been raised,I cannottake the decisionfor
the Security Council. I am prepared,however,to put the
matter to the decisionof the Security Council,and to put
to the decisionof the Security Councilthe requestthat has
beenmadeby the representativeof Bulgaria.

122. The PRESIDENT: Is there any other member wishing to address the Council?
123. It is obvious from the remarks that have just been
made by the representative of the United Kingdom that he
does not agree with the suggestion that has been advanced
by the representative of the Soviet Union. If the representative of the Soviet Union wishes to formalize any proposal
for adjournment, I shall be very glad to put it to the
Council.

131. I call on the representativeof Bulgaria.
132. Mr. TARABANOV (Bulgaria) (translated fronz
French): Mr. President,you madea mistakein sayingyou
had no speakerinscribed. I wasand remaininscribed,and
consider myself so. I merely askedyou, whetherit would
be possiblefor me to speak at our meetingtomorrow, if
there is a meeting. You have not answeredthis question.
That is why I thought it would benecessaryto tell you that
I am still inscribed.

124. The situation being so, I think the President has to
put the question to the decision of the Council
125. Mr. MALlK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): Mr. President, it is quite obvious
from all this that the modest, justified and logical request
of the representative of Bulgaria has come up against the
stone wall of Anglo-American opposition and objection.
The representative of the United Kingdom has declared that
he has the majority in his pocket, as they say, and he is
counting on the proposal’s obtaining a majority. Let us not
insist on a vote. Let us get on with our work. I am prepared
to work even until morning. I do not insist on consecutive
translation.

133. The PRESIDENT: I havethe nameof the represenfative of Bulgaria on my list. I ampreparedto give him the
floor right away if he sowishes.
134. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada):Mr. President,the point
of order that isunder discussioncanof coursebe continued
until the next meeting.You haveclearlystatedthe position
in regard to the request of the representativeof Bulgariato
speakeither at this meeting, the next meeting,or any other
meeting. There is the question of the absenceof any
motion under rule 33, to which referencehasbeenmade,
and in the absenceof any motion underrule 33 I move that
we proceed to the vote on the draft resolutioncontainedin
documentS/8761 of 22 August.

126. The PRESIDENT,: As I told the Council, I have no
other speakers on my list, and two delegations have
signified their intention of speaking after the vote.
127. The representative of the Soviet Union has not
formalized his proposal-1 understand there are objections
to that-but if he insists on his proposal I shall put it to the
vote and submit it to the Council. Otherwise, I think that
the normal procedure to take, since there are no more
speakers, would be to proceed to a vote on the draft
resolution.

135. The PRESIDENT: The representativeof Canadahas
formally moved that we proceedto the vote on the draft
resolution that hasbeentabled.Are there any commentson
this suggestion?
136,. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(transtated from Russian): I regard this action of the
representative of Canada as an attempt to deprive the
Bulgarian representative of the possibility of speaking,
Why? On what grounds? The Bulgarianrepresentativewas
invited by the Security Council at his request;he entered

128. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
[translated from Russian): Mr. President, should your
words be understood to mean that there is no intention to
give the floor to the representative of Bulgaria? You see, as
13

his name to speak before the vote, but by some accident it
turns out that he is not on the list. There are no grounds for
depriving him of the right to speak, and it would be logical
to give him the possibility.

ask the American representative to arm himself wid
patience. He has said far too many gross and indecen
slanderous things in his morning statement and in the
retorts afterwards which call for an answer, and it would br
wrong and incomprehensible for the Soviet representativt
not to reply to these insinuations and inventions.

137.’ I should like to ask the representative of Canada not
to insist on his proposal and to give the Bulgarian
representative the opportunity to have his say.

144. What emerges in the course of the discussion of this
matter in the Security Council? Those who show sa
interest in aggravating the events in Czechoslovakia in line
with their own pre-arranged and previously worked out
plans have been unmasked. The government circles of the
Western Powers, including the United States and the United
Kingdom, have so far stubbornly asserted their supposed
absolute non-participation in the events in Czechoslovakia,
and their determination not to interfere in the developmen
of these events in any way.

138. The PRESIDENT: I can assure the representative of
the Soviet Union that the request of the representative of
Bulgaria has not been forgotten. I am prepared to recognize
him at any time, even novi, and I have on several occasions
offered him the floor.
139. Mr. TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated fionr
French): I don’t know, Mr. President, perhaps 1 don’t
understand the rules of procedure, but I still consider
myself inscribed on the list of speakers, and I asked
whether it was not possible for me to be permitted to
speak, as you put it, at the next meeting of the Security
Council, if there is one, and before the vote. If you could
assure me that I would have the floor before the vote if
there is a meeting of the Security Council tomorrow-and I
believe you asked the Security Council this question
because I asked you to do so-, then I would speak
tomorrow. But, of course, I should like to speak before the
vote.

145. From the very start of the development of the events
in Czechoslovakia, a very distinctive feature could be
observed in the attitude of those countries to those events,
namely: the assignment of roles between the official
representatives and the government bodies, on one hand,
and on the other the organs of mass media and propaganda.
The former stubbornly endeavoured to dissociate tllem
selves from any indication of their participation in the
incitement of anti-socialist elements in Czechoslovakia, and
avoided in every possible way commenting on these events,
The latter, including the propaganda organs, assumed all the
functions of developing a broad anti-communist and anti.
Soviet campaign, employing for this purpose, the whole
available arsenal of misinformation, slander and falsifica.
tion, highlighting and interpreting the events in Czech@
Slovakia along an absolutely specific line convenient to the
imperialist Powers and the representatives of counter.
revolution in this country. Now the official bodies of the
United States and of the United Kingdom Governments and
their representatives in the Security Council, lowering their
masks, have become openly involved in this anti.
communist, anti-Soviet campaign.

140. The exercise of wit by certain representatives here
who spoke of tomorrow or today in order to sidestep a
certain decision are gratuitous. I simply asked you to allow
me to speak. I am inscribed on the list, and I wanted to
speak before the vote because I should like to express my
views on the question on the agenda of the Security
Council.
141. Mr. BALL (United States of America): The hour is
late, and I must say, speaking for my Government, that I
can express a sentiment which I am certain is shared around
this table. It is a matter of grave concern to find this solemn
body turned into a circus by the most absurd, ridiculous
proposals obviously intended to obstruct the exercise by
this body of the expression of its opinion, which is long
overdue, on a crisis which is confronting the world, which is
resulting in bloodshed, which is resulting in the destruction
of legitimate Government, which is threatening the peace of
the world. To have us at this point consume hours-literally
hours-on this kind of grotesque procedural nonsense is I
think an affront to all of us. We are all accomplices if we
permit this to go on very much further-accomplices in
undermining the dignity of the United Nations and the
dignity of the Security Council.

146. In this regard we can not overlook the assertions of
the representative of the United Kingdom, Lord Caradon,
that the British Government has, so he says, made 110
announcements concerning the events in Czechoslovakia,
and has supposedly maintained effective neutrality. 3ut did
and do matters really stand this way? The leading organsof
the British press have been employed to express the British
point of view, reflecting the opinions of the ruling circles Of
this country concerning the events in Czechoslovakia.
147. A few examples will suffice. The main organ of the
British monopolies, actuaIly the semi-official mouthpiece of
Government circles, the newspaper The Observer on 12
August of this year advised the Czechs and the SIovaks to
break with Moscow. This is a reflection of the real
intentions of the British ruling circles concerning the events
in Czechoslovakia. That notorious slanderer of communism,
the “professional” anti-Soviet Victor Zorza of the British
newspaper The Guardian just recentIy, on 14 August1
hopefully announced that “every communist reform mcvp
ment is inevitably accompanied by creeping capitalism”.
That is the crux of the meaning and aim of the British
ruling circles’ attitude to the events in Czechoslovakia.

142. There is a motion before you, Mr. President, that we
proceed to a vote forthwith. If you need a further motion, I
certainly shall make it. But I feel that we do ourselves a
disservice, we do the United Nations a disservice, and we do
the cause of world peace and security a disservice by
continuing this absolute farce, which is intended only to
deflect us from doing our duty.
143. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated porn Russian): Mr. President, I would like to
14

Under the guise of praise for some so-called reformers, it is
really designed first to push Czechoslovakia off the socialist
road and onto that of “creeping capitalism”, and then onto
that of genuine capitalism.

Agency, Stanidav Jan&k, arrived in Prague from the United
States on a visit. He ostentatiously joined the 231 Club and
offered it “disinterested financial aid” in dollars.
151. These are the kind of reformers who have appeared
in Czechoslovakia, the kind of Judases the American secret
service has created in that country; and official America,
through its secret service, is betting on them. It is easy to
see how, when these Judases failed to produce results, this
caused confusion both in the American secret service and
the American ruling circles. That is why the American
representative speaks so heatedly and impatiently here in
defense of reformer Judases. “Reformers” is a camouflage,
it is a word which has been assigned a very specific
meaning. What it really means is: traitors to the Czechoslovalc people.

148. Other statements may be quoted from equally
“reliable” organs of British monopoly capital. On 12
August, the London newspaper T&e Daily Telegraph,
criticizing Dubcek for not having dared to disband the
people’s militia of Czechoslovakia, gave the following
advice: “The militia is in fact the old guard of hard-core
communists. The strength of this militia, on which data
have never been published, consists of some 100,000
people,” It is not hard to understand that what the owners
of this organ of British monopoly capital are thinking is
that there are 100,000 workers with arms in their hands in
Czechoslovakia, standing guard over socialist achievements.
This figure has frightened the owners of that organ. And
both the wish and advice were expressed plainly and
frankly. The advice was to disband this militia.

152. The British also quickly grasped the true nature of
the members of the 231 Club, The general of bourgeois
Czechoslovakia, Palecek, maintained a steady friendship
with the British Ambassador in Prague, Parker. Hruby, a
well-known leader of the 231 Club, is the son of a former
minister of the protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia. The
terrorist Kebel, and a certain Slavik, whose father is now
the head of the reactionary organization “The Council of
Free Czechoslovakia in the United States”, penetrated the
club’s leadership. These are the people through whom the
official and unofficial American agencies operate in Czechoslovakia. These are the ones on whom they are betting. One
of the club’s leaders, Strasek, without concealing his hatred
of the Communist Party, called for the removal of
Czechoslovak workers from power in the country, while
another member of this club, Siska, went so far as to
demand complete liquidation of the Communist Party of
Czechoslovakia.

149. That is how matters stand on the alleged neutrality
and non-interference of Great Britain regarding the events
in Czechoslovakia. We cannot fail to draw attention to
another highly indicative phenomenon. The anti-socialist
elements in Czechoslovakia have engaged in a course of
creating a series of so-called clubs under quite innocent
names. However, among them a so-called “231 Club” was
established. This club created a broad network of district
committees of its own. All of a sudden, branches of this
club appeared even in the United States and in Canada.
These clubs and their branches recruited Czechoslovak
immigrants from among political criminals, renegades,
traitors to their homeland and similar rabble. Branches of
the club began actively to raise money for a club fund.
Recently the newspaper Rude Prbvo published an open
letter addressed to Sram, the secretary of the 231 Club in
southern Czechoslovakia. The author of the letter,
A. Czernjr, unmasks the secretary as a speculator and a
traitor. Sram, who has now seized the post of secretary in
the club’s regional organization, was, according to the letter
which has been confirmed by documents and by extracts
from Sram’s own autobiography, the owner of a large
private firm. After the liberation of Czechoslovakia and the
establishment of the socialist system there, he turned his
hand to managerial work and was sentenced several times
for speculation. Then he became a paid agent of the
American secret service as a Judas, according to Mr. Ball’s
formula and his own confession, giving secret data to the
American secret service. A member of the 231 Club,
Fratisek Paul, maintained constant contact with the editor
of the immigrant magazine Steletsetvy in Austria, and with
an agent of the CIA secret service administration headquarters, Pechacek, as well as with staff members of Radio
Free Europe, which let it be clearly understood that it was
prepared to aid the club in every way possible provided that
it did not become a bnanch of the Communist Party of
Czechoslovakia.

153. That is the truth of the matter regarding the
supposed impartiality, neutrality and non-intervention of
Britain and America in the events in Czechoslovakia. And
who are the heads of this club? That old fascist, Brodsky;
the former bourgeois general Palecek, and Rambousek, who
were all tried as espionage agents of the imperialist secret
service?Ceck, and others. All of them are die-hard, malicious
enemies of socialism. The make-up of this club, what a
motley crew of dyed-in-the-wool reaction it represents is
evidenced by the statements of some justly rehabilitated
political leaders. These leaders have written that among the
club’s members are collaborationists who worked with
fascist troops during the occupation period in Czechoslovakia; there are thieves and murderers who were and are
enemies of the Czechoslovak people and of all honest
people.
154. Moreover, one of these leaders, the diehard fascist
Brodskjr, who obtained the post of secretary-general of the
club, during one of its general assemblies, burning with
hatred and malice towards the socialist system in Czechoslovakia and towards communism, declared: “We’ll tear the
Communists limb from limb”. And it is just these leaders
who are so dear to America and Britain and their
representatives here in the Security Council. That’s precisely why they defend these leaders so passionately.

150. A third active member of the club, Jaromir NebeskJi
of Prague, established contact with a representative of the
American “Pan American” company, which was willing to
be generous and promised to grant the club $10,000. At the
beginning of May a paid agent of the Central Intelligence

15.5, At yesterday’s and today’s meetings of the Security
Council, the American representative, Mr. Ball, shed croco15

”

and subversive tactics are an inseparable, inherent part of
the preparations and implementation of aggressive a&en.
tures against the socialist countries. The enormous subver.
sive espionage machinery of the United States, supplied
with thousands of millions of dollars, is actively working
toward this end and intensifying its recruitment of
“Judases”-to
use Mr. Ball’s terminology. These plans pre
vide for encouragement of opposition movements and even
uprisings against the present Governments of the socialist
countries. They provide for penetration of opposition
forces within the Communist parties of the socialist
countries, their security agencies, their military and
counter-intelligence organizations, and the other State
institutions of the socialist countries.

dile tears and dramatically described “the establishment of a
curfew on Prague, the capital of Czechoslovakia. He
conjured up the possibility that, as a result, unfortunate
incidents might occur. We need hardly wonder that
somebody in the Central Intelligence Agency might indeed
like to provoke unfortunate incidents in Czechoslovakia,
cause bloodshed and disorder, to which the Czechoslovak
reaction and counter-revolution are being incited by
American propaganda and the statements of the official
American representatives here in the Security Council.
However, calm reigns in Czechoslovakia and its capital. The
overwhelming majority of the people, in response to the
call of the President of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic,
is maintaining calm and is filled with a deep sense of
political responsibility in the face of the anxious situation
created by external and internal reaction.

161. This dangerous policy of subversive propaganda,
ideological sabotage and military preparations by the
NATO bloc, which is the tool of the aggressive designsof
United States imperialism and of the insane revanchist plans
of West Germany, require the utmost and keenest vigilatlce,
unity and readiness on the part of the peopIes of the
socialist countries, of the entire socialist community, fo
repel decisively any aggressive surprise attack on socialist
positions. And that is preci,sely why the NATO countries
have become alarmed-and why the United States and 111e
United Kingdom, in particular, established this aggressive
military bloc, when they saw that their bet on tlls
restoration of capitalism, on the return in Czechoslovakia
to the systems so much to the liking of the imperiatisl
Powers. Not only were measures of ideological ,subversion
adopted for this purpose, but also of practical action. In
July of this year it became known, as the press had already
reported, that the Czechoslovak security agencies had
discovereda clandestinecache of weaponsof foreignorigin
on Czechoslovakterritory, not far from the bordersof West
Germany alongpart of the road betweenthe citiesof Clleb
and Karlovy Vary. The bullets, automatic weaponsaltd
other arms removed from this cache all bore the rllark
“Made in U.S.A.“. These armswere depositedfrom West
Germany for partisansof the restorationof the old orderin
Czechoslovakia,for the purposeof arming “Judases”-to
use Mr. Ball’s terminology-with theseAmerican weapoas.

1.56. Of course, those political circles in the United States
and in NATO who are putting their bets on the explosion
of fratricidal strife in Czechoslovakia, do not like all this.
Still, are there no limits to the cynicism and hypocrisy of
these representatives of the NATO countries?
157. Mr. Ball was distressed at the possibility of individual
unfortunate incidents. Yet the American representative has
not said a single word of regret about those thousands and
tens of thousands of deaths constantly inflicted upon the
Viet-Namese people as a result of the continuing American
aggression in Viet-Nam. Every day blood flows in the cities
and villages of Viet-Nam from American bombs, rockets,
napalm, and from American shooting and chemical
weapons, and hundreds of Viet-Namese citizens who are in
no way responsible perish, including women, old men and
children. For years now the blood of the Viet-Namese has
flowed over the fields of that country. This blood drips
from the hands of the American murdering aggressors who
are hopelessly trying to crush the legitimate aspirations of
the people of Viet-Nam to uphold their freedom and
independence against the gross and repulsive aggression
unleashed by the United States of America.
158. Knowing the invincible might of the Soviet Union
and the community of socialist countries, imperialism no
longer dares risk a frontal attack on the socialist community, for that would be tantamount to suicide. But in the
offices of certain United States Government departments
so-called alternatives are being worked out all the more
persistently, designed to undermine the socialist system of
the socialist countries, and to create a rift within the
socialist community.

162. In quantity and size this weaponry was fully in
keeping with the type of armsSuitablefor the actionsof
small insurrectionary detachments and groups, and tllis
venture bears the mark of the United States Cetltral
IntelligenceAgency.
163. In the light of thesewell-known andirrefutablefacts,
it will be appropriate here in the Security Council,when
discussingthe question of the situation in Czechoslovakia,
which has been raised by the NATO Powerswith Clear@
provocatory intent, to recall againthe remarkablewordsof
that outstandingpatriot and CommunistJulius Fucik, 410
gave his life in the struggle for the freedom andindepep
dence of his country and againstfascist aggression
and
militarism. He wrote and said: “Oh people! I haveloved
you. Be on your guard! “. These words againsoundm
ardent call to all who hold dear the causeof socialism,
the
unity of the countriesof the socialistcommunity, andtile
cause of peace. These words are timely now, when
Czechoslovakiais undergoinga period of hard&p created
by the attempts of reaction, aided and abetted by fore@

159. The imperialist circles of the United’ States stub.
bornly continue to follow a course which, with the aid of
ideological and political methods combined with secret
subversive measures, is designed to shatter socialist society,
undermine the unity of the socialist system, and thereby
weaken its ability to resist direct aggression.
160. It is well known, and it has been reported in the
Press, that CIA plans do exist, containing detailed outlines
of subversive activities against individual Warsaw Treaty
countries. These plans provide mainly for the so-called
liberation of East Germany and Czechoslovakia. These
plans confirm that ideological and clandestine espionage
16

Powers, to turn back the wheel of history in this country
and wrest it from among the fraternal socialist countries.

i69. The actions of the Soviet Union and the other
socialist countries are fully in accordance with the right of
States to individual and collective self-defence provided for
by the treaties of alliance which have been conclud :J by
the fraternal socialist countries. These actions, as has
already been stated officially, are not directed against any
particular State and do not infringe upon any State’s
interests. The only interests against which they are in fact
directed and upon which they infringe are the interests of
the imperialist Powers which have made every effort to
wrest Czechoslovakia from the community of socialist
States. It is absurd from the legal standpoint and untenable
in point of fact to represent the matter in such a way that
the aid granted the people of Czechoslovakia by the
socialist countries within the context of individual and
collective self-defence should appear as alleged interference
in this country’s internal affairs. Not a single article of the
Charter of the United Nations provides any basis for
terming the carrying out of individual or collective selfdefence as an act of interference.

164. However, the socialist countries have declared repeatedly, and we consider it essential to stress this again
most decidedly that nobody will ever be allowed to wrest
so much as a single link from the community of socialist
States which was and is an indestructible bulwark against all
and any imperialist plots, subversion, attacks and provocations. It is the sure safeguard of all nations, not only of the
socialist system but also of all the countries of Africa and
Asia which have recently freed themselves of the imperialist
yoke and are treading the path of self-reliant development
and defending their freedom, independence and- social
progress.
165. The American representative has repeatedly referred
in his statements to various reports and declarations
allegedly coming from Czechoslovakia. From where did he
draw this information of a type cletirly slanderous to the
people of Czechoslovakia? From where does all this foul
counter-revolutionar
propaganda and misinformation on
the situation in Czechoslovakia creep out, information
which he so readily and zealously presents to the Security
Council?

170. The acts of the socialist countries are directed neither
against the political independence nor the territorial inviolability of Czechoslovakia, nor against the interests of its
people. Therefore they do not fall within the purview of
the prohibitions of Article 2 of the Charter which sets forth
the principles in accordance with which all Members of the
Organization shall act.

166. It is well known that all this is extracted by
American propaganda from the filthy source of counterrevolution hiding underground, and is repeated here by the
American ‘representative. Some speakers here, and the
representative of Canada in particular, have resorted to all
kinds of supposedly legal arguments. Attempts have been
made to cast doubt on the legality of the measures adopted
by the socialist countries to give aid to Czechoslovakia and
to ensure the security of the other countries of the socialist
community.

171. These actions in no way violate the principles of
non-interference set forth in the Charter and in the
well-known United Nations Declaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention in the Domestic Affairs of States
‘and the Protection of their Independence and Sovereignty.
But if we are to talk about interference in the internal
affairs of Czechoslovakia, then we should also speak of the
outside incitements, the support from abroad which was
and is being given to the anti-socialist elements in Czechoslovakia by the imperialist circles of the United States,
Great Britain, West Germany and a number of other States
which for a long time have been trampling the principles of
non-interference underfoot.

167. One need not be an expert on matters of international law to show the complete untenability of these
arguments. In the Tass communication it is clearly and
accurately stated that the assistance to the Czechoslovak
people has been provided in conformity with existing treaty
obligations. Is it not well-known that the socialist countries
concerned, having been forced by the threat of the creation
of an imperialist bloc called NATO to conclude a military
treaty, in 1955 signed the Warsaw Treaty? This Treaty
provides that:

172. What has been so ingeniousIy and speedily accomplished here in the Security Council by the representatives
of the United States and the United Kingdom is an
immediate example of the interference of their countries
and Governments in affairs which concern only Czechoslovakia and the States allied with it in accordance with the
alliance commitment under the Warsaw Treaty. This is
precisely a glaring example of interference in the affairs of
others under cover of the United Nations, utilizing the
Security Council for their own shady imperialist aims.
Nobody has asked or is asking them to do this. They are
driven to it by hostility and hatred towards the socialist
countries, hatred which the official representatives of the
United States and the United Kingdom are trying to cover
up here in the’security
Council by false and hypocritical
speeches about freedom. All of this shows that neither the
Soviet Union nor the other socialist countries have cornmitted, nor are they committing any vioIation of international law and, specifically, of the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of other States.

“The Parties (i.e., these countries) shall likewise take
such other concerted action as may be necessary to
reinforce their defensive strength, in order to defend the
peaceful labour of their peoples, guarantee the inviolability of their frontiers and territories and afford protection against possible aggression.”
168. This is a part of article 5 of the Warsaw Treaty which
defines the tasks and purposes of the armed forces and of
their Unified Command. It is to “defend the pea’qeful
labour of. _ . peoples, guarantee the inviolability of. . ,
borders and territories. . . afford protection” against the
threat of aggression from the imperialist forces and the
NATO aggressive military bloc that the socialist countries
have come to the assistance of the people of Czechoslovakia.
17

173. Those who have tried and are trying to interfere in
the internal affairs of Czechoslovakia are the imperialist
States, and I have already presented the facts on this. It is
they who have interfered and are trying to interfere for the
purpose of restoring capitalism in this country. The attempt
to involve the Security Council in a discussion of this
question and such persistent demands to force acceptance
of the resolution on Czechoslovakia, drafted by the
Anglo-Americans, are, among other things, the continuation
of this policy of interference in the internal affairs of other
countries. Mr. Ball stated frankly here that he is an enemy
of socialism and communism. But he added that he is a
partisan of freedom. It seems to me essential to comment
on these statements.
174. Speaking from a position of hatred towards socialism, of support and protection of reactionary forces, the
American representative babbled heaven knows what kind
of nonsense here about some sort of Soviet tyranny in
Czechoslovakia in 1948 and about some mythical murder
of Masaryk. He endeavoured to distort the nature of the
events in the Hungarian People’s Republic in 1956. But the
representative of Hungary has already given a sufficiently
effective rebuttal and reply here to this slanderous statement of the representative of the United States. It is
entirely understandable that these slanderous inventions
have, both yesterday and today, been immediately and
decisively refuted and unmasked by the representative of
the Hungarian People’s Republic as slanderous fabrications.
The result was inevitable: the man who tried here to play a
role for which he was not cut out, the role of “defender” of
the peoples of the socialist countries, whereas in fact he is
the worst enemy of socialism and communism, fell on his
face. He took on a job he does not know. Today too,
Mr. Ball tried to appear in the role of a “defender” of the
socialist countries. True, as I have already said, he was
forced to admit that he is an enemy of socialism and
communism. He spoke of freedom. But what is meant by
that freedom. which is propounded by a representative of
monopoly capital? To monopoly capital freedom means
freedom for the rich and the super-rich; it is the freedom of
bankers and capitalists to sit astride the neck of the
working class, of the labouring people. In this case too,
when he speaks of freedom in Czechoslovakia he means
that freedom under which the owners of American capital,
who were driven out by the people’s revolution in that
country, could, with the support of “Judases”, return
unopposed, establish their business enterprises and unrestrainedly exploit the Czechoslovak working people as they
do in a number of countries where American monopoly
capital has succeeded in penetrating.
175. When Mr. Ball speaks of freedom, he evidently has in
mind freedom to kill many hundreds of thousands of
wholly innocent people in Viet-Nam, freedom for political
terrorism which has led to the destruction of many
outstanding political leaders of the United States, When he
speaks of freedom he apparently means freedom for the
racists who have placed ‘over 20 million people with
“non-white”
skin in a position where they are deprived of
all rights, an unbearable position.
176. Our understanding of freedom is different. It consists
in helping the Czechoslovak people, the Czechoslovak
18

workers to defeat the counter-revolutionary
plots of ex.
ternal and internal reaction, and thereby clear the way to
free socialist development in the future.
177. Obviously it is not fortuitous that the American
representative has exerted considerable efforts in trying to
give the members of the Council the impression that there
is and has been no Western plot against communist power in
Czechoslovakia. The enemies of socialism, acting to the
detriment of the Czechoslovak and Soviet peoples, have
repeatedly engaged and are engaging in efforts to cast
shadowsof doubt on the fraternal, friendly co-operation
between the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia. Today
another enemy of socialismjoined this chorus: the American representativeto the Security Council, Mr. Ball. He let
loose a seriesof slanderousinventions irrelevant to Soviet.
Czechoslovakco-operation and to the aid which the Soviet
people are giving the fraternal Czechoslovakpeople. But
Mr. Ball hasevidently picked a rather unfortunate subject.
Obviously, he is poorly informed on the real nature of the
co-operationbetweenthe Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia,
This collaboration has become an intrinsic part of our
achievements,of our successesin the construction of
socialismand communism.Insinuations, slander,ridiculous
inventions-these are the usual methods of imperialist
propagandaand the hirelings of imperialism,who would
like to discredit the economic, scientific and technical ties
between the socialistcountries, to attempt to sow discord
amongand divide their fraternal peoples.Our country, the
land of the Soviets, true to its international duty, is giving
the socialist States large-scaleeconomic and technical
co-operation for the development of their national economies.We need only mention that, in conformity with the
agreementsconcluded,the Soviet Union assumed
an oblige
tion to provide co-operation in the construction, recon.
struction and expansion of some 1,400 plants, individual
workshops,and other industrial, transport and communica.
tions units in fraternal Czechoslovakia.About 900 of these
plants ,and units are already in operation. One exampleof
the fruitful nature of the fraternal tiesestablishedamong
our countries, the countries of the socialistcommunity, is
precisely the experience of the economic co-operation
between the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia.The Soviet
Union is giving Czechoslovakiaits co-operationin settingup
the large-scaleEastern-Slovakironworks complex. Its hot
and cold rolling mills, having a total annual average
production capacity of 3.7 million tons, were established
with Soviet equipment. The large-scale
petrochemicalplant
Slovnaft, the synthetic fibres plant in Humene, the large
cement works in Banski-Bystrica, a lead-and-zincore
processingplant and other industries which play a major
role in the Czechoslovak economy were built with the
technical collaboration of the Soviet Union. A largepart of
the equipmentinstalledin theseindustrieswasproducedin
Soviet factories by the handsof Soviet workers, by Soviet
engineersand scientists.A modern signallingsystemand
centralization and automation of block systemson the
important parts of the railway network were installedwith
the aid of the Soviet Union. Our country is participatingin
the construction of the first atomic electric powerstation.
In view of Czechoslovakia’slimited raw materiaisresources
and the difficulties of obtaining and paying for raw
materialson the capitalist markets, the Soviet Union helps
meet Czechoslovakindustry’s raw materialrequirements
tc

a considerable extent. Such supplies, which are delivered on
a fixed price basis agreed upon far in advance, guarantee the
Czechoslovak enterprises favorable conditions for utilization of their capacities.

varieties of raw materials essential to the maintenance of
war industry production in the United States at a level
permitting expansion and aggression.

178. It should aho be mentioned that according to surveys
by Czechoslovak economists and the statements of industrial managers, the conditions and prices on which these
raw materials are purchased are to Czechoslovakia’s advantage. The importance and quantity of Soviet raw materials
and consumer goods delivered to Czechoslovakia are impressive. They meet almost all of Czechoslovakia’s petroleum requirements; over 80 per cent of its iron ore import
requirements; approximately 63 per cent of its synthetic
rubber demand; about 42 per cent of its non-ferrous metals
needs, and so forth. Over the past decade, the annual
imports of grain from the Soviet Union averagedtwo thirds
of the total centralized government grain purchases within
Czechoslovakia.
179. We should also mention$ome data on foreign trade
between the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia, at least for
the period 1956-1968, that is, 12 years. During this period
Soviet Union deliveries to Czechoslovakia were as follows:
grain: 17 million tons; cotton: nearly 700,000 tons; wool:
about 70 tons; petroleum: 51 million tons; metal ores: 80
million tons; pig iron: about 2 million tons; sheet metal:
about 2.5 million tons; copper: 285,000 tons; aluminium:
over 200,000 tons; lead: over 200,000 tons; phosphate
concentrate: nearly 3.5 million tons; zinc: 170,000 tons;
asbestos: over 200,000 tons; timber: nearly 5 million
cu. m.; and almost 1.2 milliard roubles worth of machinery
and equipment.
180. If Czechoslovakia had been obliged to buy all these
materials for hard currency on the open market, it would
have had to spend about $3,500 million. Here is a concrete
example, here are concrete facts and instances of the
mutually beneficial fraternal socialist co-operation between
two socialist States.

184. Latin America supplies the United States industry
with 99.5 per cent of its total lead requirements; 39 per
cent of its iron ore; 44. I per cent of its copper, and 60.6
per cent of its zinc. In addition, an enormous amount of
agricultural produce and raw materials are purchased by the
North American monopolies at extremely low prices in
Latin America. The pillage of the Latin American continent
by the American monopolies has been going on for nearly
150 years, ever since 1823 when the ill-fated Monroe
Doctrine wasproclaimed claiming “America for the Americans”-this means the American monopolies located north
of the Rio Grande.
185. Comparatively recently, a new form of pillage has
been practised in Latin America. Again, according to data
from the American press,in recent years about 4,000 Latin
American technical experts who had a higher education
have been lured every year to the United States. Special
recruiters employed by the great monopolies constantly
visit the most important universities and scientific research
centres in Latin America, All this, too, represents both the
word and the concept Mr. Ball so dislikes: the word
“imperialism”. And the facts and figures I have quoted
from the American press are the living proof of imperialism
in action. These figures are the result of imperialist policies
of monopoly capital. And precisely asa result of this policy
so many Latin American countries, despite over 100 years
of existence as independent, sovereignStates, unfortunately
belong to this day to the category of the under-developedor, as they are usually termed-developing countries.
186. Against the background of this exploiting, pillaging
policy of the imperialist monopolies, the facts and figures I
have cited on the fraternal co-operation between the Soviet
Union and Czechoslovakia shine brilliantly by contrast.
Mr. Ball, the representative of United States monopoly
capital, just doesn’t understand these new, truly fraternal,
comradely relations between the countries and peoples of
two socialist States. He can’t understand them. His mind
works differently. He recognizes only cash, maximum
profit relationships, the exploitation and pillaging of the
weak by the strong. This, as he understands it, is real
freedom, freedom for American monopolies,

181. The American representative representing as he does
large-scalemonopoly capital, cannot get through his head
the kind of fraternal relations and co-operation which can
exist between a large Power and one which, geographically,
may be termed middle-sized. Therefore, for purposes of
comparison it may be appropriate to give some data on how
American monopolies work, for example in Latin American
countries.

187. That is precisely the reason, as history shows, why
the socialist countries, socialism, communism and the
Soviet Union arouse such frenzied hatred in the imperialist
rulers of monopoly capital. That is precisely why throughout the many years since the early days of the 1917
October Revolution the main ideological weapons of
imperialism in its struggle against the countries of socialism
are anti-communist and anti-Soviet.

182. I take this data from the American press.In order to
show the difference between the forms and methods of
economic co-operation between the Soviet Union and
Czechoslovakia, on one hand, and the United States and the
Latin American countries, on the other, we may note that,
according to the data published, direct investments by
American monopolies in Latin American countries total
$11,400 million. I stress again, this figure is taken from the
American press, During the period between 1945 and 1965
these investments have brought the United States monopolies gigantic profits: $40,000 million!

188. But all the efforts of the enemies of socialism and
communism, the enemies of the Soviet Union, the carriers
of these anti-communist, anti-Soviet ideas have clamorously
failed, both from the ideological and military standpoint.
And no one will ever succeedin slandering the Soviet Union
and its truly international ties, its friendly and fraternal
relations and comradely mutual aid to the peoples of the
socialist countries and those of many developing countries.

183. The United States pumps out of Latin America
enormous quantities of raw materials-no less than 20
19

,
past, they still refuse to take active steps to put a stop to
that race, to accept universal and complete disarmament,
and ban the use of atomic weapons.

189. I would not consider my statement complete if I
were to fail to react to the remarks of some representatives
in the Security Council who have tried to present matters in
such a way as to make it appear that the socialist countries
are practically to blame for the heightening of tension in
the world.

195. That is what is poisoning the international situation.
The shadow of aggression in Viet-Nam and the cloud of the
aggression committed on behalf of the imperialist Powers
by the Israeli aggressors in the Middle East hang over the
whole world and create a state of tension, insecurity and
mistrust, and hinder the settlement of international prob.
lems, creating obstacles to the rapprochement between East
and West of which the representatives of the United
Kingdom, the United States and others have spoken so
tenderly here. That’s what prevents the easing of inter.
national tensions and the achievement of an agreement
between East and West. That is the position concerning the
question of who is really to blame for the tension in
international relations.

190. This was mentioned by the representative of Brazil in
particular, the representative of a country located in the
southern part of the American continent and whose people
know the imperialist neighbour from the north very well.
Nobody knows better than the Latin American peoples
how the American monopolies operate, and how they have
meddled for centuries in the internal affairs of the South
American continent, removing the systems and leaders Zhey
find inconvenient and creating all kinds of obstacles to’
prevent a number of countries from taking the path to
genuine democracy, freedom and progress.

196. The representative of the United Kingdom, Lord
Caradon, spoke at great length here about freedom. But the
policy of the United Kingdom and its NATO allies towards
the peoples of Africa speaks for itself. Who is it who has so
far prevented the liberation of Southern Rhodesia from the
tyranny of a racist rkgime? Everybody knows: it is the
policy of the United Kingdom and, of its Government.

131. Incidentally, on this score too we may refer to the
American press. A bulletin published by the United States
Information Centre in Washington in September 1966
contains the fGllo,wing statement: “The military organizations armed and trained by the United States in Latin
A.neriLa ha:!e overthrown the legitimate civilian Governments in a number of countries.” This is a report by the
American press; it lists a number of countries which I shall
not name here.

197. Why was the protracted twenty-second session of the
General Assembly unable to adopt a sufficiently strong
resolution on South West Africa or on that country which,
in accord with its wishes, is now called Namibia? Precisely
because the just and wise proposals and demands of the
African countries, and the countries of Asia and Latin
America which support them, were backed neither by the
United Kingdom nor by the United States, nor indeed by a
number of others which are their allies in the military
aggressive bloc.

192. Mr. President, I have already spoken at an earlier
meeting about those who are to blame for the tension of
the post-war period, those who started the cold war, who
gave rise to the policy of blocs and who, in our time, try at
every possible opportunity to encourage that policy and
heighten international tension. Who are these culprits?
Those who are trying today to don the toga as defenders of
freedom in Czechoslovakia, although one defender of
freedom, West Germany, is still missing among them; its
revanchist aspirations are increasingly emerging and becoming obvious. Nobody can or could have any doubts on that
score. Everybody knows what a base and repulsive imperialist role the West German revanchists are playing by pointing
at Czechoslovakia in order to do again what Hitler did to
that country in his day.

198. It is these Western Powers which support Portugal’s
bloody colonial wars against Angola, Mozambique, and
so-called Portuguese Guinea. These are the freedoms upheld
by the United Kingdom and the United States in the south
of Africa, which strengthen and encourage racist rdgimes
and prevent the African peoples from freeing their long
suffering continent of the last hotbeds of colonialism,
imperialism, oppression and slavely. That is why the words
of the United Kingdom representative here ring false when
he appears with a hypocritical statement on the question of
freedom in Czechoslovakia.

193. The assertion that the socialist countries are poisoning the international atmosphere is obviously misplaced.
Everybody-the originators of such statements, the participants in this meeting, all those present, and those who are
not-they all know that it is American imperialism and not
Soviet communism which is poisoning the international
situation by its predatory war against the Viet-Namese
people.

199. A few words now about yesterday’s and today’s
appearances of the representative of the Czechoslovak
mission. To what extent did he carry out the instructions of
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Czechoslovakia? Yestep
day he said that he had received these instructions by radio,
and that he was not certain whether they were literal,
correct or identical, and he did not take part in this
morning’s meeting at all, despite the President’s invitation
to do so. Today, after making a few statements, he
abandoned the meeting without so much as saying a word
to anybodjr. What a strange attitude! Evidently all is not
well here. Much of what he said here had been published
earlier in the American press, and even in the United
Nations Office of Public Information where, as everybody

194. Refusing to heed the voice of reason, the governing
circles of the United States are keeping up their aggressive
actions against a Sovereign State, the Democratic Republic
of Viet-Nam, escalating the criminal war in that country. It
is the United States and the other NATO Powers which, by
doing everything in their power to assist this policy of
aggression, intervention, and interference in the affairs of
other countries, are to blame for the present international
situation, since for years they have been engaged in the
armaments race, including nuclear armament, and as in the
20

206. At the same time, the Tass communiqub reports that
these clandestine radio stations, illegal publications and the
propaganda centres of the Western Powers are being given
direct assistance in spreading the basest kinds of falsehoods
by some official figures. Specifically, the report mentions
that 0. Sik, I. Hijek, Vlasjk and Gasparik, who are in
Yugoslavia, will carry on their Government functions
outside of Czechoslovak territory, which, by the way,
nobody has authorized them to do.

the Americans also predominate, so that they are
the first to publish such things.

knows,

200. From what sources do the American propaganda
organs get such information? It is perfectly obvious. From
the muddied sources of the Czechoslovak counterrevolution, from clandestine broadcasters. In this connexion, I consider it appropriate to acquaint the members of
the Security Council with a communication recently
received from Moscow, a Tass communication. It reports
numerous meetings, speeches, resolutions and letters of
workers in the Soviet Union and the other socialist
countries evidencing full and widespread approval and
support of the measures adopted in defense of the socialist
achievements in Czechoslovakia. These measures are encountering solidarity and support from many Communist
and workers’ parties among the workers and progressive
forces.

207. All those who cherish the cause of socialism in
Czechoslovakia will dismiss the claims of such discredited
politicians and those who back them to speak on behalf of
thq Czechoslovak Socialist Republic.
208. According to information arriving from Czechoslovakia, the soldiers of the allied armies, showing restraint
and an awareness of their duty in a complex situation, are
helping their class brothers, the workers of Czechoslovakia
with honour and dignity to sustain the cause of socialism
and to remove the threat to the inviolability and sovereignty of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic. On the
streets and squares of the cities and villages one can often
see the soldiers and officers of the allied armed forces
engaged in friendly conversation with the population,
answering numerous questions, helping it to evaluate the
political situation properly, explaining the lofty aims these
troops are fulfilling in giving fraternal, friendly assistance to
the Czechoslovak people in the preservation and strengthening of socialism in Czechoslovakia and in strengthening and
ensuring the security, independence and sovereignty of a
fraternal Socialist country.

201. Some statesmen in a number of bourgeois countries
are beginning to adopt a realistic position. Of course, the
report says, the imperialist circles, having bet on wresting
Czechoslovakia from the community of socialist States, can
not resign themselves to the collapse of their hopes. And we
could see this today, in the American representative’s
behaviour during the discussion of so innocent a question as
whether to give the Bulgarian representative the floor at
tomorrow’s meeting, or insist that he be given it today or
not at all.
202. The imperialist circles continue to create an atmosphere of tension and political hysteria concerning the
events in Czechoslovakia. And this is clearly apparent in the
speeches of both the United States and the United
Kingdom representatives in the Security Council.

209. Mr. President, I will not insist on consecutive
interpretation, although I have the right to do SO.

203. The above-mentioned report also states that in
Europe the ruling circles of Bonn are particularly excited
over the situation. They are literally going mad, involuntarily betraying their calculations regarding the activity of
the counter-revolutionary forces in Czechoslovakia.

210. The PRESIDENT: May I inquire whether the representative of Bulgaria wishes to address the Security Council
at this stage.
211. Mr. TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated from
French): As I told you, Mr, President, I should like to speak
before the vote is taken on the draft resolution-if,
of
course, you allow me to do so.

204. On the whole, the situation on 22 August in
Czechoslovakia was calm. Nevertheless, anti-Soviet forces in
Prague continued their subversive activities, attempting to
spread nervousness and insecurity among the population.
As before, clandestine radio transmitters are being used,and
counter-revolutionary leaflets printed for this purpose. And
these clandestine radio broadcasts are being accepted here
as sources of absolute truth and are being presented as
so-called facts to readers and listeners who have been
befuddled by monopoly propaganda.

212. The PRESIDENT: I understand that the representative of Bulgaria does not want to addressthe Council at this
stage.The Council is seized of a formal motion by the
representativeof Canadathat we should proceed to the
vote. I call on the representativeof the Soviet Union on a
point of order.
213. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translatedfrom Russian):The representative of Bulgaria
askedfor the floor before. If you give him the floor, I have
no objection.

205. In some districts of Prague, inflammatory posters
have been pasted up, containing slanderous attacks on
prominent Czechoslovak Party and State leaders and on the
allied troops. Cars equipped with loudspeakers have
appeared on the streets, transmitting the clandestine broadcasts. Clandestine radio stations and illegal publications,
together with the propaganda centres of the Western
countries, are spreading the basest kind of falsehoods. Some
official figures are giving them direct assistance. The
American representative has mentioned Hijek here, and has
already prepared a seat at the Security Council table for
him and expressed willingness to listen to him.

214. The PRESIDENT: I recognize the representativeof
the United States.
215. Mr. BALL (United Statesof America): Mr. President,
the Security Council. . .
216. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics):
Point of order.
21

217. Mr. BALL (United States of America): I am address- want to permit this statement to be made at a moment
when something is being prepared-I don’t know exactly
ing myself to the question of consecutive interpretation.
The Security Council, as is the casewith every self-respect- what-and when the representative of the United States has
ing legislative body, is the master of its own procedures. already made a statement meant to suggest that there will
Any permanent member of the Security Council has the be a meeting tomorrow. I don’t know whether that was
decided by the Council or by the United States delegation.
right to waive consecutive interpretation. But the decision
as to whether there has to be consecutive interpretation is a
224. Also, as I have understood it, the main reason why
decision for the Council itself to make. And I propose, that
the representative of the United States insisted that the
if the representative of the Soviet Union persists in this
Council proceed to a vote this evening is that tomorrow
obvious and highly deplorable effort to prevent the Council
morning, when Mr. Jiri Hajek will be here, the United
from expressing its views in a vote by conducting the most
States representative intends to make him a present on
patent kind of filibuster, that this Council proceed at this
moment to take a vote on the question as to whether we behalf of the Security Council, giving him a resolution, or
at least a vote, as a gift of kelcome here. This may be a
have to endure the agony of consecutive interpretation
highly praiseworthy intention on the part of the United
simply in order to aid the representative of Soviet Union in
States and its representative here, but it would also
pursuit of his design to frustrate the will of the Council.
undoubtedly please certain reactionary circles of many
countries, and particularly those of this country where the
218. The PRESIDENT: I wish to state that I wasunder
Security Council is at present meeting.
the impression that the representative of the Soviet Union
had waived the right of consecutive interpretation.
225. Since he has mentioned a number of times here that
the People’s Republic of Bulgaria has undertaken armed
219. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): Mr. President, since the United
intervention against Czechoslovakia, my Government has
States representative was absent from the meeting for a asked me to take part in the debate on this matter in order
while, he apparently took a nap and dreamed that I was to reject categorically the fantastic assertions of some
insisting on consecutive interpretation of my statement. I
delegations present here. Bulgaria, as a small country which
am surprised at his passionate statement on it, but there has suffered in the past from intervention by others,
were no grounds for this statement, no reason at all, and he
particularly by large imperialist Powers which tried and still
is breaking down an open door. He is so opposed to
try to intervene in the Balkans, does not and never will
anything the Soviet delegation says and proposes that in
practise intervention in the affairs of other countries, and
this mood he is evidently ready to speak against the Soviet
even less would our country intervene in the affairs of a
delegation for all and any reason.
socialist country to change the established social order
there. As a socialist country, we are concerned with the
220. I announce that I declared officially to the President preservation and development of socialism everywhere. if
that I do not insist on consecutive interpretation, and I
we are in Czechoslovakia now, it is only to help the
consider the United States representative’s statement either
population of that socialist country to overcome the
a misunderstanding or else as a continuation of his
problems created for it by outside intervention and by
slanderous line against the Soviet delegation.
internal counter-revolution, the latter supported by reactionary and counter-revolutionary forces outside Czecho221. Mr. BALL (United States of America): I wasappar- slovakia.
ently the victim of a misunderstanding. It was not my
misunderstanding, it was a misinterpretation, As I under226. I therefore categorically reject, on behalf of the
stood what was said in English, it was that the representa- Bulgarian Government, the slanderous version of representive of the Soviet Union insisted upon consecutive intertatives of certain Governments who, as members of the
pretation. I think that everyone who was listening under
Security Council, wish to set’themielves up asjudges at the
stood the same thing. I am delighted that the representative same tirx, although their hands are plunged in intervenof the Soviet Union does not insist upon this. I think that
tions against foreign countries and peoples, and who charge
this is the most useful contribution he has made to the
that the People’s Republic of Bulgaria would intervene in
proceedings a.ll evening.
any way in the internal affairs of the Socialist Republic of
Czechoslovakia.
222. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
Bulgaria to addressthe Security Council.
227. However, before commenting on this matter and on
certain fantastic and bizarre assertions of some representa
223. Mr. TARABANOV (Bulgaria) (translated porn
tives here, allow me to express my astonishment and
French): Mr. President, you asked me a few minutes ago
indignation at the tone used by some representativesin the
whether I wished to speak on this question. I told you that
course of this debate. Attempting to create easily aroused
it was my intention to make a statement before the vote on
emotions, the United States representative, in the courseof
the draft resolution. However, I think we have misunderthe discussion taking place in the Security Council has
stood each other, and that you do not understand exactly
already, on a number of occasions, termed the Govern.
what I meant, that is, that if you intended to ask the
ments of the socialist countries, accused of having inter
Council to vote on the draft resolution, I wished to speak vened in Czechoslovakia together with the Soviet Union, as
before the vote. I wish to thank you for giving me the floor,
puppet governments. Perhaps it is the rule for the represek
and also to thank the members of the Security Council for
tatives of countries such as the United States, and especially
their courtesy, although some of them did not, of course, for their representatives at the United Nations, to consider
22

231. Having dealt with this slander against my country, I
should now like to comment on the procedure which has
been adopted by the Security Council regarding the
question before it, to show how inadequate and impossible
it is, and that it already betrays premeditation, bad faith,
the bad faith of those who have introduced this question in
the Security Council.

as puppets the small countries with which they nevertheless
maintain regular diplomatic relations and which have
representatives in Washington and in whose capitals the
Government of Washington has diplomatic representatives.
Perhaps this is a custom, but it is undoubtedly an execrable
custom on the part of these representatives. Possibly such
an attitude, adopted towards the smbll countries with
which the United States tries to maintain diplomatic
relations, derives directly from the policy it practises, the
policy of the discipline of power in which this country is
beginning to indulge a bit too much, particularlsr after the
efforts made by the present permanent repro: ;ntative of
the United States of America in the United I\iaLJ,as. As you
know, he has written a book to give his views on the
discipline of power to be applied to others. Such “refined”
language on the qart of the distinguished representative of
the United States is perhaps the result of the custom the
representatives of that country have adopted towards some
of their allies in the various military blocs which they have
established throughout the world, and which they have also
adopted in the back-yards of their diplomatic activities.

232. In a letter dated 21 August 1968 [S/8758] addressed
to the President of the Security Council, the representatives
of Canada, Denmark, Paraguay, the United Kingdom and
the United States have, upon instructions from their
Governments, requested that an immediate meeting of the
Security Council be convened to examine the serious
situation in the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic. At the
same time, the Permanent Representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, in another letter [S/8759/ also
addressed to the President of the Security Council, has
cx plained and emphatically stressed the fact that there is no
justification for the examination of this question by the
Security Council. He added: “. . . military units of the
socialist countries have entered the territory of the CzechoSlovak Socialist Republic pursuant to a request by the
Government of that State, . . .“. He also stressed that:
“Needless to say, the above-mentioned military units will
be withdrawn
from the territory of the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic as soon as the present threat to security
is eliminated and the lawful authorities find that the
presence of those units is no longer necessary.”

228. As far as my country is concerned, we indignantly
reject such vulgar language and this impertinent attitude.
Need we remind the distinguished representative of the
United States here before the members of the Security
Council, that the Bulgarian people has fought courageously
and heroically for over twenty years against fascism and
international reaction so as to be able to stand beside the
Soviet Union and the socialist countries in their constant
efforts for the progress and welfare of their peoples and of
all humanity? During this heroic struggle, it lost over
70,000 victims who fell in the struggle against fascism and
reaction in our country, killed, hung and executed in a
merciless but unremitting struggle. If we take a count and
make. a compsrison with the losses suffered by the United
States-a large country-in
the course of the two world
wars, this certainly represents a much higher proportion per
capita. However, we are not speaking of the two world
wars; we are speaking of the political struggle the Bulgarian
people have carried on for two decades in order to stand
beside their brothers in the struggle of the socialist peoples,
to stand side by side with the Soviet Union.

233. Despite these explanations given by the Governments
of our countries-which
have never engaged in aggression of
any kind against another country and have never infringed
on the sovereignty of any independent State-the representatives of the Government of the United States and of other
countries continue to insist on saying that there is an
intervention in the internal affairs of Czechoslovakia; they
continue to insist that no aid should be given the
Czechoslovak people so that it may eliminate the counterrevolutionary elements which have established themselves
in certain crucial points of Czechoslovak life and are trying
to exploit their positions in order to change the political
system of this country and bring it to restore capitalist
reaction.

229. A people which has been capable of waging such a
struggle, under the guidance of its leaders, could never be
anybody’s puppet. It is by its own free choice alone that
the Bulgarian people have wished to be with the Soviet
Union, and that it is with the socialist countries in their
struggle .for the progress of all humanity, for the peace and
welfare of the world.

.’
’ !
I,

234. However, it must be noted that the fraternal aid
which the Soviet Union and the other socialist countries are
giving the Czechoslovak people now is not very different
from the aid given it in other cases and periods of its
development, whether in the form of close economic
collaboration or of military and other assistance in defence
against its enemies, both from outside and against the tools
of counter-revolution and reaction within the country. But
at those
times, although the imperialists always opposed
fraternal aid between the socialist countries, they could not
allow themselves to mix in the internal affairs of the
socialist countries. They did not permit themsehes to do
so, because they were aware that the principle of this
mutual assistance inderlay the very foundations of all the
declarations and documents drawn up and adopted by the
fraternal parties and by the socialist countries in all their
contacts and activities.

230. Of course, there have been times in the past when
Governments which were in the pay of the imperialists and
participated in the imperialists’ quarrels might have served
as puppets of those imperialists. But, thanks to the struggle
of the Bulgarian people, those days are gone forever.
Perhaps that is why certain imperialist countries and the@
representatives here, and certain imperialist circles, so
keenly regret that those times are over in Bulgaria, and also
in other countries which are now free to move towards
socialism and progress. Such assertions are to be scornfully
rejected. Nobody should be allowed to make them in the
Security Council, all the less a representative of the United
States.

235. Of course, it is an old habit of the imperialist circles
all over the world, and particularly in the United States,
23

,I L:,
‘i
I

‘j
!‘II,’‘.’

always to be against the socialist countries and socialism in
general. It is scarcely necessary to try to prove it. The very
statements of the United States representative before the
Security Council during the present debate are there to
prove it. Under these circumstances, one may legitimately
wonder-and one does, indeed, wonder-what
are the real
reasons which lead the representatives of certain countries
and certain imperialist circles to intervene, through the
Security Council, in the internal relations of the community of socialist countries. This is all the more surprising
since certain representatives who initiated this debate
repeat here ad nauseam that these events supposedly have
occurred at a time when Czechoslovakia was supposed to be
developing, improving the socialist order in its country; that
the Czechoslovak people were creating a better socialist
society in its country. This is odd and, of course,
ingenuous. It is really remarkable to observe that, at a
certain moment in the history of the development of
socialism in a given country, the most obstinate enemies of
socialism announce that they are ready to ensure the
conditions necessary for this particular development of
socialism. Certainly this can not fail to create serious
doubts regarding their true intentions.
236. In general, the Members of the United Nations, as
well as non-member States, have been accustomed to seeing
the United States and the imperialist circles violate the
sovereignty and independence of countries in all continents
in order to change the social systems or help the agents of
imperialism in these countries to change those systems and
establish the most backward reaction and even fascism.
There are many examples of this in various parts of the
world, both near and far from the United States of
America. For all those who till now have been accustomed
to the aggressive action of the United States, the sight of
the latter announcing that it is in favour of defending a
socialist State in order to improve the form of this socialist
society is very odd indeed. Until now, the United States has
never come out in defense of an independent and progressive State, let alone in defense of a socialist State, of course.
Yet at present it seems very much interested in the
development of socialism in Czechoslovakia, and seems
particularly anxious to ensure the conditions for such
development in order to give free rein to the forces within
this country. This is really a most peculiar desire, a desire
which, one might think, is contrary to the very nature of
imperialism.
237. Nevertheless, from the statements made here by the
United States representative, it emerges that the latter is
really interested in intervening, and wants to safeguard the
process begun in Czechoslovakia for the development of
socialism. Perhaps we might be somewhat less surprised if
we were to examine the explanations given in certain
passages of the speech of the United States representative in
the discussion here. In fact, in his speech yesterday he
spoke of the country of “Masaryk, Benes and Dubcek”. By
aligning these three names on an equal footing, was he not
trying to stress that the Czechoslovakia of Dubcek should
and could also be aligned with that of Masaryk and Benes?
Isn’t that what he meant? Such a notion on the part of the
representative of the United States and of certain circles in
his country could, of course, readily explain the concern
and anxiety with which the imperialist circles are trying to

ensure the “freedom” of those-a few thousand “mercena.
ries” of counter-revolution and international reaction-who,
by the fiercest and most extraordinary coercive methods,
are trying to turn back the wheel of history.
238. It is a curious way to conceive and practice freedom:
to gain control of the press, which is the heritage of a
country and party, and make it available to counter-revolution, as has been done since the beginning of this year in
Czechoslovakia. Moreover, it should be noted that pressure
and even brutal terror have been exercised against the
leaders appointed by the corresponding organs of the
Czechoslovak Communist Party to head these organs, is
order to prevent them from performing their duties. It is
indeed a curious concept of freedom, to gain control of the
State television and radio-the most powerful information
and propaganda media the world has known to date-and
make them available to the counter-revolution, thus pre.
venting the most responsible men of this country and of the
Czechoslovak Communist Party from using them.
239. Such freedom, designed to prepare public opinion far
the return of reaction, counter-revolution
‘and, when we
come right down to it, fascism,which plungedEuropeand
the world into two world wars during the lifetime of a
singlegeneration, is nothing but freedom to prepare new
hecatombsfor the peoplesof Europe and the world.
240. The imperialists-with all due respect to Mr, Ball,
who expressedthe bizarre idea that the Soviet missionhasa
machine or even a computer to insert the expression
“imperialist” or “imperialism” after every three or four
words, and this machine or computer seemsto worry
Mr. Ball so much that he talked about it here for quitea
while-naturally the imperialists cannot, as I say, favour
freedom in Czechoslovakia. However, they are for the
freedom of precisely those counter-revolutionarieswhoarc
to changethe political systemof today’s Czechoslovakia
for
the benefit of the imperialists and capitalists, for the
benefit of the fascistswho have establishedthemselves
in
West Germany and are now trying to unleash a war in
Europe, or at least to create tension which could leadIO
war in Europe and the world.
241. Such freedomfor the counter-revolutionary elements
is simply tantamount to depriving the populations and
workers of Czechoslovakiaof their freedom. The Czechom
Slovakpeople, the CommunistParty, and their leadershave
no need of suchfreedom, and have not askedfor it. Such
freedom, intended to undermine, changeand transformthe
political systemin order to set up a reactionary system,is
necessary only to the supporters of the reaction and
counter-revolution of international imperialism.*
This viewis
also appropriately expressed in the letter [see’ 1441~1
meeting, para. 2101 from a group of membersof the
Central Committee of the CzechoslovakCommunistParty,
membersof the CzechoslovakGovernment andParliament,
which says;
“In Prague. . . during spontaneousmeetingsattended
by many thousands,matters came to the point of gross
indecencieswhen variouselementsattacked the Party and
insulted its representativeswhom they themselvesre
peatedly obliged to participate in thesemeetings.In the

24

centre of the city a public campaign was started to collect
signatures in favour of liquidating the people’s militia.
Communists who expressed their point of view in the
discussions at these spontaneous street meetings were
rudely silenced and physical, force was frequently used
against them. Many of those who signed the letter at the
Auto-Praha works were persecuted in a shameful manner,
even to the point of dismissal from their jobs. The press
continues, ahhough indirectly, to defame publicly leading
functionaries by other more sophisticated means, and this
organized subversive activity reached its climax in the last
few days: a group of right-wing extremists quite openly
attacked the premises of the Secretariat’of the Central
Committee of the Czechoslovak Communist Party in
Prague.
“Thus, the extremist forces have not heeded the Party’s
appeal, but have further intensified their subversive
activity, attempting to provoke conflict in our country
regardless of the consequences. Thus a situation has arisen
in which the obligatidns deriving from the Bratislava
Declaration of six fratkrnal communist and workers’
parties, which also bears the signature of our Party’s
representatives, are being publicly, systematically violated.”
242. Further on the letter reads:
“Aware of our responsibility towards our people, filled
with true patriotic feeling, with the feeling of international socialist solidarity, aware of our international
commitments, we have assumed the initiative of rallying
all patriotic forces in the name of our socialist future and
our homeland.

subversive schemes. To try to involve the Security Council
in the settlement of the situation in one of the countries of
the socialist community-a situation which it is trying to
settle with the aid of some of its partners-without
having
been specifically requested to do so by this or the other
cduntries concerned, is nothing but pure and simple
intervention in the internal affairs of those countries, which
is forbidden by the letter and spirit of the Charter itself.
Neither the Security Council nor the United Nations have a
right to intervene in the affairs of a cduntry, or between
countries, unless they are asked to do so.
245. Even the- statements of the Acting Permanent Representative of Czechoslovakia yesterday evening, which
caused such joy and enthusiam in the patently interventionist circles, and his stataments this evening, mentioning
cabled press reports and clandestine radio stations, in no
way indicated that an intervention by the Security Council
in the internal affairs of Czechoslovakia had been re”
quested. Moreover, we have been informed that the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Czechosioyak Socialist
Republic has announced his intention to discuss all these
matters resulting from the operations undertaken to clear
and improve the atmosphere in Czechoslovakia, and to
create the conditions of calm required to give the Czechoslovak people a chance to put its own house in order. This
Minister intends to reopen the discussion of these questions
and to settle them in a spirit of understanding with the
socialist countries concerned, ,and within the community of
socialist States, and not try and submit them to the
Security Council, which he has no intention of doing.
246. Unless we are mistaken, this information was also
transmitted to us through the Mission of the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic. Mr. Ball’s literary games concerning the
alleged telephone conversations of neutral diplomats with
staff members of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs are
nothing but the figments of an over-active imagination,
serving only to amuse the public. They are a fitting
demonstration of what happens when the representatives of
the imperialist countries run short of arguments: they use
their imagination, or that of those who come to their aid.
Nevertheless, the fact remains-and this is important-that
in the present circumstances the United Nations and the
Security Council should not immix itself in the internal
affairs of a socialist country which has not asked them to
do so. Nor should the organs of the United Nations mix
themselves into the internal affairs of the socialist community without being invited to do so. On the contrary, if
the Security Council means to abide by the duties and tasks
assigned to it under the Charter, it should put a stop to the
attempts of certain countries to intervene in the internal
affairs of any State, and especially of a socialist country by
using the Security Council and thereby involving the United
Nations in such intervention. Such an attitude on the
Council’s part would serve in the future as a lesson to those
countries which want to immix themselves’in the affairs of
other States using the Security Council as a mask for their
manoeuvres. They who intervene in the internal affairs of
various countries in different parts of the world, who carry
pn a dirty war of extermination against the Viet-Namese
people in order to introduce a new colonial system,
neo-colonialism, in Viet-Nam, and those who actively
support them or maintain tacit complicity by their silence

“The danger of fratricidal strife, which has been
prepared by the reaction and which would be a tragic
repetition of Lipan (this refers to the battle at Lipan in
1434) has confronted us with the need to make the
historic decision of appealing to the Soviet Union and to
the other fraternal socialist countries for assistance. Our
allies have granted us this assistance, as they did in 1945
when it was a question of our very existence.”
243. This appeal is conclusive evidence of the state of
mind prevailing at the moment when the counter-revolutionary forces tried to gain control of all Czechoslovakia. It
expresses the anxiety of a people faced with counter-revolution organized by the reactionary forces outside and
inside the country. The efforts of the representative of the
United States to discrddit this appeal by his cynical remark
on “its so-called Russian original” have certainly misfired.
It has only shown once more the pattern followed by the
American imperialists in their frequent interventionist
practices throughout the world. It is their own practice
which ffiey are trying to lay at the Soviet Union’s door.
244. It is worth noting that, to go to the lengths of
resorting to provocations such as that of trying to involve
the Security Council in a matter outside its purview, and
talking about the aid given by the Soviet Union and the
other socialist countries to Socialist Czechoslovakia, the
American imperialists must really have been touched to the
quick on the sore point of their counter-revolutionary and
25

i
:/

+.Lm
.!

will thus be warned by the Security Council that it will not
let itself be drawn into such a manoeuvre.
247. If the Council wishes to be equal to its mission, it can
only refuse outright to adopt any resolution whatever
which is requested by these countries. That is the only way
the Security Council can deal with those who wish to
exploit it to pursue their imperialist activities and their
interventions in the affairs of other countries.
248. Moreover, I can assure you, on behalf of the People’s
Republic of Bulgaria, that the socialist countries will never
permit anybody to interfere in their internal affairs.
249. The PRESIDENT: Now that the representative of
Bulgaria has made his statement before the vote, may I
assume that the Council has no objection to following the
courseproposedby the representativeof Canada,that is to
say, that we shouldproceedto the vote on the text of the
draft resolutionthat hasbeentabled.
250. I understandthat the representativeof India has
signified his intention to addressthe Council before the
vote in a statementin explanationof vote. If he isprepared
to speakI shallbe very gladto give him the floor.
2.51. Mr. PARTHASARATHI (India): At the 1441st
meetingof the Council,my delegationreadinto the record
a statementby the Prime Minister of India on the grave
situation in Czechoslovakia.
I would like, with the Council’s
permission,to quotetwo passages
from that statement:
“ . . . The principle of non-interferenceby one country
in the internal affairsof anotherconstitutesthe very basis
of peaceful coexistence.We have always believed that
international relationsshouldbe governedby respectfor
the sovereigntyandindependence
of nations,big or small.
WeIhave alwaysstood for the right of every country to
develop its personality accordingto its own traditions,
aptitudes and genius.India has alwaysraisedher voice
whenevertheseprincipleshavebeenviolated.
“. . .
“I am sure I reflect the opinion of the Housewhen I
expressthe hope that the forces which have entered
Czechoslovakiawill be withdrawn at the earliestpossible
moment, and the Czechpeoplewill be ableto determine
their future accordingto their own wishesandinterests,
and that whatever mutual problems there may be
between Czechoslovakiaand its allies will be settled
peacefully. The right of nations to live peacefully and
without outsideinterferenceshouldnot be deniedin the
name of religion or ideology.” [1441st meeting,
para. 12.5.)
252. The PrimeMinister of India madeanotherstatement
in the Indian Parliamentyesterday, that is, on 21 August,
on the subjectunderour consideration.Shesaid:
“We are wedded to certain basic and fundamental
principlesto which we haveadheredall theseyears,andI
would like, with the permissionof the House,to restate
them: We ardently and sincerelybelievethat every State
26

should be left free and unfettered to decide its own
future and its own destiny. We believethat there should
be no external interference in the affairs of any country.
Thirdly, force should not be used as the arbiter of
decisions,and finally, differences in ideology or social
systemscan never be an excuse for interfering in one
another’sinternal affairs.”
253. Another passagefrom the statement of my Prime
Minister is particularly relevant. I would like, with the
permissionof the Council, to quote that passage.
Shesaid:
“In the presentsituation, the immediateneed,as1have
saidyesterday, is for the withdrawal of the forceswhich
have entered Czechoslovakiaso that the Czechoslovak
people may be free to determine their own future for
themselveswithout any intervention and in an atmop
phere which is free from tension. Whatever problems
there may be between Czechoslovakiaand its neighbours
shouldbe settledpeacefully by meansof negotiationsand
not through the use of force. The processes
of peaceful
co-existencewhich we have tried to promote for somany
yearsmust be allowedto developunimpeded.”
254. In the light of the statementsof the PrimeMinister
of India, it will be clear to the Council that India firmly
supports respect for the sovereignty, independenceand
territorial integrity of Czechoslovakia.It shouldbe equally
clear that we are againstany interference in the internal
affairs of Czechoslovakia.As our Prime Minister said,tlrc
immediateneedis for the withdrawal of foreign forcesfrom
Czechoslovakia.At the sametime, I shouldlike, to placeon
record our deep sympathy with the heroic peopleof
Czechoslovakiain their presentordeal.
2.5’5. The draft resolution containedin documentS/8761
was submitted to the Council late yesterday morning.In
our view, it is necessaryto examinefully the implications
of this draft resolution on the situation in Czechoslovakia
and on its leadersand people. Surely, it is recognizedthat
any action of this Council must be directed towards
alleviating the grave situation in Czechoslovakia.
The prime
necessityis the withdrawal of foreign forces from CzechaSlovakia and the safety and security of its leadersand
people. With this in mind, we have informally suggested
somechangesin the draft resolution,principally to remove
the judgement of condemnation. Unfortunately, some of
the co-sponsors
were not preparedto considerany changes
in the draft resolution. Therefore, my delegationwill
abstainon the draft resolution.
256. Mr. BOUATTOURA (Algeria) (translated jh
French): It is with profound misgivingsand real anxiety
that my delegationhas followed both the developmentof
the situation in Czechoslovakiaand of that which weareto
call a debate in this Council. There has beenvirtually no
debate, since, with regard to both substanceand form,it
hasbeenimpossibleto apply any of the generallyaccepted
rules. One is almost led to believe that the breachof
principlesmust inevitably result in the mishandlingof the
rules of common procedure. On this point, my delegation
wishesto stressthat no discussion,no consultation,no
negotiation worthy of the namehastaken placeamongall
the membersof the Council. Somedelegations,particularly

those of Africa and Asia, have often been criticized
precisely on that score. But these delegations have never
acted lightly at the Council level, even and particularly
when the effective implications of a resolution were such
that the debate was on a more or less heated tone.

26?. I am also in duty bound to state emphaticaIly that,
now as in the past, Algeria fervently adheres to the right of
peoples to self-determination, and to the principles by
which foreign forces occupying the territory of another
State should be withdrawn and the settlement of problems
should be sought within the framework of a peace based
first on justice and subsequently on stability. There can be
no grounds or justification for occupation, whatever its
character, of the territory of a State by foreign armed
forces. Consequently, foreign interference, whatever its
form, cannot be accepted. It is in everybody’s interest to
put an end to occupation by the withdrawal of such forces
within
the framework
of respect for sovereignty and
territorial integrity. However, as has rightly been observed
here, the tragic crisis which is at present shaking the
Czechoslovak nation must be set in its European context, a
context which, as you must all know better than we do, is
primarily determined by a balance accepted by everybody
since the Second World War. This balance, based primarily
on military blocs and tacit acceptance of a political and
territorial status quo, must necessarily undergo a phase of
adjustment and instability. Those who are inspired by this
objective, both here and elsewhere, have long since chosen
the course of non-interference and self-determination.

257. Precipitation and haste were justified, we were told
yesterday morning, by the fact that by tonight there would
no longer be any constitutionally established authorities.
The representative of Socialist Czechoslovakia appositely
replied that the occupation forces had not succeeded in
imposing on the Czechoslovak people representatives whom
it had not elected.
25X. My delegation had referred to certain developments
which made the continuation of negotiations even more
necessary. The representative of Czechoslovakia duly and
explicitly informed us that the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, Mr. Hijek, was
coming to New York to take part in the present meetings of
the Security Council and that he hoped Mr. I-IAjek would
have the opportunity of explaining his country’s position in
detail.
259. Moreover, although it is only fair to merition that at
the worst of times reasonable time-limits have been granted
to delegations and their Governments to enable them to
reach the decisions they considered appropriate, that is not
the case today. What is more, by an insidious campaign,
those whose only fault is that they advocate as wide an
agreement as possible in as short a time as possible are being
accused of schemes to promote some sort of manoeuvre.
Let it be clearly established that the Algerian delegation
shall seek no other course but to safeguard the Charter.

264. We have the feeling that all these conditions apply to
the situation in Czechoslovakia, and that is why our
adherence to these principles is greater than ever. That is
why we understand and share the convictions of socialist
Czechoslovakia, especially concerning the most acute problems of Viet-Nam and the Middle East, for there is no
doubt that tolerance of the aggression in Viet-Nam, like
tolerance of the aggression in the Middle East-a tolerance
which has become crystallized in signs of a certain
impotence on the part of our Organization-has been a
determining factor in the development of the crisis in
Central Europe.

260. Our uneasiness has given rise to a certain caution, due
to the fact that the main complainants, those who have
chosen to adopt a tone of resentment, practically hysterical
admonitions and the most far-fetched professions of faith
are the ones who, when Africa, Asia or Latin America are
involved, display an off-hand passivity which ill conceals
the ties of interests, and confine themselves to appeals to
pious principles. Is there supposed to be one standard for
Europe, and another for the rest of the world? Nothing is
more striking or more deserving of our most painstaking
attention than the contrast between the dignified, noble
and courageous attitude of the Czechoslovak delegation,
which is completely restrained, and the attitude of those.
who have assumed the role of champions of a cause in order
to better disguise their responsibility in South-East Asia,
South Africa and the Middle East. They have given proof of
aggressivity, excess, and have manifested a kind of political
and Intellectual courage barely distinguishable from provocation.

265. The Council had a choice between the path of the
cold war and that of safeguarding a vital principle: the
rights of a people. Either we wished to act effectively, and
in that case we should have acted differently, or else we
wished to exonerate ourselves of blame, and in that case we
could have gone about it differently. We cannot at one and
the same time engage in or conceal violation of the Charter
and act as its authorized defenders. There is now no doubt
that the Council has chosen the first of these paths, since
the result this Council is clearly going to achieve is that of
having compiled yet another propaganda file, thereby
causing great moral and political damage to socialist
Czechoslovakia, which will have suffered the outrage of
deceit.
266. Nothing is more repugnant than to see those who
oppress Viet-Nam, who aid the annihilation of Palestine,
cry out in self-righteous tones against the oppression of
Czechoslovakia, while claiming to be the advocates of a
policy to save this same Czechoslovakia, in this Organization and this Council where, by unfair power relationships, the most just causes are defeated. The procedure, the
way the debate and the negotiations have been conducted,
even the content of the resolution can mean only one thing
to us: the law, the Charter and Czechoslovakia have been
sacrificed to the creed of the cold war.

261. We should therefore pay the tribute they deserve to
the representatives of Czechoslovakia who, by their clearsightedness, have refused to yield to provocative attitudes.
262. My delegation wishes to take note of the statements
made here on 21 August 1968 [1441st meeting] by the
representative of Czechoslovakia, Mr. Jan Muzak. My ddegation has noted with close attention the message addressed
to the nation by President Svoboda.
27

267. True, the balance of blocs, the balance of hegemonies, could only lead to a state of international tension
in which the peoples attached to their natural rights are the
sole losers. How, then, could anyone have entertained the
illusion that while this policy was being pursued systematically everywhere in the world, Europe would have
remained an oasis of dhwte? Our hope, here as elsewhere,
is that the troops may be withdrawn, that intervention may
end, and free self-determination may be fully implemented.
268. We share the genuine anxiety and sadness of those
who, like ourselves, have cherished and upheld, for themselves and for others, the cause of freedom and independence of peoples, wherever they may be. Everyone, every
people, every nation has the right to develop within the
framework of its sovereignty and integrity. To strike at
these principles is to strike at our faith, our creed.

276. The representatives of the imperialist countries ha
shamefully, hypocritically assumed the role of defenders
socialism in Czechoslovakia. Actually, they are infuriate
by the collapse of their plans and intrigues to accompbsb
counter-revolutionary
coup in Czechoslovakia, to wre
Czechoslovakia from the community of socialist States ar
turn it into their satellite, their colony. Nobody asked the,
to discuss this matter. They acted illegally. They ha\
violated the Charter of the United Nations, by dragging fll
question into the Security Council and by the use of the
automatic majority.
277. Everything that has been said by the representative
of the United States, the United Kingdom and otht
representatives of the NATO countries, all this slande.
insinuation, misrepresentation, this attempt to shift th
blame for international tension to the innocent, all this j
also reflected in the draft resolution they have introducec
This draft resolution and its presentation are just as illeg;
and contrary to the Charter as the raising of the questiol
itself for discussion by the Security Council, This sorr
scrap of paper is a summary of the slanders and fabrication
with which the representatives of the United States and b
United Kingdom have spoken at such length here. Thi
draft reflects the imperialist designs of these two Power
and some of those who support them.

269. The force of the powerful has wounded the Arab
nation in Palestine. The force of the powerful continues to
inflict bloodletting on Asia, in Viet-Nam. The force of the
powerful persists in imposing apartheid. racism and the
exacerbaied domination of a policy of colonialism by
settlement on Africa. In short, the world continues to
suffer from a well-known disease: the global co-protectorate.

278. These actions are aimed at a further aggravation o
the international situation, at interference in the interna
affairs of other countries-which
nobody has asked these
Powers to do and against which, on the contrary, the wholt
world protests-in order to cover up imperialist aggression
and intervention in a number of the world’s regions and
especially in Viet-Nam and the Middle East.

270. In the light of these considerations, my delegation
will abstain in the vote on draft resolution S/8761.
271. Mr. TARDOS (Hungary): In explanation of our vote,
I would like to state very briefly the following.
272. First, from the very beginning we considered that the
discussion of the situation in the Czechoslovak Socialist
Republic did not serve the’ interests of the people of that
country, but, on the contrary, only those of the imperialist
Powers and of their allies, the counter-revohrtionary forces
in Czechoslovakia. Therefore, we voted against the inclusion of this item on the agenda of the Security Council.

279. The Soviet delegation considers the tabling of this
draft resolution just as illegal and contrary to the Charter as
the debate on this question itself.
280. In view of these considerations, the delegation of the
Soviet Union will vote against this draft.

273. Secondly, the text of the draft resolution before us
does not alter our opinion. It makes the situation even
worse, and it is in the interest only of the NATO countries
which planned and submitted it. It is distasteful that they
presented themselves as true defenders of the Czechoslovakian Communists, whereas they try to destroy all the
achievements of socialism in that country.

281. The PRESIDENT:
As no further speakers have
indicated a desire to take the floor at this stage, I consider
that the Council is ready to vote on the draft resolution
contained in document S/8761 sponsored by Brazil, Cti
nada, Denmark, France, Paraguay, Senegal, the United
Kingdom and the United States of America.
.
282.,7 I have been asked to draw attention to a small change
-that’should be made in operative paragraph 1 of the English
text. Operative paragraph 1 should read “Affirms fhat.the
sovereignty, political independence and territorial integrity
of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic must be fully
respected”. That is to say the noun “sovereignty” should be
substituted for the adjective “sovereign”.

274. Out of these considerations, my delegation strongly
opposes the draft resolution and will vote against it,

275. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): In its statements during this
debate, the Soviet delegation has adequately demonstrated
the whole fictitious, groundless and provocatory nature of
this endeavour to discuss the question of the situation in
283. I should stress also that the name of Senegalhas beea
Czechoslovakia. This venture was provoked by the leaders
added to the names of the sponsors of the draft resolution.
of the NATO imperialist aggressive bloc countries in order
to divert attention from the crimes being committed by the 1 284.; The Security Council will now proceded to vote en
imperialist forces in Viet-Nam, in the Middle East and in ljj the.eight-Power draft resolution in document S/8761.
many other parts of the world. The representative of
Algeria has just spoken of this in detail.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
28

In favour: Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia,
France, Paraguay, Senegal, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America.

has called into question not only their judgement, not only
their perception, it has also called into question their
humanity. And let there be no doubt, Ambassador Malik,
what they have done, what your Government has done is
self-destructive. Their repressive action will some day be
repudiated by their successors with the same violence, with
the same vehemence that the cruel and repressive acts of
Stalin were repudiated by his successors.

Against: Hungary, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Abstaining: Algeria, India, Pakistan.
The result of the vote was 10 in favour, 2 against, with
3 abstentions.

290. Mr. YIJNUS (Pakistan): I take the floor to explain
the vote we cast a while ago. My delegation abstained from
voting on the resolution which was just put to the vote. The
Council met in the evening of 21 August on an urgent basis.
Late that night we were informally provided with the first
draft of a possible resolution to be submitted in the
Security Council. Yesterday morning a revised version of
that draft was made available to my delegation at about
11 a.m. The Council has been in continuous session since
10 p.m., and it then proceeded to vote on the draft
resolution. Due to the shortness of time between the
presentation of the draft and the vote and due also to
difficulties in communications with my capital, I regret that
it was not possible for my delegation to receive final
instructions on the draft resolution just voted upon. In
these circumstances the delegation of Pakistan was left with
no choice but to abstain on that resolution.

The draft resolution was not adopted, one of the negative
votes being that of a permanent member of the Council.
285. The PRESIDENT: A number of delegations have
signified their intention of speaking after the vote. Accordingly, I now call on the next speaker on my list, the
representative of the United States.
286. Mr. BALL (United States of America): This is the
105th time that the Soviet Union has employed its veto to
frustrate a decision by the Security Council. No one at this
table is surprised; no one is surprised that a Power which
views Czechoslovakia as its private colonial domain and
which has vetoed by naked and brutal force the right of the
Czechoslovak people to breathe the air of freedom should
undertake without apparent qualms or reservations to try
to shut off and frustrate this solemn and serious body, the
Security Council.

291. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): I have asked to speak at
this time to consider the results of the vote announced by
you, Mr. President, in which the Soviet veto has led to the
rejection of the resolution sponsored by eight of the
delegations here present. The result, as has been said, was
no surprise. But in the light of that rejection, I believe that
we must briefly consider, before we adjourn, what further
action the Security Council should endeavour to take in
view of the continuing seriousness of the situation in
Czechoslovakia.

287. The Soviet veto in fact is what we would expect of it.
The Soviets had signalled it by their conduct throughout
our proceedings. It is an expression of arrogance, of
cahousness, of total indifference to the higher sensibilities
of all mankind.
288. Your veto, Ambassador Malik, may stifle the legal
vote of this Council, but it cannot suffocate the soul of a
proud people defying the imposition of an Ersatz Government made in Moscow. Your Government, Ambassador
Malik, can veto a Security Council resolution, but it cannot
veto for ever or even for a long time the stubborn insistence
of the Czechoslovak people to pursue their own national
development within the communist system. Your Government, Mr. Malik, can veto the past Government of Czechoslovakia and install your Quislings. But how long do you
expect that you could make these brutal actions survive?

292. In my remarks this morning I referred to the
intolerable situation created by the fact that the lawful
authorities in Czechoslovakia have been subjected to the
indignity of being forcibly removed from office. We were
given further grim and profoundly disturbing information
about these leaders by the Acting Permanent Representative of Czechoslovakia earlier at this meeting. I realize that
the representative of the Soviet Union, while rejecting any
right of this Council to give consideration to or show
concern about the events which are taking place in
Czechoslovakia, has nevertheless sought to reassure us on
the basis of certain Tass statements concerning the fate of
the displaced Czechoslovak leaders. I might say, however,
that we in this Council have not found these statements
based on Tass reports entirely reassuring.

289. Over the centuries tyrants have tried to kill freedom
again and again and again, They have not succeeded. They
have tried to destroy hope; it has defied them. They have
tried to blunt and brutalize the finer instincts of mankind.
They have failed. The aggression of the Soviet Union and
some of its clients in the Warsaw Pact will fail in the same
way. Just as Moscow is finding it extremely difficult to
fabricate a synthetic Czechoslovak Government tonight,, so
will the Soviet Government discover that the veto of the
earnest aspirations of the Czechoslovak people will be
written in sand. History will unquestionably demonstrate
that the most wretched victims of the veto you have cast
tonight will not be the Government or the people of
Czechoslovakia but rather those frightened and rattled
’ leaders of the Soviet Union who launched the invasion and
the brutal occupation of Czechoslovakia, for their ,action

293. I would therefore hope that in the present situation
the Council would see fit as a minimum measure to
consider a simple draft resolution which I now propose on
behalf of the delegations of Brazil, Canada, Denmark,
France, Paraguay; Senegal, the United Kingdom and the
Uni:cd States, which reads as follows:
“The Security Council,
“Concerned at reports about the current developments
in Czechoslovakia including the arrest of Czechoslovak
leaders,
29

“Requests the Secretary-General to appoint and despatch immediately to Prague a Special Representative
who shall seek the release and ensure the personal safety
of the Czechoslovak leaders under detention and who
shall report back urgently.”
294. Of course I will not insist on a vote on this draft
resolution tonight since I am sure that delegations, as many
have indicated their concern about the timing of the
previous resolution, will wish to have time to consider the
text of this draft resolution which I have just read out and
seek instructions from their Governments and to consult
on it.
295. I would ask the Secretary-General to have this text
circulated as well as the translations by tomorrow morning.
296. The PRESIDENT: The draft resolution which has
been submitted will be circulated as requested.
297. I call on the representative of the Soviet Union in
exercise of his right of reply.
298. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): Mr. President, taking advantage
of my right of reply, I should like to make a short
statement calling attention to the fact that the malice,
slander, insinuation, pathological animosity and hatred
towards the socialist countries, socialism, the lofty ideals of
communism on the part of the representative of American
monopoly capital in the Security Council have reached a
climax in his equallyspiteful,hostileconcludingstatement.
299. He mentionedthe Soviet veto. Evidently he keepsan
exact scoreof the number of times the Soviet delegation
hasusedthe veto. But the veto hasenabled,does,andwill
continue to enablethe Soviet Union, during the existence
of this international Organization,the United Nations,to
defend the just causeandinterestsof many, many peoples
of its own and other countries against the threat of
imperialistaggression,
subversion,invasion,slander,and of
that strugglewhich wasinstituted againstthe first socialist
country in the world, the Soviet Union, since the very
earliestdays of the glorious,great 1917 October Revolution.
300. The Soviet veto hashelpedto savethe freedomand
independenceof many countriesof the Arab East, and to
thwart the ill-intentioned plans of enslavementof the
Americans,the British, andmany other imperialiststowards
free countries.
301. The Soviet veto has ensuredthe admissionto the
United Nations of those countries whose admissionwas
blocked for many, manyye,arsby the American andBritish
imperialists.It was the Soviet veto, applied over seventy
times in similar cases,which helped to admit Albania,
Bulgaria, Hungary, Mongolia and a number of other
countriesto this important internationalOrganization.
302. For many, many years the Anglo-American imperialists, utilizing their automatic majority in the Security
Council, opposedthe admissionof a whole seriesof States,
and it was only the Soviet Union veto which, in strict
30

conformity with the Charter, helped to protect the interests
of those countries and enabled justice to prevail: those
countries becameMembers of the United Nations Organization in 1955, when the imperi&lists, feeling that they
were powerlessto overcome the provisions of the Charter,
were obliged to accept a “package deal” and agreedto
admit sixteen countries at once, including those against
whoseadmissionthey had voted for many years sincethe
very establishmentof the United Nations.
303. Therein lie the strength and greatnessand the
international importance of the Soviet veto, and your
slanderous accusations, Mr. Ball, are neither new nor
original. We have heard them repeatedly from your predecessors.They cannot alter the substanceof the issue.We
have employed, do, and will courageously and proudly
employ the veto against attempts by the imperialiststo
imposetheir will and their commands.Your intention to
imposeyour commandswasobvious from your behaviour,
your speeches,
andyour concluding words.
304. You neededto concealthe evil deedsin Vie&Namby
this disgracefuldocument which you introduced into the
Security Council, this shameful action by which you, the
representativeof monopoly capital,’ not even scorningthis
kind of hypocrisy, decided to play the part of the defender
of communismand socialism.You spoke of tyrants. But
the most dreadful tyranny of all is the tyranny of
imperialism.The people of Viet-Nam, the peoplesof the
Arab countries feel it constantly, every minute, every
second. With your country’s collaboration, and that of
American monopoly capital in particular, the tyranny of
imperialismalso reigns in a number of regions of Africa,
supportingracismin South West Africa, in South Africa, in
Southern Rhodesia,in the Portuguesecoloniesandin many
other places.
305. We were saying that somebody drowns regions,
countries and territories in blood. Now, who could that
be? Don’t all thosepresentknow that it is you who drown
the fields, villages and cities of Viet-Nam in blood? Your
handsare drenched in blood from these evil deeds,from
this imperialist tyranny, this effort to impose its commands,its will, to subjugatethe freedom-loving peoplesof
Viet-Nam, of the Arab, African and Latin American
countries to American financial capital. There is the most
dreadful tyranny of modern times: the tyranny of imperialism.
306. You dare to speakof the leadersof other countries.
You would do better to speakof your own leaders,what
they are doing and how they are carrying out their policy in
Viet-Nam, in the Middle East, and in many other countries.
Your hysteria here, your spite and hostility show that you
havefound you are powerlessin Czechoslovakiato establish
and maintain the rule of your secret service, of counterrevolution and reaction with which you have sympathized,
to which you gave directives through your propagandaand
espionageorganizations, which you financed creating an
unbearablesituation, preventing the Czechoslovakpeople
from developing freely and independently along the SOcialist course. You had plans to impose your imperialist
course,the domination of the monopolies.But this bet was
defeated by the common efforts of the fraternal socialist

countries which courageously came forward to render
assistance to the Czechoslovak people who found themselves faced by the threat of international imperialism and
its conspiracy against the Socialist countries.

adopted in order to impose their commands, their will,
their determination on the Security Council and the
Secretary-General, by the attempt to claim that this is
allegedly not a substantive proposal. Oh no, my fine
gentlemen! This is indeed substantive, and you will not
succeed in by-passing the Charter and involving the intentions of the Secretary-General of the United Nations in
your imperialist designs. Therefore, I consider that there is
no need at all to convene the Security Council tomorrow
on this matter.

307. The fate of peoples is and will be determined by the
peoples themselves, and not by the imperialist system
which is condemned by history.
308. I do not insist on consecutive interpretation
cording to the usual practice.

ac-

311. The PRESIDENT: 1 shall state the procedural situation, A draft resolution has been submitted by eight
delegations, and in order for us to proceed to consider that
draft resolution and vote on it, tie opinion has prevailed, as
a result of informal consultations that took place in
accordance with the usual practice, that a meeting should
be called for 5 p.m. tomorrow for the purpose of resuming
our discussion. Therefore, if there is no objection, I shall
adjourn this meeting with the understanding that we shall
meet again in this chamber at 5 p.m. tomorrow.

309. The PRESIDENT: As I have no other speakers on my
list, I think we have no alternative but to adjourn. After
Informal consultations, the opinion has prevailed that the
Security Council should meet later today-Friday,
23
August-at 5 p.m. If there is no objection I shall adjourn
the meeting to 5 o’clock.
310. Mr. MALIK (Union of ‘Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): Mr.!President, I consider the
proposal of the Canadian representative as a new trick of
the NATO countries. In this dirty story he appears as the
chief mouthpiece and representative of th_eAnglo-American
circles. Having failed in their attempt to impose the
resolution on the Security Council, they are now trying
another trick. They are trying to drag the Secretary-General
of the United Nations into this dirty business of theirs, that
is, their interference in the affairs of a socialist country and
in the common affairs of the fraternal socialist countries.
The reason for this venture is perfectly obvious. I presume
there are no grounds for this kind of venture. One illegal
move, one violation of the Charter did not go through. It
was defeated. Now diversionary manoeuvres are being

312. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): The Soviet delegation reserves its
right to state its views again at the time you have
mentioned, Mr. President.
313. The PRESIDENT: I assure the representative of the
Soviet Union that he will have ample time to state his
views, and with the consent of the Council I propose now
to adjourn this meeting.
The meeting rose at,3.55 a.m. on Friday, 23 August 1968.

31

P

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consul!
your
or Geneva.

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Nations,
Soles Section,

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

throughout
New York

IJNIES

Les publications
des Notions
Unies
sent en vente
dons
les libroiries
dipositairer
du monde
enlier.
Inform.ez-vous
aup&
de votre librairie
ou
Notions
Unier,
Section
des ventes, New York ou Gendve.

et let ogencer
odresrez-vous
C;

KAK

HAuUti

IlOJlYqHTb

M34AHMR

OPTAHHSAUJlM

06bEAHHEHHblX

II:1~11111111 O~~IIIIII:I~I~~~OBW~~IICII~I~X
IIar[llil
JIOilillO liplIlTS
11 lillll;tillldx
Jfaramlax
II
JII'ClITI'TIIIIS
110 DI'CS pailOllLU
NllIla.
IIRIIO~JITC CnpllilI
06 ll:1$lllIlJlx
ll ll8lll(13f
Iillllil~llOY
Hara:lllIIC
ILlI llIIUIlITC
110 n,qwy
: Opramm~m
06ne~rlllClrrll,l.
IIal~lril.
CCtillIIJl
uo
DpO~ll;Jic
lr:l~nlllIfi,
IIbdIopJi
~r.in Xhena,.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Las publicacioner
de las Naciones
Unidar
estcin
en todot
porter
del mundo.
Consulte
(I w librero
Venlos,
Nueva
York o Ginebro.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

UNIDAS

en vento en libreriar
o dirljore
a: Nocioner

Price: $U.S. 1.50 (or equivalent

in other

Y cosos dirtribuidoras
Unidos,
Secci6n

currencies)

de

35221-October

1972-2,050
