A /76/PV.97

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

97th plenary meeting

Thursday, 28 July 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Peñaranda
(Philippines), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 66
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Draft resolution (A/76/L.74)
The Acting President: I should like to inform
members that the debate on this item will take place on
a later date to be announced.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Turkmenistan to introduce draft resolution A/76/L.74.
Mrs. Ataeva (Turkmenistan) (spoke in Russian):
On behalf of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan,
Uzbekistan and my delegation, Turkmenistan, allow me
to introduce draft resolution A/76/L.74, entitled “Zone
of peace, trust and cooperation of Central Asia”.
We thank all delegations for the constructive and
fruitful negotiations, which have produced a substantive
draft resolution. We note with satisfaction the continued
broad interregional support for the draft resolution.
Throughout the process of negotiating the text of the
draft resolution, we made every effort to maintain a
constructive atmosphere and to reach consensus.
The Charter of the United Nations calls upon all
Members of the Organization to maintain international
peace, develop friendly relations, pursue international
cooperation and settle their disputes by peaceful

means. In developing those purposes and principles,
the international community has long recognized that
the establishment of zones of peace in various regions
of the world can contribute to the security of States in
such zones, as well as international peace and security
as a whole.
Concrete efforts in that regard were made by
countries in various regions of the world, such as the
Indian Ocean, the Mediterranean, South-East Asia and
the South Atlantic.
We believe that the time has come to formulate and
promulgate clearly articulated principles and norms
that, taking into account the legitimate interests of
the Central Asian countries, will contribute to peace,
security and sustainable development in that region,
strengthening cooperation and cultural ties among
people in the Central Asian region.
It is obvious to us, as it is to everyone, that the
promotion of the common interests of our peoples is
fully consistent with the ideals and standards that
should govern friendly relations among States.
The draft resolution “Zone of peace, trust and
cooperation of Central Asia” was prepared after
extensive consultations among the countries of the
region, while taking into account the constructive
views and proposals of other countries. The draft
resolution reflects concepts and ideas that have
evolved in the region over the years. It also reflects the
aspirations, principles and goals that the countries of
the region share concerning the future of their region
and it emphasizes their commitment to strengthening

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-44219 (E)

*2244219*

A/76/PV.97

mutual understanding and cooperation among
themselves and promoting a healthier international
relations environment.
In its tenth preambular paragraph, the draft
resolution states that the countries of Central Asia are
determined to preserve their independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity and to develop their relations in
peace and liberty, not only for their own benefit but
for that of all humankind. The draft resolution also
emphasizes the special interest and responsibility of our
countries in terms of promoting regional cooperation
for peace, security and development, through which
the region can make a significant contribution to
international peace and security and ensuring that the
purposes and the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations are realized.
In the fifth and sixth preambular paragraphs, the
draft resolution recalls the proclamation by the General
Assembly every five years of the International Year
of Peace and Trust, which was declared for the first
time in 2021 pursuant to resolution 73/338. We believe
that the promotion of peace is the main objective of
the United Nations. In that regard, the proclamation
every five years of the International Year of Peace and
Trust will help motivate the international community
to build peace and trust among States through, inter
alia, political dialogue, mutual understanding and
cooperation, with a view to building sustainable peace,
solidarity and harmony.
As Secretary-General António Guterres noted in
his address to the representatives of Member States
at the general debate of the General Assembly at its
seventy-third session,
“Our world is suffering from a bad case of
trust deficit disorder ... [T]rust is at a breaking
point — trust in national institutions, trust among
States and trust in the rules-based global order ...
Among countries, cooperation is less certain and
more difficult ... Trust in global governance is also
fragile, as twenty-first-century challenges outpace
twentieth-century institutions and mindsets”
(A/73/PV.6, p. 1).
In that regard, our goal is to call on the international
community to promote the ideals of peace and trust by
all means possible and demonstrate their commitment
to peace, trust and dialogue. The countries of Central
Asia hold enormous potential for cooperation and
development. They share a common spiritual, cultural
2/19

28/07/2022

and historical heritage. They are united by their faiths,
linguistic kinship and similar outlooks. The countries of
the region also share transportation and communication
networks and mutually complementary economies.
Contacts among their Heads of State have increased
recently, thereby strengthening political trust among
our countries, and we have begun to talk more about
the benefits of cooperation rather than competition. We
have also begun to share the same view of the need to
seek reasonable compromises on a number of sensitive
regional issues. The draft resolution reflects the regular
consultative meetings held among the Heads of State of
Central Asia as a new form of cooperation that reflects
a desire to peacefully resolve existing issues. The most
recent such meeting was held on 21 July in Bishkek.
The draft resolution also welcomes the Central
Asian Women Leaders’ Caucus, which was established
in December 2020 with the participation of the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy
for Central Asia and the United Nations Development
Programme. It is the first platform of its kind in
the region and aims to increase women’s political,
economic and social participation in Central Asia. We
acknowledge the importance of preventive diplomacy
and the role played by the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia in
that regard.
Paragraph 1 of the draft resolution declares
the region of Central Asia a zone of peace, trust
and cooperation.
Paragraph 2 of the draft resolution notes with
satisfaction the significant practical contribution of
the Central Asian States in strengthening regional
peace, trust and cooperation in achieving sustainable
development, as well as their efforts in that regard.
Paragraph 3 of the draft resolution reaffirms that
threats to stability and sustainable development in the
region require closer and more coordinated cooperation
among the States of Central Asia, and it reaffirms
the importance of regional cooperation involving
regional and international organizations in addressing
those threats.
Peacekeeping
is
inextricably
linked
to
socioeconomic development. In addition to the muchneeded efforts to promote further regional cooperation
called for in paragraph 5 of the draft resolution, we
have an opportunity to broaden cooperation among
22-44219

28/07/2022

the countries of Central Asia in exploring new ways
to develop our potential and achieve better living
conditions for our people.
Paragraph 6 of the draft resolution encourages all
States of the region and all other regions to cooperate
in efforts towards sustaining peace in the Central Asian
zone and to respect the national unity, sovereignty,
political independence and territorial integrity of all
States of the region, while strictly observing the Charter
of the United Nations.
The text of draft resolution A/76/L.74 reflects the
consensus of the States of the region. Its success will
depend on the support of the international community.
We hope that all countries aspiring to achieve peace,
development and cooperation will show their full
support for it. We believe that, through our joint
efforts, our nations will strive towards and succeed in
transforming Central Asia into a region of peace, trust
and cooperation.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/76/L.74.
I give the floor to the representative of Pakistan,
who wishes to speak in explanation of position before
action is taken.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Pakistan expresses its
appreciation to the Governments of Turkmenistan
and the other Central Asian countries, including
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan,
for proposing an important draft resolution (A/76/L.74)
on the zone of peace, trust and cooperation of Central
Asia. We welcome in particular the introduction of
the draft resolution by Ambassador Aksoltan Ataeva,
Permanent Representative of Turkmenistan, on behalf
of the countries of Central Asia. Pakistan fully supports
this timely draft resolution and its objectives.
The endeavour to promote peace, trust and
cooperation in Central Asia and other regions is more
vital today than ever. Today the world order established
75 years ago on the basis of the fundamental principles
of the Charter of the United Nations is under threat.
Over the past few decades, we have witnessed the
frequent resort to unilateral force and external
intervention. Foreign occupation persists in several
regions. Conflicts among and within nations have
proliferated. Ideologies of hate — Islamophobia,
anti-Semitism and fascism — have re-emerged. And a
new and destabilizing global arms race is under way.

A/76/PV.97

In that challenging global environment, it is essential
to revive respect for the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, actively promote the peaceful
resolution of conflicts and international cooperation
and overcome the global challenges of development and
climate change.
Central Asia connects the East with the West and
the North with the South. Peace and stability in this
region are vital in achieving stability, cooperation
and international trade. The objectives of the draft
resolution — to strengthen international peace and
security, promote the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter, advance multilateralism and
enhance mutual understanding and cooperation — are
also essential building blocks for economic development,
regional peace, prosperity and connectivity in Central
Asia and beyond. We believe that regional connectivity
and cooperation can also contribute to building and
sustaining peace, stability and security.
Earlier this month, Pakistan supported and
co-sponsored the important resolution (resolution
76/295) initiated by Uzbekistan on strengthening
connectivity between Central and South Asia. The
ancient Silk Route, which connected the East and West
across the Eurasian heartland, was a prime historical
example of the benefits of regional connectivity. It
unleashed an era of prosperity in Central Asia. China’s
Belt and Road Initiative and the China-Pakistan
Economic Corridor are timely initiatives to revive the
prospects of prosperity through regional connectivity
and cooperation.
Relations between the peoples of Central Asia
and Pakistan are rooted in a shared historical and
cultural heritage. Pakistan is committed to building
connectivity and cooperation in trade, investment,
transport, energy, tourism and other sectors with our
Central Asian neighbours. Our traditional cooperation
with the Central Asian States has further deepened in
recent years. For the landlocked Central Asian States,
Pakistan can serve as a gateway, not only to South Asia
but also to global markets. To guarantee the promotion
of sustainable peace in the region, it is also vital to
ensure durable peace and security in Afghanistan.
Today, after 40 years of conflict, there is an
opportunity to bring peace and development to
Afghanistan. To that end, sustained engagement
is essential with the de facto Afghan Government,
especially by all of its six immediate neighbours. That

22-442193/19

A/76/PV.97

28/07/2022

will consolidate the zone of peace, trust and cooperation
of Central Asian countries.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position before action is taken.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/76/L.74, entitled “Zone of peace, trust and
cooperation of Central Asia”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Herity (Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management): I would like to announce
that, since the submission of draft resolution A/76/L.74
and in addition to the delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/76/L.74: Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus,
Bolivia, Fiji, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Lebanon,
Morocco, Nicaragua, the Philippines, the Russian
Federation and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/76/L.74?
Draft resolution
(resolution 76/299).

A/76/L.74

was

adopted

The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of the United States of America,
who wishes to speak in explanation of position on the
resolution just adopted.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): The
United States congratulates Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan on the
adoption of resolution 76/299, which declares Central
Asia a zone of peace, trust and cooperation.
The intention to establish a region as a zone of peace
creates a foundation for greater cooperation among
their Governments that can reinforce the interrelated
pillars of peaceful and prosperous society, sustainable
development, peace and security, human rights and
the rule of law. Their commitment to the principles of
preventive diplomacy will not only help strengthen the
security of the States in the region but is also vital to
maintaining international peace and security.
We are disappointed that some delegations
fought vigorously against the inclusion of language
in the resolution reaffirming the mutually reinforcing
relationship between human rights and the rule of law
4/19

and peacebuilding and sustaining peace. The concept
that regions and countries must respect human rights
for all and adhere to the rule of law in order to flourish
is enshrined in the very Preamble of the Charter of the
United Nations. It is our responsibility, as the General
Assembly, to continuously reaffirm our commitment to
those principles.
Nevertheless, we thank Turkmenistan for its
tireless pursuit of consensus among the members of
the Assembly on the various elements of the text of
the resolution. We appreciate Turkmenistan’s extensive
consultations with Member States on the text and
applaud its efforts.
We are delighted about the resolution’s
acknowledgement of the critical role that women play
in the promotion of peace, security and sustainable
development. Let us not forget that women should
always actively participate in policy leadership,
development and implementation. Their involvement
in the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict
prevention and conflict resolution and at all levels of
decision-making will ensure that we are able to move
quickly and comprehensively address the challenges we
all face.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position on the resolution
just adopted.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 66.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly concluded its consideration
of sub-item (b) of agenda item 74 at its 93rd plenary
meeting, on 11 July 2022. In order for the Assembly
to take action on the draft resolution before it, it will
be necessary to reopen consideration of sub-item (b) of
agenda item 74.
May take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of sub-item (b) of
agenda item 74?
It was so decided (decision 76/506B).
22-44219

28/07/2022

Agenda item 74 (continued)
Promotion and protection of human rights
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms
Draft resolution A/76/L.75
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Costa Rica to introduce draft
resolution A/76/L.75.
Ms. Chan Valverde (Costa Rica): On behalf of the
Maldives, Morocco, Slovenia, Switzerland and my own
country, Costa Rica, it is my honour to introduce draft
resolution A/76/L.75, entitled “The human right to a
clean, healthy and sustainable environment”.
At the outset, we want to thank the more than 100
Member States from all regions that co-sponsored the
text. We acknowledge the presence of all delegations at a
historic moment for human rights and the environment,
as well as for the United Nations and the multilateral
system. The adoption of the draft resolution will
represent the culmination of a long history that is both
overdue and timely.
This year, we commemorate the fiftieth anniversary
of the Stockholm Declaration and Action Plan for the
Human Environment, whereby we established for the
first time our common conviction that human beings
have a fundamental right to an environment of a
quality that permits a life of dignity and well-being.
Since then, that right has developed — both at the
national and regional levels — with the recognition
of that right by a vast majority of Member States, as
well as its establishment in regional human rights
instruments worldwide.
The call to establish the right to a healthy
environment has grown ever-stronger over the past 20
years at the international level. Our countries initiated
a process in 2011 at the Human Rights Council to
establish linkages between human rights and the
environment. Among other outcome, that process led to
the creation of the mandate of the Special Rapporteur
on the issue of human rights obligations relating to
the enjoyment of a safe, clean, healthy and sustainable
environment, progressively clarifying how a clean,
healthy and sustainable environment is an integral part
to full enjoyment of all human rights and that everyone,

A/76/PV.97

everywhere, is entitled to all human rights without
distinctions of any kind.
That is why the universal recognition of the right
to a clean, healthy and sustainable environment is so
timely. In October 2021, the Human Rights Council
adopted resolution 48/13, recognizing the right to a
clean, healthy and sustainable environment as a human
right, with four abstentions and without opposition.
With universal recognition in mind, our countries
submitted a draft resolution to Member States in New
York. We conducted a process of open, inclusive and
transparent consultations, delivering an outcome that
speaks on behalf of and to all of us and reflecting the
urgent need to culminate universal recognition of that
human right by the General Assembly.
The co-presenters of the draft resolution opted
for a technical approach to the text, with a focus on
recognition of the right, building on Human Rights
Council resolution 48/13. We are of the view that the
final text presented today, which has received the
sponsorship of more than 100 delegations so far, is a
strong, well-balanced text that links human rights,
environment and development language.
The world is facing an unprecedented triple
environmental crisis, including increasing catastrophic
climate change, biodiversity loss and pollution. In
recent years, we have continued to witness rising
temperatures, rising sea levels, heat waves, wildfires
and floods, which have wreaked havoc on countries
in all regions. That global crisis is all-consuming and
has immense impacts on the realization of all human
rights, not least the rights to health, food, water and
adequate housing.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Michelle Bachelet, has warned that the world
has never seen a human rights threat of this scope.
That is true for every country, whether developing
or developed, but is particularly impactful on the
poorest, most vulnerable and most marginalized. Air
pollution causes 13 deaths per minute worldwide, while
9 out of every 10 children are exposed to deadly air
pollution. Climate change is forcing the displacement
of 20 million people annually. Four environmental
rights defenders are killed every week for defending
the right to a healthy environment, while the decline
of nature and biodiversity is threatening the cultural
identity of our societies, including indigenous peoples
and local communities.

22-442195/19

A/76/PV.97

28/07/2022

Yet, despite that gloom, we see hope. We have seen
an unprecedented number of conferences and meetings
on the theme of the environment this year. That
discussion has begun to build mutual understanding of
the scale of the threat we face, but also the solutions
we need.

and, above all, for action from decision-makers. We
can demonstrate to the world that the United Nations
remains valid and able to deliver in the face of the
current challenges that can only be overcome together.
It is high time to recognize the right to a clean, healthy
and sustainable environment as a human right.

Building on the message of the President of the
General Assembly — a message of hope — and in the
face of those global, environmental and human rights
crises, the universal recognition of the human right to
a clean, healthy and sustainable environment provides
a powerful and effective response that we hope will
catalyse transformative changes in our societies. That
includes generating a paradigm shift towards what our
relationship to the environment and ecosystems should
be, truly placing human well-being and the enjoyment
of all human rights and a healthy planet at the centre of
our aims for the prosperity of all.

To conclude, we call on all States Members of the
United Nations to support draft resolution A/76/L.75 and
rally behind this historic moment. Let us take this step
forward into a future that we know is possible, because
we have been working towards it for over 50 years since
Stockholm: to defend and improve the environment for
present and future generations as an imperative goal of
all humankind — a goal to be pursued together and in
harmony with the established and fundamental goals of
peace and worldwide economic and social development.

For the majority of States that have already
recognized that right, its universal recognition
contributes to improving environmental outcomes
and increasing the enjoyment of human rights. For
those that have not, it could present a starting point
for constitutional changes or changes to environmental
laws in recognition of that right. The draft resolution
will also contribute to enhancing and integrating the
United Nations response to the triple environmental
crisis, as well as to supporting Member States more
coherently and effectively in fulfilling their human
rights obligations related to environmental matters and
scaling up efforts to guarantee a clean, healthy and
sustainable environment for all.
In 2023, we will commemorate the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights — a major achievement for humankind and
human dignity. At this historic moment today, we have
a unique opportunity to set a new “common standard of
achievement for humanity”, as Eleanor Roosevelt said,
by further strengthening international human rights
law with the universal recognition of the human right
to a healthy environment.
The significance of this moment is paramount. With
the political will and leadership of the international
community to place human well-being and the human
rights of present and future generations at the centre of
our concerns, we build trust and hope among all people,
including women, young people, children and especially
the most vulnerable. They are calling for answers
6/19

The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/76/L.75.
Before giving the floor to those representatives who
wish to speak in explanation of vote before the voting,
may I remind delegations that explanations are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to begin by thanking the
delegations of Slovenia, Switzerland, Costa Rica, the
Maldives and Morocco, the main sponsors of draft
resolution A/76/L.75, on the human right to a clean,
healthy and sustainable environment, for their openness
and constructive approach in negotiating the document.
I especially thank the representative of Costa Rica for
her heartfelt introduction of the draft resolution.
The Russian Federation attaches great importance
to the issue of environmental protection and is
paying increasing attention to it at both the national
and international levels. The subject matter of
the draft resolution encompasses two branches of
law — international human rights law and international
environmental law. However, neither universal
environmental agreements nor international human
rights treaties address such concepts as a clean
environment, a healthy environment and sustainable
environment, or a concept similar to them. The
wording of existing international legal instruments
varies significantly.
The legal terminology for such concepts today
is being developed at the national level. Based on
22-44219

28/07/2022

A/76/PV.97

its own specific situation and circumstances, every
country is establishing its own norms. In that regard,
asserting the right to a clean, healthy and sustainable
environment without first defining at least minimum
universal norms would be premature. Furthermore,
we are convinced that the new right can be recognized
only within the framework of international treaties that
have been carefully prepared by competent experts
and subsequently adopted by States. Only then will we
be able to speak of a right that is legally recognized
by States.

agreements, including respect for every State`s
permanent sovereignty over their natural resources,
as recognized in the Stockholm Declaration and the
Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, as
well as the right to self-determination of all peoples
regarding their natural wealth and resources, as
enshrined in article 2 of the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. We thank the
core group for its willingness to accommodate some of
Brazil`s concerns in that regard, which is why we will
vote in favour of the draft resolution.

The method chosen by the sponsors — to recognize
the right through the adoption of a draft resolution — is at
the very least legally questionable and could subsequently
have negative consequences. Therefore, the Russian
Federation is unable to support draft resolution
A/76/L.75 and calls for a recorded vote. However, as it
acknowledges the importance of the issue in general,
the Russian delegation will not vote against the draft
resolution but will abstain in the voting.

Nevertheless, we regret that the core group was
unable to conduct the negotiating process in a way
that allowed for greater debate on this important
issue, so that a true and meaningful consensus could
actually be achieved. We also regret that the final text
does not incorporate a clear reaffirmation of both the
principle of the sovereignty of States, while taking
into account national priorities, and the principle of
common but differentiated responsibilities, which is a
cross-cutting principle of international environmental
law. We are also disappointed that the text lacks strong
language on the provision of the financial resources,
capacity-building and technology transfer necessary
for developing countries to implement in good faith the
right recognized in the draft resolution.

Mr. Parga Cintra (Brazil): The Brazilian
Constitution provides for the right to an ecologically
balanced environment, which is indispensable to the
achievement of a healthy quality of life. As such, Brazil
supports the universal recognition of the right to a
clean, healthy and sustainable environment. A healthy
quality of life is intrinsically related not only to the
environmental dimension of sustainable development
but also to its social and economic dimensions.
We are therefore convinced that the General
Assembly should ensure that the international human
right to a clean, healthy and sustainable environment is
consistent with both the rights and principles expressed
and codified in international human rights law and
environmental declarations and conventions, including
their financial commitments, so that no one is left
behind. That was our approach to the negotiations on
draft resolution A/76/L.75.
For Brazil, the recognition of an international
human right to a healthy and sustainable environment
can be a positive incentive to national efforts and can
contribute effectively to the protection and promotion
of human rights and the environment, as well as to
the implementation of existing frameworks on human
rights and the environment.
However, establishing such a right will achieve that
purpose only if it is consistent with the obligations and
commitments contained in international environmental

In reaffirming its utmost commitment to the
promotion and protection of human rights, Brazil will
continue to take steps to safeguard the right to a clean,
healthy and sustainable environment, including with a
view to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals
and fighting extreme poverty.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I would like to briefly
explain the position of my delegation on draft resolution
A/76/L.75, on the right to a healthy environment. We
thank Costa Rica and the main sponsors of the draft
resolution for introducing this important initiative,
as well as for their openness to listen to and engage
with delegations.
We support the right to a clean, healthy and
sustainable environment. Pakistan’s Constitution and
our domestic policies recognize the protection and
promotion of the right to a healthy environment as
fundamental to the exercise of the basic rights to life
and health. We are also fully supportive of global efforts
to protect the environment and proactively safeguard
the basic human rights of those who are vulnerable to
environmental degradation.

22-442197/19

A/76/PV.97

As the text of the draft resolution has gone through
various stages of development, three aspects of the
initiative need to be highlighted.
First, with regard to the process, we agree that
any new human right can be legally recognized only
through the negotiation of a convention at the relevant
intergovernmental forum or forums, which in this case
are the relevant forums on climate change and the
environment. As of now, the right to a clean, healthy
and sustainable environment and the corresponding
State obligations have not been legally established by
the existing international human rights instruments
Therefore, we believe that the draft resolution is a
political resolution and not a legal affirmation by the
General Assembly of the right to a clean, healthy and
sustainable environment. We consider the status of that
right to be similar to that contained in the declaration
on the right to development, adopted in 1986 by the
General Assembly in resolution 41/128. We will
continue to work for the legal acceptance of the right to
development in all the relevant forums.
Secondly, on substance, it is clear that the impacts
of climate change have been greatest on those who
are least responsible for the degradation of the global
environment. There are certain elements in the draft
resolution that should have stayed in the resolution,
including the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities and the responsibility for financing
from developed countries to support developing
countries in improving the environment. The concept
of common but differentiated responsibilities, as
enshrined in principle 7 of the Rio Declaration on
Environment and Development at the first United
Nations Conference on Environment and Development,
in 1992, is an accepted principle and should have been
reflected. In the light of States’ unequal contribution to
global environmental degradation, they have common
but differentiated responsibilities. Developed countries
should acknowledge the responsibility they bear in the
international pursuit of sustainable development, in
view of the pressures their societies have placed on the
global environment, and the need for technological and
financial support for developing countries.
Thirdly, we believed that the draft resolution
could have been strengthened further by elaborating
the mutually reinforcing linkage between the right
to a healthy environment and the enjoyment and
realization of economic, social and cultural rights and
the right to development, as well as by highlighting
8/19

28/07/2022

the particular situation of developing countries and
those countries that have been most adversely affected
by climate change. Pakistan will vote in favour of
draft resolution A/76/L.75 because we did so in the
Human Rights Council. We do so in the hope that the
political affirmation of the right to a clean, healthy and
sustainable environment will further galvanize our
individual and collective efforts to effectively address
the ongoing environmental degradation and its negative
impacts on the realization of basic human rights.
It is in that spirit that we will vote in favour of the
draft resolution.
Ms. Ershadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to make the following statement in explanation of
vote before the voting on draft resolution A/76/L.75,
entitled “The human right to a clean, healthy and
sustainable environment”.
I also commend Costa Rica, Morocco,
Switzerland, Slovenia and the Maldives for leading this
important process.
My delegation actively and constructively engaged
in the relevant negotiations process from the beginning.
We therefore expected a balanced text that would take
into consideration our concerns and reservations.
Unfortunately, this draft resolution tries to impose
additional burdens of environmental commitments on
the shoulders of developing countries and references
a human right that lacks a clear definition and
understanding among States and does not appear in the
core international human rights treaties.
Besides, we have witnessed that references to
unilateral coercive measures are lacking in the text,
even though such inhumane measures, purposely
attuned to take the heaviest toll on innocent children,
women and men, impede the enjoyment of human rights
in a clean, healthy and sustainable environment.
In that regard, my delegation would like to
emphasize that what was needed was a balanced
approach in order to meet the concerns of certain States,
including developing countries, as well as the inclusion
of a paragraph on the sovereign rights of States and
one on the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities, as set out in the Rio Declaration on
Environment and Development.
We reiterate that, unless we address the barriers to,
and means of, implementation within the Sustainable
Development Goals framework and the right to
22-44219

28/07/2022

development, we have not appropriately taken into
consideration the concerns of certain countries. In that
regard, we would also like to flag that the language
incorporated in the draft resolution on human rights
issues should be adjusted and reflected in a balanced
and consensual text.

A/76/PV.97

itself in order to ensure the existence of humankind and
of all species. Mother Earth demands that we consider
the happiness of present and future generations in order
to achieve this harmony.

My delegation will therefore abstain in the voting
on this draft resolution.

We share the concern of some delegations that there
is no clear definition of the concept of a human right to
a clean, healthy and sustainable environment. Instead,
we recognize that there are different approaches,
visions, models and tools available for each country in
that regard. Each country has the right to define that
concept according to its circumstances, priorities and
respective national legislation. Moreover, we believe
that an intergovernmental process should be initiated
to reach agreement on such a definition.

Mr. Morales Dávila (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): Our delegation wishes to take the floor in
explanation of vote on draft resolution A/76/L.75,
entitled “The human right to a clean, healthy and
sustainable environment”.

Likewise, we regret that relevant contributions
from some Member States have not been included.
We recall that, if we are to achieve vital harmony with
nature, we must tackle these multiple challenges with
inclusiveness, commitment, cooperation and solidarity.

Nicaragua reiterates its principled position on the
importance of promoting the right to development
as a human and inalienable right of peoples, and we
highlight the equitable principle of common but
differentiated responsibilities and the urgent need for
ambitious climate actions that will enable us to limit
the global temperature rise to 1.5° Celsius.

The Government of Reconciliation and National
Unity is implementing its own model of sustainable
development in harmony with nature as part of the
restitution of the rights of all Nicaraguans.

Consequently, we would like to reiterate that the
content of this draft resolution should be interpreted in
a manner consistent with the national legislation and
development priorities of countries, as well as their
cultural and ethical values and religious backgrounds
and in line with internationally recognized human rights.

The absence of measures and actions continues, and
the devastating damage to Mother Earth is increasing.
It is concerning that emissions from developed
countries continue to climb and countries are not
doing enough to reduce them, thereby increasingly
impacting developing countries in particular, which are
the least responsible for the anthropogenic effects that
precipitate climate change.
Unfortunately, the text presented does not include a
reference to the historical responsibilities of developed
countries and the need for them to take the lead in
changing current production and consumption patterns.
We believe that, in order to have a human right to a clean,
healthy and sustainable environment, we must first
eradicate poverty and hunger. For that, it is essential
that developed countries fulfil their commitments to
official development assistance, technology-transfer
and capacity-building.
Nicaragua recognizes the inherent rights of our
Mother Earth and considers that now, more than ever,
we must unite to protect the ecosystems that provide life

Mr. Pary Rodríguez (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I thank the
delegations of Costa Rica, the Maldives, Morocco,
Switzerland and Slovenia for driving the negotiations
on draft resolution A/76/L.75, on the human right to a
clean, healthy and sustainable environment. Since it is
becoming increasingly clear that we are in the midst of
a systemic crisis, ensuring that harmony with Mother
Earth is restored requires deepening and expanding
rights-based approaches for the benefit of current and
future generations.
Bolivia’s constitutional development explicitly
recognizes the right to a healthy, protected and balanced
environment. Likewise, our Constitution is unique in
recognizing that the exercise of that right should allow
individuals and collectivities of present and future
generations, as well as other living beings, to develop
in a normal and permanent manner. In other words,
Bolivia is a pioneer in considering the right to a clean,
healthy and sustainable environment as an individual
and collective right with a scope that extends beyond
human beings.
We believe this draft resolution to be an
important starting point to initiate the discussion and

22-442199/19

A/76/PV.97

implementation of innovative policies that, beyond
passively protecting that right, would guarantee
it through the fair and equitable distribution of
responsibilities and benefits derived from nature. In
that connection, it is also vitally important to provide
developing countries the means to ensure a transition
that enables them to exercise their right to a clean,
healthy and sustainable development.
My delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution and urges all States to continue working and
listening to each other in search of consensus that will
help restore harmony with the rest of Mother Earth with
equity and justice.
Ms. Ali (Syrian Arab Republic): My delegation would
like to thank the core group — Costa Rica, Maldives,
Morocco, Slovenia and Switzerland for presenting draft
resolution A/76/L.75, entitled “The human right to a
clean, healthy and sustainable environment”.
Allow me to explain my country’s position on this
draft resolution before taking action on it.
My delegation is of the firm belief that all human
beings deserve to live in a clean, healthy and sustainable
environment. No efforts should be spared to that end.
My country is no stranger to the adverse impacts
of climate change, environmental degradation and
non-sustainable development on the environment, and
hence attaches great importance to issues related to
environmental protection and participates actively in
relevant discussions in specialized international forums.
Throughout the process, my delegation actively and
in good faith engaged with the facilitators and made sure
to send concise and constructive comments on the text,
aimed at strengthening it. Right from the beginning, we
were of the belief that the draft resolution at hand was
not only of a humanitarian nature, but also involved
development and technical aspects.
The world has already warmed to dangerous levels.
Heat waves, wildfires, droughts and severe storms have
become more common. Developing countries are more
susceptible to the dire impacts of those phenomena
on the enjoyment of a clean, safe and sustainable
environment and are less able to confront it properly.
We therefore saw the merit in highlighting the
development needs and priorities of developing
countries and the principle of common but differentiated
10/19

28/07/2022

responsibilities. We have also added some language on
capacity-building and technology-transfer.
We regret that our legitimate concerns were not
addressed and reflected in the text. However, in view of
the importance of the topic as a whole, the Syrian Arab
Republic will not vote against the draft resolution, but
rather abstain in the voting.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/76/L.75, entitled “The human right to a
clean, healthy and sustainable environment”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. Herity (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/76/L.75, and in addition to the delegations listed in
that document, the following countries have become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Albania, Argentina,
Austria, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia,
Botswana, Chad, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Denmark, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Eswatini, the Gambia, Ghana, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mauritania, Mexico,
Mongolia, Mozambique, Namibia, the Niger, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, the Philippines, the Republic
of Moldova, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San
Marino, Seychelles, Singapore, South Africa, South
Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Timor-Leste, Tunisia,
Tuvalu, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania
and Zambia.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde,
Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
22-44219

28/07/2022

Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia,
Eswatini, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North
Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Belarus, Cambodia, China, Ethiopia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Kyrgyzstan, Russian Federation,
Syrian Arab Republic
Draft resolution A/76/L.75 was adopted by 161 votes
to none, with 8 abstentions (resolution 76/300).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Kyrgyzstan,
Saint Kitts and Nevis and Seychelles informed the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote after the voting, I would
like to remind delegations that explanations are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by representatives
from their seats.

A/76/PV.97

Mr. Reed (United Kingdom): We welcome the
opportunity to discuss resolution 76/300 and make our
national position clear in the negotiations.
The United Kingdom has a strong commitment
on taking ambitious action to tackle climate change,
biodiversity loss and environmental degradation. We
were proud to host the twenty-sixth Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (COP26) in Glasgow, where all 197
parties agreed to the Glasgow Climate Pact. At COP26,
nature also moved from the margins of the debate on
climate change to the very heart of it. We will continue
strong United Kingdom leadership and engagement on
climate change and on nature to make sure that promises
are kept and delivered to the highest standards, working
with all partners to maintain momentum.
The United Kingdom is concerned that
environmental degradation can have implications
for the full enjoyment of human rights. In some
circumstances, it can pose a risk to the lives and wellbeing of individuals and communities. We continue to
call on States to promote their human rights obligations
while taking action to combat climate change and
biodiversity loss and environmental degradation.
However, the recognition of that right in the
resolution is without due regard to the usual formation
of international human rights law and without prejudice
to the United Kingdom’s legal position. There is no
international consensus on the legal basis of the human
right to a clean, healthy and sustainable environment,
and we do not believe that it has yet emerged as a
customary right.
Recognizing rights without due consideration and a
common understanding at an international level of what
those rights comprise creates ambiguity — individuals
cannot know what they can legitimately claim from the
State and the State has no clear understanding of the
protection it is obliged to afford to the individual.
We regret that, despite our constructive approach
to negotiations, this resolution has no reference to
important related issues. In particular, it fails to
acknowledge the role of human rights defenders
working on environmental issues or the need for a
deeper discussion on this right.
Nonetheless, we want to make three points on our
vote today. First, General Assembly resolutions are not
legally binding. Secondly, the recognition of the right

22-4421911/19

A/76/PV.97

in this resolution does not, therefore, legally bind States
to its terms. Thirdly, our understanding is that the right
to a clean, healthy and sustainable environment derives
from existing international economic and social rights
law as a component of the right to an adequate standard
of living or the right to the enjoyment of the highest
attainable standard of physical and mental health.
As this resolution states in paragraph 2, this right is
“related to other rights and existing international law”.
The United Kingdom acknowledges that this is an
issue of deep concern to all of us, and it is on this basis
that we voted in favour of the resolution today.
Ms. DaCosta (Jamaica): I have the honour to
deliver this statement in explanation of vote on behalf
of the delegation of Jamaica.
We thank the co-facilitators of the text for their
efforts in the negotiation process towards the adoption
of resolution 76/300, entitled “The human right to a
clean, healthy and sustainable environment”.
Article 13 (3) (l) of the Jamaican Constitution
recognizes the right of every citizen
“to enjoy a healthy and productive environment
free from the threat of injury or damage from
environmental abuse and degradation of the
ecological heritage”.
Therefore, the Jamaican delegation is able to support
this resolution in principle, in recognition of the
confirmation of the right to a clean, healthy and
sustainable environment as a human right. Accordingly,
Jamaica has voted in favour of the resolution.
As a small island developing State that continues to
face unique environmental vulnerabilities that threaten
socioeconomic development and sustainability,
Jamaica is a fervent advocate within the context of the
United Nations and other multilateral forums on issues
of climate change, the depletion of natural resources,
environmental degradation and biodiversity loss.
The Government of Jamaica firmly believes that the
only successful way to address complex and multifaceted
global challenges such as these is through multilateral
cooperation where all nations — big and small — come
together to agree on solutions for the way forward. This
strong preference for solutions and language that have
been agreed by the General Assembly, where all States
are represented and considered equal, is at the heart
12/19

28/07/2022

of the reason that Jamaica broke silence on the text,
despite our support for the resolution in principle.
We maintain the view that references such as “the
unsustainable management and use of natural resources”
and “unsustainable development” in the ninth and
thirteenth preambular paragraphs, respectively, are not
terminologies agreed by the General Assembly. Indeed,
precedent in the General Assembly shows agreement
with the use of the term “unsustainable” in the context
of debt levels or in relation to patterns of consumption
and production.
The use of the term “unsustainable” in a way
that is not universally agreed in the context of this
resolution allows for subjective interpretation. As such,
it ultimately undermines global efforts to solve the
challenges and impediments to sustainable development
coherently and cohesively, as we cannot move forward
effectively if we do not move forward together.
Jamaica is also of the view that this text could have
benefited from the inclusion of relevant references to the
international meeting entitled “Stockholm+50: a healthy
planet for the prosperity of all — our responsibility, our
opportunity” and the ministerial declaration adopted
at the fifth session of the United Nations Environment
Assembly — both recent multilateral meetings that
dealt with the matter of a healthy planet for all and
actions for nature, respectively.
We take this opportunity to reaffirm Jamaica’s
support for the fundamental principles captured in this
resolution. We reiterate our commitment to continuing
our advocacy in alignment with those positions.
Ms. Wallenius (Canada): Canada recognizes
the threats that we are facing globally and is taking
ambitious action on climate change and the environment
for our collective health and well-being and in order to
build a healthier and more sustainable world.
Canada joins many States today in supporting
resolution 76/300, on the right to a clean, healthy and
sustainable environment. Canada is supportive of the
international momentum to highlight the connection
between a healthy environment and the enjoyment of
human rights.
At the international level, Canada has been a
strong voice for the respect, promotion and fulfilment
of human rights and advocates the protection of the
environment. Canada recognizes that environmental
degradation can negatively impact human rights and
22-44219

28/07/2022

that States have human rights obligations related to
the environment. We note that there is currently no
common or internationally agreed understanding of the
content and scope of the right to a clean, healthy and
sustainable environment.
Canada looks forward to working with others
and exchanging information in order to support due
consideration of what such a right may comprise and
what it may entail within the international human
rights framework.
Mr. Yamaguchi (Japan): Japan would like to
express its gratitude to the members of the core group
for their efforts in engaging in the consultations in a
transparent and inclusive manner. As expressed by
many delegations, including ours, throughout the
consultations, my delegation engaged constructively
in the consultation process with due regard to the
aspiration expressed by the core group and other
delegations of sending a political message.
Against that backdrop, and after very careful
consideration, including the understanding that the
effects of climate change have become increasingly
severe in recent years and, in the light of the need to
create a sustainable environment, which is the aim
of this resolution, Japan voted in favour today of
resolution 76/300.
In our view, however, the right to a safe green,
healthy and sustainable environment referred to in this
resolution has the potential to be extremely broad in
scope and has yet to be clearly defined. We also do not
believe that the resolution alters the content of existing
international law.
Japan would also like to join the previous speaker
concerning our regret that the text adopted fails to
include important elements, such as on the law regarding
human rights defenders working on environmental
issues, expressed by many delegations during the
consultations, including Japan.
Mrs. Mozgovaya (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
The Constitution of the Republic of Belarus enshrines
the right of everyone to a favourable environment
and to compensation for damage caused by violation
of that right. The constant and timely improvement of
environmental protection legislation, aimed at ensuring
the environmental safety of the State, contributes to the
exercise of that constitutional right of citizens.

A/76/PV.97

We are grateful to the sponsors of resolution 76/300
for drawing the General Assembly’s attention to the
ever-more pressing issues of environmental protection.
At the same time, given the content of paragraph 1 of
the resolution’s operative part, Belarus had to abstain
in the voting. We are convinced that the identification
and recognition of a separate category of human rights
can be achieved only by drawing up a universal legally
binding instrument.
Given the occasion and the theme of the resolution
under consideration, we would like to take this
opportunity to draw the General Assembly’s attention
to the environmental and legal aspects of the developing
situation around the construction by Poland of barriers
along the Belarusian-Polish border, including within
the Belovezhskaya Pushcha World Heritage site.
The creation of an artificial barrier on the territory
of the cross-border site is causing irreparable damage
to the ecosystem of the entire European region and
represents a serious threat to biodiversity conservation.
Repeated appeals by Belarus to the Polish authorities
have been unsuccessful. We once again call on
Poland to return to compliance with its international
legal obligations, dismantle the barrier already in
place and promptly launch an adequate process
to remedy the damage caused to the ecosystem of
Belovezhskaya Pushcha.
Ms. Buist-Catherwood (New Zealand): I thank
the core group for the work on resolution 76/300. New
Zealand is strongly committed to international human
rights and international environmental issues and
recognizes that there are clear linkages between the two.
Without a clean, healthy and sustainable environment,
many human rights cannot be realized.
New Zealand acknowledges the importance of
taking a human rights-based approach in response
to important environmental issues, such as climate
change, ensuring that the most vulnerable and affected
groups, such as women, children and persons with
disabilities, have a voice. We need to pay particular
attention to indigenous peoples, while recognizing
their special relationship with the environment, our
responsibility to consult with them and the benefits
that indigenous perspectives can bring to us all. It is
important to hear perspectives from indigenous peoples
on the framing of the proposed human right and how
that would operate in the context of the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples and, in

22-4421913/19

A/76/PV.97

the case of New Zealand, our founding document, the
Treaty of Waitangi.
Given the tight time frames involved, New Zealand
has not had the time to consult with the Maori people on
the proposed scope, nature and recognition of this new
right. What we know is that many Maoris connect to the
environment through genealogy and kinship links and
take the perspective that that engenders responsibilities
to care of the environment. It is a reciprocal relationship:
the environment does not exist for the exclusive sake of
people and their enjoyment.
At the same time, any right to a clean, healthy and
sustainable environment is separate to the recognition
of certain rights of nature, as was acknowledged in
New Zealand and elsewhere. While we recognize the
urgency of environmental issues and human rights, we
also express concern over the manner in which this
new proposed right has emerged in the United Nations
system. That process should not be seen as a substitute
for the development of international law. If a new
right to a clean. healthy and sustainable environment
is to be recognized under international human rights
law in the future, it would need to go through a treaty
negotiation process so that States can develop a common
understanding. We see this process as an anomaly and
advocate that, in future, new human rights should not
come to the General Assembly in this way. However, we
stand ready to work with others to do further work on
the scope of the proposed new right and the obligations
that it might entail to develop a common understanding
and try and reach consensus on an appropriate process
going forward.
New Zealand also wants to take this opportunity to
be clear that the right to a clean, healthy and sustainable
environment does not have a legally binding character.
It has not been agreed in a treaty, and this resolution
does not state a role of customary international law
or provide evidence of a new norm of customary
international law. We are also disappointed that the
important role of human rights defenders is not included
in the resolution. The rights, including the rights to life,
liberty and security of human rights defenders working
in environmental matters, referred to as environmental
human rights defenders, must be respected.
Lastly, we consider that this resolution has the
character of a political declaration and does not create
international human rights law or new legally binding
obligations on States.
14/19

28/07/2022

Ms. Dale (Norway): Today the General Assembly
adopted resolution 76/300, which confirms the
numerous linkages that exist between human rights and
the environment and politically recognizes the right to
a clean, healthy and sustainable environment. It sends a
strong political signal to all States to step up efforts to
protect the environment, reduce emissions and choose
sustainable solutions, and, in doing so, ensuring that
human rights are protected and promoted.
A clean, healthy and sustainable environment
is the foundation of human life, and the protection
of the environment is a necessary precondition
for the enjoyment of human rights for present and
future generations.
This resolution sends a strong and important
message regarding the necessity of a clean, healthy and
sustainable environment for the enjoyment of existing
human rights. It is Norway’s view that the political
recognition through this resolution does not have
any legal effects, and it therefore cannot be used as a
legal argument.
We regret that some important elements did
not make it into the final version of the text. Human
rights defenders, including environmental human
rights defenders, play a crucial role in the promotion
and protection of human rights as they relate to
the enjoyment of a clean, healthy and sustainable
environment. Recognizing the important and legitimate
work that human rights defenders do is highly relevant
in the context of this resolution. We regret that that has
not been reflected in the text, as it was in Human Rights
Council resolution 48/13, on which this resolution is
based. We would also have liked to see a reference to
the future discussions that the right to a clean, healthy
and sustainable environment warrants.
Despite a rushed process and the fact that there are
important elements missing in the text, Norway voted
in favour of this resolution today. It is important that
we stand together to protect and promote human rights,
including in our efforts to combat climate change and
environmental degradation, which amplify conflicts
and force people all over the world into increasingly
vulnerable situations.
Mr. Heartney (United States of America): The
United States has long recognized the relationship
between human rights and environmental protection
and advancing environmental justice. We have a history
of promoting environmental protection, and we believe
22-44219

28/07/2022

that every person should live in a healthy environment.
We also believe that a healthy environment supports
the well-being and dignity of people around the world
and the full enjoyment of all human rights. We support
resolution 76/300, as it sets forth those moral and
political aspirations. We regret the loss of important
human rights language throughout the process,
including non-controversial accepted language on
human rights defenders.
Together, we must protect the environment, address
the climate crisis, stop attacks on environmental
defenders around the world and promote accountability
for human rights violations and abuses affecting those
defenders. That is a priority for the United States, as
well as many of our partners around the globe, and that
led us to vote in favour of the resolution.
The United States supports the development of the
right to a clean, healthy and sustainable environment
in a manner that is consistent with international human
rights law. It is important to establish a common
understanding of the right so that States have clarity
as to its scope, as there is not yet a shared view of the
basis of the right or of its scope. The United States
looks forward to working with other States to exchange
views in order to further develop understanding in
that regard.
However, the right to a clean, healthy and sustainable
environment has not yet been established as a matter
of customary international law; treaty law does not
provide for such a right; and there is no legal relationship
between such a right and existing international law. In
voting in favour of the resolution, the United States
does not recognize any change in the current state of
conventional or customary international law.
We note our concerns over paragraph 3 of the
resolution, which creates confusion about such
a right by conflating the contents of multilateral
environmental agreements with human rights law and
mischaracterizing aspects of the implementation of
multilateral environmental agreements.
We hope that this resolution will galvanize further
action to protect the environment and the human rights of
all individuals affected by environmental degradation.
The United States will provide a more fulsome
explanation of vote, to be published on the website of the
Permanent Mission of the United States to the United

A/76/PV.97

Nations and in The Digest of United States Practice in
International Law.
Mr. Sharma (India): India attaches great
importance to the promotion and protection of human
rights, including in the field of the environment.
Environmental protection is a part of our cultural
values. Our traditions have long stressed the importance
of living in harmony with nature.
At the twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, held in Glasgow in 2021, the Prime
Minister of India, Shri Narendra Modi, proposed the
one-word LIFE movement — a mass movement that
influences lifestyle for the environment, promoting the
mindful and deliberate utilization of resources, instead
of mindless and destructive consumption.
India is making rapid strides towards inclusive and
overall sustainable development. That is being done both
at the national level and globally through international
partnerships. India has worked with partners on
significant global initiatives for environmental
protection, which include a focus on One Sun, One
World, One Grid, the International Solar Alliance, the
Coalition for Disaster-Resilient Infrastructure and the
Leadership Group for Industry Transition.
Throughout the negotiations on resolution 76/300,
just adopted, we engaged actively and constructively
with the aim of reaching a consensual outcome. While
we appreciate the efforts and constructive approach
of the core group — Costa Rica, Maldives, Morocco,
Slovenia and Switzerland — we believe that more time
for discussions could have helped in bridging differences
and addressing the concerns of various delegations. We
expressed our concerns over the resolution, in terms of
both procedure and substance.
We believe that General Assembly resolutions do
not, in themselves, create binding obligations. It is only
through conventions and treaties that States parties
commit to a new human right and undertake appropriate
obligations for the realization of such a right.
Furthermore, there is no clear understanding and
agreed definition of the terms “clean”, “healthy” and
“sustainable”. Currently, those terms remain open
to subjective interpretation, thereby diluting the
very objective of the recognition proclaimed in the
present resolution.

22-4421915/19

A/76/PV.97

We regret that the text fails to contain a clear reference
to the foundational principle of equity in international
environmental law. We also remain concerned that,
even after the strong support by many Member States
for the inclusion of the eighth preambular paragraph
of Human Rights Council resolution 48/13, which
forms the basis of the current resolution, the decision
was otherwise. It is an important paragraph, which
reaffirms the importance of international cooperation
on the basis of mutual respect, in full compliance with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and with full respect for the sovereignty of
States, while taking into account national priorities.
We expressed our concerns clearly and repeatedly
and made constructive proposals to achieve common
ground. We sincerely believe that some of those
proposals could have helped in bringing us closer to
a consensus.
India stands ready to support any effort for a better
environment and to further international cooperation
for environmental protection. In that context, India
voted in favour of this resolution. However, given that
our concerns remain outstanding, we are therefore
constrained to dissociate ourselves from paragraph 1
of the resolution.
Mr. Gunaratna (Sri Lanka): Sri Lanka voted in
favour of resolution 76/300, entitled “The human right
to a clean, healthy and sustainable environment”. Sri
Lanka agrees with the positive sentiment underlying
the need to ensure a clean, healthy and sustainable
environment in order to promote human well-being and
the full enjoyment of human rights. The need to combat
climate change and its resultant negative effects, such
as desertification, biodiversity loss and the degradation
of the environment, can also be ensured through the
creation of a sustainable environment. It is a goal that
the whole of humankind endeavours to achieve.
However, the obligation of the State to act in that
regard is not a justiciable right, as decreed by our
Constitution, but a directive principle of State policy,
as prescribed in chapter VI, article 27, paragraph 14,
which decrees that the State shall protect, preserve
and improve the environment for the benefit of the
community. That guiding principle is given life
through the constitutional guarantee of the equal
protection of the law, as enshrined in chapter III, article
12, paragraph 1, of the Constitution of the Republic,
the National Environmental Acts and other statutory
16/19

28/07/2022

enactments in force for the protection and sustenance of
the environment. Successive Governments of Sri Lanka
have made that a primary policy goal for institutional
action. Accordingly, Sri Lanka’s obligations in that
regard need to be construed within that legal framework.
Mrs. Abraham (Trinidad and Tobago): I have the
honour to deliver this explanation of vote on resolution
76/300, entitled “The human right to a clean, healthy and
sustainable environment”. My delegation expresses its
deep appreciation to the main co-sponsors — Costa Rica,
Maldives, Morocco, Slovenia and Switzerland — for
bringing this very important resolution to the General
Assembly for consideration. We would also like to
congratulate the facilitators on their diligence and
commitment throughout this process.
At the outset, Trinidad and Tobago recognizes
the environment as a common thread, which supports
all our sectors that contribute to social and economic
development, and which must therefore be managed for
the benefit of present and future generations. As such,
our national development strategy Vision 2030 enshrines
a healthy and clean environment as a critical pillar of
our country’s development focus. The protection and
wise use of our environment and economic growth are
complementary, and every effort is made to ensure
that Trinidad and Tobago’s sustainable socioeconomic
potential is realized without jeopardizing the integrity,
biodiversity or productivity of our environment.
For that reason, my delegation constructively
engaged throughout the informal consultations with a
view to reaching a consensual text that was balanced
and reflected the views and positions of all Member
States, in particular those that are not members of the
Human Rights Council. However, we are disappointed
that, during the consultative process, our proposal
to include this very same reference to sovereignty,
as contained in the eighth preambular paragraph of
Human Rights Council resolution 48/13, was not
accommodated despite there being a request for its
inclusion by a number of Member States and the
absence of a clear rationale by the main proponents for
its exclusion in the zero draft and the final text. While
we recognize and appreciate the attempts by the main
proponents to engage on, and accommodate, some of
the concerns raised by Member States, Trinidad and
Tobago maintains that the inclusion of such language
would have reflected one of the key pillars of the
Charter of the United Nations, as the principle of
sovereignty lies at the very heart of our international
22-44219

28/07/2022

community, as well as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, which recognizes national ownership as
critical to leaving no one behind.
Notwithstanding that, Trinidad and Tobago’s
position on the resolution as a whole is guided
by shared responsibility, as a member of the
international community, to take action to build a
sustainable society that engenders an attitude of
environmental consciousness to tackle our collective
environmental challenges.
For that reason, Trinidad and Tobago voted in
favour of the resolution, recognizing that its overarching
purpose reflects an endorsement of the decision of the
Human Rights Council, as contained in this resolution,
by the General Assembly.
Mr. Ben Naftaly (Israel): Israel thanks the core
group for bringing resolution 76/300 to the General
Assembly and for facilitating the negotiations.
Israel is deeply committed to ensuring a clean,
healthy and sustainable environment for all and is
proud to be at the forefront of advancing such efforts,
from the preservation of biodiversity to the protection
and rehabilitation of air, land and water resources. We
joined a number of declarations and pledges on the
environment, including the World Leaders Summit
statement, the High Ambition Coalition for Nature
and People, the Global Ocean’s Alliance and the
Leaders’ Pledge for Nature. Other pledges that we
joined specifically address forests, regional ecosystem
conservation and the transition to renewable energy.
At the same time, Israel wishes to make it clear that
its support for this resolution is without prejudice to its
position as to the legal status, as a matter of international
law, of the right referred to in the resolution, which
must be based on well-established criteria for the
identification and development of legal norms in the
international system.
My Government and the Israeli public are acutely
aware of the daunting challenges that we all face. Israel
voted in favour of the resolution, and we will continue
to push forward national and global agendas to mitigate
and reverse the many challenges to our environment.
We will do so with urgency, and we will help to
ensure that all people have access to the benefits of
the environment.
Mr. Shahin (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of Egypt extends its thanks to the core group

A/76/PV.97

that submitted draft resolution A/76/L.75 (resolution
76/300), comprising Morocco, Switzerland, Slovenia,
Costa Rica and Maldives, for their tireless efforts
during the consultation process and for leading the
process in an objective and transparent manner.
Egypt voted in favour of the resolution on the
understanding that it does not create new rights or
subcategories of rights that are not recognized, other
than those contained in existing international and
regional human rights conventions, in line with Egypt’s
obligations under the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the Convention
on the Rights of the Child and the African Charter on
Human and Peoples’ Rights.
Egypt’s vote in favour of the resolution is based on
being keen to address issues with regard to maintaining
a clean, healthy and sustainable environment, in all its
dimensions, and accord it due attention given that all
universal human rights are indivisible, interrelated and
mutually reinforcing.
Ms. Skoczek (Poland): While aligning itself
with the statement of the European Union, Poland
would like to state its position regarding resolution
76/300, on the human right to a clean, healthy and
sustainable environment.
Poland recognizes that living in a clean, healthy
and sustainable environment has a direct and positive
impact on the full enjoyment of human rights, such
as the right to life and the right to health. Protecting
human rights and the environment can certainly work
in synergy, leading to the reinforcement of each other.
Poland does not question the fact that certain aspects
of environmental matters are already given protection
under international law.
However, we have continuously recalled that the
right to the environment as a human right does not find
its recognition in any key human rights instruments,
such as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights. Resolutions such as that adopted
today, and Human Rights Council resolution 48/13,
adopted on 8 October 2021, do not introduce any
new legally binding obligations. Poland will consider
both resolutions a strong political declaration and the
aspiration of the international community to ensure
a safe environment for every person. The potential
legal implications, as well as the material scope, of
this new right envisaged in the resolution remain to be

22-4421917/19

A/76/PV.97

determined. We have already voiced our position on
such an initiative in Geneva. We are confirming it now.
Despite the questions and concerns I mentioned,
given that the protection and promotion of human rights,
including in the environmental sphere, is a priority
issue that our country strongly supports, Poland voted
in favour of the resolution.
Ms. Xu Daizhu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Humankind and nature are a community of shared
future. A good environment contributes to people’s
welfare in an inclusive manner. China attaches great
importance to ecological and environmental protection
and upholds the important principle that clear water
and green mountains are our gold mountains. China
firmly promotes green and low-carbon development
and integrates carbon peaking and carbon neutrality
into the overall economic and social development and
ecological civilization building, thereby establishing
the world’s largest clean energy system.
In October 2021, the first phase of the fifteenth
session of the Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in
Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought
and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa, was
successfully held Kunming, China. It concluded
with the Kunming Declaration and announced the
establishment of the Kunming Biodiversity Fund,
among other things, serving as a strong boost to global
biodiversity governance.
China promulgated its national human rightsaction
plan 2021-2025, which includes a special section
on environmental rights setting out specific targets
on pollution prevention and control; the disclosure
of ecological environmental information; public
participation in environmental decision-making; public
interest environmental litigation and eco-environmental
damage compensation; ecological protection and
restoration of national land space and addressing
climate change, among other areas.
China actively participated in the consultations
on resolution 76/300. We recognize the efforts made
by the sponsors — Costa Rica, Maldives, Morocco,
Slovenia and Switzerland — to promote the discussion
of environmental issues and their interrelationship
with the promotion and protection of human rights
in the General Assembly. We thank the sponsors for
organizing numerous consultations and communicating
with Member States on specific texts.
18/19

28/07/2022

At the same time, the results of the voting on
today’s resolution, once again shows that there is no
agreement on the right to the environment, in particular
with regard to the definition and scope of the right to
the environment and its relationship with other human
rights. The parties still need more time to engage in
patient and in-depth dialogue and consultation to
gradually enhance understanding, build consensus and
prevent undue haste. In the area of global environmental
governance, adherence to the principle of common but
differentiated responsibilities is a concern shared by
China and the majority of developing countries. China
is deeply concerned that the principle is not included in
the text of resolution 76/300.
For the reasons just mentioned, China abstained in
the voting on the resolution. We look forward to better
communicating with all parties on the issue of the
right to a healthy environment in order to garner the
broadest possible consensus, based on fully addressing
the legitimate concerns of all parties. China will also
continue to pursue with all parties the harmonious
coexistence of humankind with nature and a more
robust, greener and healthier global development.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote after the voting.
We will now hear from those delegations that wish
to make statements after the adoption of the resolution.
I give the floor to the representative of the European
Union, in its capacity as observer.
Mr. Camelli (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
The European Union welcomes the adoption of this
important resolution (resolution 76/300) on the human
right to a clean, healthy and sustainable environment,
which is important for the enjoyment of all human
rights. We would like to thank the core group for its
significant initiative.
It is by now an established fact that climate change
and biodiversity loss have substantial negative effects
on the effective and full enjoyment of human rights,
disproportionately affecting women and girls in diverse
situations and conditions and those who are already in
vulnerable situations, including indigenous people,
children, older persons and persons with disabilities.
22-44219

28/07/2022

A/76/PV.97

Some form of the right to a clean, healthy and
sustainable environment is already enshrined in
numerous national and regional instruments. However,
more needs to be done to fully grasp the magnitude of
those challenges and to translate that right into policies
and actions that have human rights at their centre. The
resolution just adopted lays the ground for such action.

Last year, Lukashenko’s regime engineered a
migration crisis on the European Union’s external
border, pushed out several thousand migrants and left
them stranded. That politically motivated crisis is the
sole reason for the enhanced border protection along
the Polish border, which is at the same time the external
border of the European Union.

We also underline the important role of human
rights defenders who work on environmental matters
and are referred to as “environmental human rights
defenders”, and we would have liked to have seen the
term included in the text.

The environmental situation in border areas is
being closely monitored by Polish environmental
services. The fence currently being built on the Polish
side of the border includes more than 20 large-animal
crossings, as well as many smaller roads. Border rivers,
waterways and marshes will not be fenced.

The EU is committed to pursuing its role as a global
leader in such efforts. We are substantially reducing our
carbon emissions, and we remain the world’s largest
provider of climate financing.
For the reasons just mentioned, the members of the
European Union voted in favour of resolution 76/300.
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in exercise of the right of reply, may I remind
members that statements in the exercise of the right of
reply are limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention
and five minutes for the second intervention and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Skoczek (Poland): In response to the
unwarranted claims concerning the environmental
situation on the Polish-Belarussian border made by the
representative of Belarus, let me state the facts.
Let us be clear as to who the culprit is in that
situation, which required the declaration of a state of
emergency in the areas along the Polish border and the
subsequent construction of the fence in question.

On other critical wildlife roads, a different border
protection system will be used. The fence will be subject
to continuous electronic monitoring by Poland, aimed
at recording the behaviour of animals in order to allow,
if necessary, for increasing the number of crossings.
Mrs. Mozgovaya (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
I would like to emphasize that the only regime that
exists is Belarus is a visa-free travel regime. I request
the representative of Poland to use respectful language
when addressing the General Assembly. Poland’s
actions on the border between Belarus and Poland are
completely unjustified. There have been no migrants on
that border for a long time.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 74?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at noon.

22-4421919/19
