A /75/PV.40

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

40th plenary meeting

Thursday, 10 December 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 39
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General (A/75/378)
Draft resolution (A/75/L.45)
The President: For 40 years, the General Assembly
has addressed the situation in Afghanistan, focusing
on peace, stability, good governance, human rights
and development. This year there has been welcome
progress on many fronts in Afghanistan’s path towards
peace and political reconciliation.
First, I welcome the growing optimism towards a
negotiated settlement. I am encouraged by the common
desire of the parties towards a peaceful and negotiated
settlement in Afghanistan.
Secondly, peace and security in Afghanistan
are inextricably linked to development. They are
interdependent. I am therefore very pleased to note
the renewed interest of the international community
and the significant support for long-term assistance
to Afghanistan expressed at the 2020 Afghanistan
Conference, co-hosted by the Governments of
Afghanistan and Finland and the United Nations
in Geneva.
Thirdly, I strongly welcome the ongoing efforts of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
to implement its mandated tasks. The United Nations
must remain committed to promoting sustainable peace

and stability and boldly reforming its role in ushering in
a new era in Afghanistan.
Fourthly, engaging women and other vulnerable
groups in the peace efforts is a sine qua non for
sustainable peace and inclusive development. I therefore
welcome the increased participation of women across
many sectors of Government and the private sector,
as well as the creation of a technical committee to
review the law of 2009 on the elimination of violence
against women.
The benefits of peace should be directed towards
the people of Afghanistan, who have been waiting for a
genuine opportunity for peace and prosperity for nearly
40 years. We cannot disappoint them again. Violence,
the threat of terrorism, the unstable security situation
and the increasing number of civilian casualties
might derail the Afghan-led Afghan-owned peace and
reconciliation negotiations, which remain the only path
to enduring peace and stability.
The additional challenges arising from the
coronavirus disease pandemic and climate change also
threaten the progress achieved in Afghanistan. We must
ensure that we factor in those additional risks so that
they do not undermine the progress already made.
I encourage the Assembly to come together and push
to consolidate the opportunity for peace and development
that has been presented to support Afghanistan.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Germany to introduce draft resolution A/74/L.45.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-35149 (E)

*2035149*

A/75/PV.40

Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Germany aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered by the observer of
the European Union later in today’s debate.
Of all the special years for Afghanistan declared
in the past two decades, 2020 was indeed singular.
Most important, it saw the start of the Afghanistan
peace negotiations on 12 September. For the first time,
representatives of the Republic of Afghanistan and the
Taliban sat together to discuss ways to end the conflict
and work towards a peaceful future for the country.
That was possible because important milestones
had been reached in the preceding months — the United
States-Taliban agreement and the joint declaration of
the United States and the Republic of Afghanistan
concluded in February; the agreement between the two
pre-eminent political leaders of Afghanistan reached in
May after the conclusion of the presidential elections;
and two ceasefires, albeit short-lived, as well as the
release of thousands of prisoners, which provided proof
of the sincere commitment to peace, particularly on the
part of the Republic of Afghanistan.
A little more than two weeks ago, we witnessed
the Afghanistan Conference 2020 in Geneva,
which once again confirmed that the international
community stands firmly behind the Islamic Republic
of Afghanistan and its ongoing quest to achieve selfreliance. Donors pledged more than $13 billion in
foreign aid and stabilization.
Finally, as this extraordinary year draws to an
end, we witnessed the agreement on rules of procedure
between the Republic of Afghanistan’s negotiating
team and the Taliban on 2 December and the first
session of the High Council for National Reconciliation
three days later. All that is happening against the
backdrop of the coronavirus disease pandemic, which
is having a devastating impact in Afghanistan and
creating profound challenges for its health system and
socioeconomic and humanitarian situation. It is also
happening against the backdrop of a tense security
situation that has seen a severe spike in violence in the fall
and several high-profile attacks in the last few months.
An immediate, permanent and comprehensive ceasefire
is an indispensable necessity for the peace negotiations
to proceed and eventually succeed.
Draft resolution A/75/L.45, entitled “The situation
in Afghanistan”, has taken all those issues on board,
and indeed many more, including democracy, the rule
of law, good governance, counter-narcotics, social and
2/22

10/12/2020

economic development, refugees, regional cooperation
and human rights. I would like to underline — as today
is International Human Rights Day — that human
rights play a very important role in the draft resolution.
As its long-standing facilitator, Germany has
thoroughly updated and streamlined the draft
resolution. We have not done so alone but together with
the entire plenary, giving every country a voice while
listening carefully to the concerns of the countries of
the region, international donors, troop contributors
and those closely supporting the peace process. Most
important, we have listened to what the Republic of
Afghanistan itself has to say about the situation in
Afghanistan. After all, we unanimously support an
inclusive, Afghan-led and Afghan-owned process.
Negotiations this year were rather unusual, as
was the case for many draft resolutions considered
in 2020. We opted for a full virtual experience, with
representatives working from their living rooms and
writing in the chat box what they would normally
have written on a piece of paper to pass to the Chair.
That made consultations more efficient but also less
personal. We all miss the cookies and coffee breaks.
We promise to go back to German House as soon as the
pandemic is behind us.
While the draft resolution will find the support
of many delegations — to date there are more than 60
co-sponsors, including 27 original co-sponsors — it will
not please everyone, mainly owing to our streamlining
efforts. The draft resolution had grown in length over
the years, to reach a full 16 pages last year, and it had
become impossible to go through the entire document
in a single reading. As facilitator, we were compelled
to act and cut out some of the long enumerations of
organizations, projects and ministerial meetings, whose
only merit was pleasing some of us.
For Afghanistan, it is important to look towards the
future. That is why our focus in the draft resolution has
moved away from dwelling on past achievements. It is
also why we made the long-announced and carefully
weighed decision to turn the draft resolution into a
biennial document. That has become the norm for many
resolutions and will give us some time to think long
and hard about what we collectively would like to see
in the draft resolution. It is also an opportunity to craft
a more strategic, forward-looking document. We need
to be bold, especially in the remaining four years of
Afghanistan’s transformation decade. Now is the time.
20-35149

10/12/2020

Of course, we would like to go back to adoption
by consensus; however, we are not ready to do so at
any price. I ask members to vote in favour of the draft
resolution. Despite what some delegations will say later
on, it is a constructive and forward-looking draft. Our
experts worked hard on it, often finding a compromise
only after hours of debate. I ask that members reward
those unrelenting efforts by lending their support to
the draft resolution. It remains, first and foremost, an
important expression of support for Afghanistan and its
people by the entire membership of the United Nations.
Mrs. Raz (Afghanistan): Let me thank you,
Mr. President, from the bottom of my heart for the
statement and the summary you delivered earlier, on
behalf of what is a priority for Afghanistan and the
people of Afghanistan.
I also would like to thank the Permanent Mission of
Germany for introducing draft resolution A/75/L.45 and
acting as facilitator during the negotiations of the final
text. Ambassador Christoph Heusgen and his team, led
by Counsellor Friedrich Schroeder, have accomplished
a commendable task in leading the conversation at a
time when in-person meetings and negotiations are still
difficult. I am sure that Mr. Schroeder has more grey
hair after managing the negotiations.
We thank Germany for its commitment to lead the
General Assembly in support of the Afghan people in
our efforts to achieve a peaceful, prosperous, stable
and self-reliant Afghanistan. I would like to thank the
representatives of all other Member States, as well as
our neighbours, the region and our allies and friends,
who showed flexibility, looked for compromises and
continuously supported the desire and wishes of the
Afghan people for a peaceful and stable Afghanistan.
I would particularly like to extend my deepest
appreciation to the more than 60 countries that have
co-sponsored today’s important draft resolution. I
would like to thank them all for standing with us today.
The draft resolution we will adopt reflects
Afghanistan’s priority, progress, challenges, mutual
commitments and joint efforts for a prosperous
and stable country. In fact, it echoes the hopes and
longings of the Afghan people, unanimously supported
and shared by all Member States, for security and
a long-awaited peace. It calls for a permanent and
comprehensive ceasefire to end the conflict in
Afghanistan. It calls for expanding the gains of the past
two decades and places at the centre the sovereignty,

A/75/PV.40

independence, territorial integrity and national unity of
a democratic Afghanistan.
The draft resolution summarizes the shared
achievement of the past 19 years, attained through
our international and regional partners’ support and
investment in the new Afghanistan. It commends the
efforts and progress of my nation and its political,
economic, governance and social reforms. It recognizes
the urgency and necessities of people in need and the
importance of poverty reduction. It solidifies our
joint approach to deliver services, stimulate economic
growth, create employment opportunities and increase
domestic revenues. It stresses the need to continue to
promote and protect all human rights and fundamental
freedoms, the rule of law and democratic processes,
which are my Government’s top priorities. It welcomes
the promotion of an inclusive, Afghan-led and Afghanowned peace process, including the full and meaningful
participation of women and young people.
The draft resolution also emphasizes the important
role of regional cooperation in promoting long-term
stability, peace, security, prosperity and sustainable
development and welcomes the efforts of international
partners and regional and neighbouring countries. As
often said by His Excellency President Ghani, regional
cooperation and regional connectivity are key and
effective means for us in promoting and bringing about
peace, security, stability and economic development in
Afghanistan and the region.
I would like to highlight in that regard the
vision of Afghanistan to become a regional hub for
connectivity, transport, energy, industry, trade and
digital connectivity. It is important that I highlight the
role and contribution of our neighbours and regional
partners, as well as regional organizations, in realizing
that vision.
Last but not least, the draft resolution also
highlights security threats and conveys a deep concern
about the threat posed to Afghanistan by terrorism in
the region on the part of Al-Qaida, the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other international
terrorist organizations and their affiliates.
While we focus on achieving peace, the Government
of Afghanistan has not lowered its guard or diminished
its efforts to fend off attacks by the Taliban or other
terrorist groups. The serious threats and heinous
acts of terror by ISIL, Al-Qaida and other terrorist
group continue to take the lives of innocent people in

20-351493/22

A/75/PV.40

Afghanistan. Our brave Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces have continued their relentless efforts
to repel any attempt by those groups, which have
shown an apparent lack of humanity and continued
to target the civilian population and infrastructure, in
clear violation of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law.
The draft resolution also recognizes the serious
threat and harm caused by illicit opium cultivation,
production and trafficking to the security, development
and governance of Afghanistan, the region and beyond.
The Afghan Government is a committed partner in the
fight against that serious threat, but in order to fight
it effectively we must first recognize the linkages
between narcotics and terrorism.
The revenue from narcotics is an important source
of support for terrorist groups, which continue to fund
their operations through the cultivation, production and
trafficking of illegal drugs, thereby gravely affecting
Afghanistan. Despite the challenges, the Afghan
Government has continued to respond through its efforts
to target, seize, dismantle and destroy drug stockpiles
and laboratories of illicit drugs. We believe that those
efforts must be supported by comprehensive regional
and international efforts that focus on tackling the
root causes that contribute to illicit trade, eliminating
financial safe havens, reducing consumption and
demand and preventing the trafficking of the chemical
precursors used for the production of those drugs and of
improvised explosives.
The draft resolution welcomes the recent
developments achieved in the peace talks held in Doha.
Not too long ago, the negotiating team of the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan and the Taliban reached a
breakthrough, concluding an agreement on the rules
and procedures for Afghanistan’s peace negotiations.
Discussions are ongoing between the teams on the
agenda of the peace talks. Back in Afghanistan, our
High Council for National Reconciliation held its first
meeting, emphasizing the importance of unity among
political actors for the achievement of a final settlement
for a peaceful Afghanistan.
However, violence continues to be the main hurdle
against peace. It slows down the progress of the process
and, more important, causes immense suffering to
innocent people. The attacks on educational institutions,
including Kabul University, have highlighted that,
without a reduction in violence or a lasting ceasefire,
4/22

10/12/2020

the people of Afghanistan will continue to live under
the same fear that has shaken the country over the past
four decades.
The need for a ceasefire is urgent and at the top
of the Government’s agenda to end all hostilities and
pave the ground for progress in the peace talks. An
immediate ceasefire will contribute to lasting peace,
which the Government is committed to delivering, in
line with the mandate of the people as expressed in last
year’s National Consultative Peace Jirga. In addition, the
pledging conference held recently in Geneva renewed
the partnership between the international community
and the people and the Government of Afghanistan.
The conference communiqué, which was supported
by 66 countries and 32 international organizations,
reflects the core priorities of the Afghan Government
and people.
We entered the conference conscious of the
need to establish higher standards on accountability,
transparency and efficiency, which were reflected in
the new Afghanistan Partnership Framework. We thank
the General Assembly for reasserting in today’s draft
resolution the values and objectives affirmed in Geneva.
Allow me to conclude by once again thanking all
delegations that participated in negotiations on the
draft resolution and all delegations in the Hall for
their continued support. As I said before, the draft
resolution is a manifestation of all Member States’
support for Afghanistan’s priorities and their solidarity
with us at this critical juncture. It provides us with yet
another opportunity to echo the strong message that all
members can and will stand firmly in unity with the
people of Afghanistan in our efforts to build a peaceful,
prosperous and self-resilient country. We look forward
to the support of the Assembly today.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Gonzato (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States. The candidate countries Turkey,
the Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate BosniaHerzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova and Georgia, together with Liechtenstein,
align themselves with this statement.
20-35149

10/12/2020

I would like to thank the Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan, Ambassador Adela Raz, for her
statement. I would also like to thank all the delegations
that participated in the consultations on draft resolution
A/75/L.45, in particular Ambassador Heusgen and his
team for facilitating the negotiations.
Yesterday we all received a note verbale from the
Afghan Mission asking for our support for the draft
resolution. We hope that message from the country
directly concerned was well received by all Member
States and that the draft resolution will be adopted by
consensus today.
Afghanistan is at an important juncture. There
is a historic opportunity for peace and stability,
which all Afghans long for after decades of immense
human suffering. The start of intra-Afghan talks on
12 December was an encouraging step towards genuine
reconciliation and we, the international community,
must support it. As Ambassador Raz stated, only an
Afghan-owned and Afghan-led peace process can lead
to durable peace.
At the donors conference held on 23 and
24 November, the EU and its member States renewed
their commitment to accompany Afghanistan on its
path to peace, security, stability democracy, prosperity
and self-reliance. Respect for human rights and the
participation of the whole population, including the
meaningful inclusion of women and persons belonging
to religious and ethnic minorities, are key components
of the political process. The draft resolution reflects
that consensus and provides a strong commitment of
support for the people of Afghanistan.
The EU and its member States strongly condemn the
horrific levels of violence in Afghanistan, which have
continued and in certain respects even increased after
the signing of the Doha Agreement for Bringing Peace
to Afghanistan and the beginning of intra-Afghan direct
negotiations. We call for an immediate, permanent and
comprehensive ceasefire to save the Afghan people
from further meaningless suffering and demonstrate
sincerity in the peace negotiations. An unstable
Afghanistan will continue to threaten and destabilize
its neighbours, the wider region and beyond.
Illicit drug trafficking and terrorism do not
recognize borders. The EU and its member States will
remain vigilant to ensure that terrorist organizations and
violent extremists no longer use Afghan soil to launch
attacks in Afghanistan or elsewhere. Drug trafficking,

A/75/PV.40

human trafficking, smuggling and all related organized
crime networks must be stopped.
The Taliban continues to perpetrate an unacceptable
number of deadly attacks all over the country, including
in urban areas, causing substantial civilian losses.
That brutality runs counter to the Taliban’s stated
commitment to peace and the declared sincerity of its
participation in ongoing peace talks. The legitimacy of
any leadership in Afghanistan starts with respecting
the lives of the Afghan people. Those responsible for
acts of horrific violence against civilians cannot be
Afghanistan’s leaders of tomorrow or partners of the
international community.
In line with Security Council resolution 2513 (2020),
the international community is ready to constructively
support intra-Afghan peace negotiations, but that is
contingent upon the parties’ genuine engagement in the
negotiations themselves. The lifting of sanctions is not
automatic. The EU and its member States, notably the
members of the Security Council, are determined to
ensure that conditions are met before moving forward.
Lasting peace cannot be based on the impunity of
those who have committed gross violations of human
rights. The sustained support of the EU and its member
States for peace and development in Afghanistan is
conditional and depends on progress in the peace
process. Our contribution will be rooted in a transparent,
democratic and principled approach. Gender equality,
the full enjoyment of human rights by all Afghans,
including women, young people and persons belonging
to minorities, as well as victims of war, must be
safeguarded and promoted. We also underline the need
for continued progress on governance and an effective
fight against corruption.
To conclude, I would like to reaffirm that the EU
and its member States will stand with Afghanistan
and its people to help build a sovereign, unified and
democratic Afghanistan. The progress made since 2001
to preserve and promote democratic principles and
human rights and fully implement the human rights
provisions of the Afghan Constitution and international
conventions to which Afghanistan is a State party,
including the rights of women, young people and people
belonging to minorities, must be upheld.
A peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan, free of
terrorism and drug trafficking, is essential not only
for its own stability and development but also for that
of the entire region and beyond. A negotiated political

20-351495/22

A/75/PV.40

settlement leading to peace must result from an
inclusive peace process.
We believe that the draft resolution reflects our
collective political support for promoting an inclusive,
Afghan-owned and Afghan-led peace process that
builds on the political and social achievements of the
past 19 years. Our mandate from European citizens is
to contribute to the improvement of the lives of Afghan
citizens, and our actions are guided by that mandate.
The future of Afghanistan must not be compromised,
and the interests of its people, in all their diversity,
must be respected.
Mrs. Kocyigit Grba (Turkey): Turkey is pleased to
co-sponsor draft resolution A/75/L.45, on the situation
in Afghanistan. We welcome the successful completion
of the negotiations, led by Germany, and we thank all
delegations that exerted genuine efforts to that end. We
deem the draft resolution to be very important, as it
not only highlights the achievements to date but also
guides the future efforts and responsibilities of both
Afghanistan and the international community.
Afghanistan continues its journey of political,
security and economic transformation. The country
is going through a crucial phase that should lead to a
lasting and comprehensive peace agreement by putting
an end to the persistent bloodshed, safeguarding the
human rights of all Afghans, including women and
children, and upholding the rule of law.
The achievements of the past two decades in
Afghanistan need to be consolidated, which requires
a comprehensive approach that addresses the security,
development and political tracks at the same time. We
would all like to see peace in Afghanistan, but peace
gained at the price of those achievements is not peace.
We welcome the recent agreement on the
procedural framework for intra-Afghan negotiations.
That is a heartening sign for the future of the peace
talks. It shows the commitment of the negotiating
parties to continue the peace talks and their ability to
find common ground. We hope that that development
will pave the way for substantive discussions and give
momentum to the peace process.
However, the agreement on the rules of procedure
is only one step. It is essential to sustain the peace talks
patiently, in particular on major issues, such as the
political road map and ceasefire, which are expected to
be more challenging matters.
6/22

10/12/2020

Despite recent progress in the peace talks, violence
in Afghanistan continues at different levels, and we
strongly condemn those terrorist attacks. At this
critical juncture, it has become ever more important
to achieve a comprehensive ceasefire. A significant
reduction in violence is necessary to create a conducive
environment for the talks. The representation of all
Afghans, including women, in the process is key to
reaching lasting peace.
We welcome the holding of the first meeting of the
High Council for National Reconciliation and hope that
it will contribute to further advancing the peace process.
We also welcome the finalization of the Cabinet by the
Parliament. It is our hope that Afghan political leaders
will work in harmony and in an inclusive manner for
the well-being of the Afghan people.
Sound economic development is vital to the
peace efforts. We are heartened by the renewal of
international support for Afghanistan’s development
at the 2020 Geneva Conference. Despite the economic
difficulties faced globally due to the coronavirus disease
pandemic, the continuation of international assistance
provides hope for a better future. In line with our strong
commitment to Afghanistan, we announced a pledge of
$75 million for the next two years. We will continue to
support efforts to achieve a lasting peace that upholds
the achievements made in the fields of democracy and
human rights, in particular women’s rights.
That also entails efforts through regional
mechanisms, such as the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process
on Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure and
Stable Afghanistan, which enjoys a vast membership
and a large area of expertise and has proved its great
value over the years on critical issues for Afghanistan.
The establishment of the first-ever confidence-building
measure on women’s empowerment at the Istanbul
ministerial conference held last year was the most
recent stunning example. We reiterate our call to utilize
the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process as an umbrella
platform at this critical time, as well as to assist postpeace stabilization efforts.
In conclusion, our support for Afghanistan is crucial
to preserve and expand on the economic, social and
political gains made since 2002. The role assumed by
the United Nations and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan in the process will continue to
be central. Turkey remains committed to standing by
the people of Afghanistan, as it has always done.
20-35149

10/12/2020

Mr. Fifield (Australia): Australia welcomes the
ongoing Afghanistan peace negotiations, and we call
on all parties to embrace this opportunity to create and
implement a sustainable, inclusive political settlement.
We support an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace
process that preserves and builds on the political,
economic and social achievements of the past 19 years.
We call on both parties to conduct the negotiations
in good faith, and we note that difficult compromises
may be needed to see a successful conclusion to
the bloodshed.
We note with great concern the unacceptably
high number of casualties, including among women
and children, as a result of the conflict. We call on
all sides to reduce the level of violence and observe
a comprehensive and permanent ceasefire to create
the environment necessary for the peace negotiations
to progress.
We strongly encourage all parties to include
Afghanistan’s diverse voices, particularly those of
Afghan women, throughout the negotiations. Australia
continues to promote women as key agents of change
and encourages their full, equal and meaningful
participation and leadership in Afghanistan’s peace,
stabilization and decision-making processes for the
benefit of all Afghans.
Australia recognizes the important steps taken
by Afghanistan on its development pathway, and
we join the international community in supporting
its continued progress towards self-reliance. At the
international conference on Afghanistan last week,
the international community demonstrated strong
support for Afghanistan by committing $13.5 billion
in development assistance, which included Australia’s
pledge of up to AUS$200 million from 2021 to 2024.
We should acknowledge the strength of that support
from international partners at a time when domestic and
development budgets are under considerable strain as a
result of the coronavirus disease pandemic. However, that
financial support comes with conditions. A prerequisite
for ongoing international financial assistance will be
Afghanistan’s commitment to democracy, the rule of
law, human rights and gender equality, as embedded
in the Afghan Constitution, along with full respect for
Afghanistan’s international commitments.
We also expect a strong commitment by all
Afghans to fight against corruption, which will ensure
that critical international resources are provided to

A/75/PV.40

those most in need. The prospect of peace offers a
transformational opportunity, and the next few months
will be critical in setting Afghanistan’s course for the
years ahead.
Australia remains committed to helping the Afghan
people chart their course towards peace and seek a more
secure and prosperous future.
Mr. Kakanur (India): I would like to begin
by thanking all delegations that participated in
the consultations on draft resolution A/74/L.45, in
particular our German colleagues, who as usual ably
facilitated the negotiation process. My delegation
attaches great importance to the consensual adoption of
the draft resolution, which is an important opportunity
for the international community to express its solidarity
for peace and stability in Afghanistan.
Afghanistan today is at a critical stage, and it is
vital for the international community to send the
right message to everyone concerned. That was
the overarching principle guiding our approach to
the negotiations.
Nobody seeks peace more than the Afghan people,
upon whom war has been imposed for more than
four decades. All opportunities for bringing about
peace and stability should be welcomed. At the same
time, we are also deeply concerned about the high levels
of violence and condemn it in the strongest terms. It
is important to address the threat to the security and
stability of Afghanistan resulting from the violence
committed by the Taliban and other terrorist groups. The
peace process and violence cannot go hand in hand, and
we call for an immediate and comprehensive ceasefire.
The draft resolution also reiterates the importance
of safeguarding the achievements of the past two
decades, especially the gains made in democracy,
social and political reforms and the rights of women
and minorities.
As contiguous neighbours, India and Afghanistan
share a natural historical relationship. Our strategic
partnership and long-term commitment to the
development of Afghanistan reflects that time-tested
partnership. Since 2001, India has invested more than
$3 billion in development, reconstruction and capacitybuilding in Afghanistan. We recently concluded an
agreement with Afghanistan for building the Shahtoot
Dam, which would provide safe drinking water to
2 million residents of Kabul city. India will also launch

20-351497/22

A/75/PV.40

phase IV of its high-impact community development
projects in Afghanistan, including approximately 150
projects worth $80 million.
To work around the artificial and political
obstacles resulting from the non-permit of full transit
rights to Afghanistan so that its products may reach
India and Indian products may reach Afghanistan, we
operationalized air-freight corridors that have seen
more than 1,000 flights to date.
The draft resolution recognizes that, for peace
and stability to prevail in Afghanistan, the peace
process must not only be inclusive, Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned but also Afghan-controlled. Solutions
must come from the Afghans themselves, and the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Afghanistan
must be respected. There needs to be zero tolerance
for terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. It is
important to ensure that the territory of Afghanistan
is not used by terrorist groups to threaten or attack any
other country. It is also important that the international
community ensure that all States deny terrorist groups
sanctuary, freedom of operations, recruitment and
financial material or political support and that those
who do so are held accountable.
The rights of women, minorities and the vulnerable
need to be protected. Respect for human rights and
democracy needs to be ingrained in any framework that
a future Afghanistan plans to decide for itself.
It is important for Afghanistan to have access to
the high seas for a prosperous future. The international
community should work towards the removal of all
artificial transit barriers imposed on Afghanistan
and ensure that all transit rights are guaranteed to
Afghanistan under bilateral and multilateral transit
agreements, without any hindrance. We are glad to note
that the draft resolution calls upon States to do so.

10/12/2020

China welcomes the agreement reached by the
two parties a few days ago on the rules of procedure
for negotiations. We hope that the two parties will
consolidate that positive momentum and continue to
demonstrate their constructive posture, meet each other
halfway and strive for a swift and effective solution to
the political settlement of the situation in Afghanistan.
The international community should fully respect
the will of the Afghan people, create a favourable
environment for smooth negotiations and ensure an
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned process of negotiations.
No outside forces should impose solutions or take the
opportunity to manipulate the negotiations process
for their own selfish interests. Foreign troops should
be withdrawn from Afghanistan in an orderly and
responsible manner. Security vacuums should be
avoided so as not to harm the interests of Afghanistan
and the countries of the region. Criminal acts committed
by foreign troops in Afghanistan should be thoroughly
investigated and perpetrators brought to justice.
As a close neighbour and sincere friend of
Afghanistan, China has been consistent in supporting
the Afghan reconciliation process through the
Afghanistan Contact Group of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the China-AfghanistanPakistan Trilateral Foreign Ministers’ Dialogue. China
has actively supported the peace talks and played a
constructive role in helping the Afghan people realize
inclusive peace and reconciliation. As always, China
will continue to support, mediate and facilitate the
Afghan peace and reconciliation process.

Given our commitments to Afghanistan, we are
proud to co-sponsor the draft resolution, as we have
done in the past. We urge the General Assembly
today to provide its full support to the Government of
Afghanistan and the draft resolution.

At present, Afghanistan continues to experience
frequent violent attacks, and its security situation
is worrisome. The international community should
provide training, funding and technical support for
capacity-building in the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces and help Afghanistan respond
effectively to terrorism, cross-border crimes, drug
smuggling and other threats. Through bilateral and
multilateral channels, China has continued to assist
Afghanistan in strengthening its counter-terrorism
capacity-building, while supporting its fight against
terrorism and efforts to maintain national security.

Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The situation in Afghanistan is now at a critical stage.
This past September saw the start of the first set of
intra-Afghan negotiations, which has opened a window
of opportunity for ending years of conflict and war.

Development is the master key to solving all
problems. There can be no sustainable development in
Afghanistan without socioeconomic development. At
the Geneva international conference on Afghanistan
that was held earlier this year, President Ghani

8/22

20-35149

10/12/2020

reiterated the significance of regional cooperation and
interconnectivity for the development of Afghanistan.
The international community should support
Afghanistan’s participation in regional cooperation
and interconnectivity so as to take full advantage of
Afghanistan’s geographic location in order to swiftly
alleviate poverty and achieve stability and prosperity.
China will follow the principles of consultation,
cooperation and shared benefits, continue to advance
the Belt and Road Initiative with Afghanistan and make
our contribution to regional economic integration and
the common development of all countries.
The coronavirus disease pandemic presents a huge
challenge for Afghanistan. The international community
should help Afghanistan to contain the pandemic
as soon as possible and advance its socioeconomic
recovery. China has provided Afghanistan with several
batches of anti-pandemic aid and dispatched medical
experts to Afghanistan. China will continue to do what
it can to help Afghanistan combat the pandemic and
promote its socioeconomic development.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): We thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today’s meeting
to discuss the situation in the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan, an important issue for the international
community given the current critical stage of its
transition to peace, stability and prosperity. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his report (A/75/378).
The Afghan people have made great strides towards
achieving their aspiration to build State institutions to
establish security and progress. Afghans require the
support of the international community to safeguard
those gains in order to complete the transition process
and overcome numerous challenges to security,
sustainable development and the economy.
We commend the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan for its pivotal role in that regard. We also
value the important role of Afghanistan’s neighbouring
and friendly States in coordinating and cooperating
with Afghanistan, while providing humanitarian and
development support and technical expertise.
With regard to draft resolution A/75/L.45, we
thank the delegation of Germany for playing a leading
role once again in preparing the draft resolution and
managing the negotiations. We also thank the Afghan
delegation and all other delegations for their efforts and
participation in the consultations.

A/75/PV.40

As for the content of the draft resolution, one
of its most notable elements is its reference to the
peace process. It welcomes the efforts of the Afghan
parties to facilitate the peace talks sponsored by the
State of Qatar, which will contribute to encouraging
the conclusion of the extremely important peace
process. As facilitators of talks between the Afghan
Government and the Taliban, we believe that the two
parties approach the peace process with a high level of
wisdom and responsibility with a view to ending the
conflict and achieving lasting peace.
We are proud that the State of Qatar has
participated in international efforts to help our brothers
in Afghanistan achieve the desired peace by playing
the role of mediator with the support of friendly
countries, in particular the United States, the pivotal
role of which we appreciate in ensuring the success
of the negotiations. Consequently, the State of Qatar
co-sponsored the draft resolution, which reflects our
commitment and the commitment of all Afghan parties
to end the war in Afghanistan and achieve peace and
stability for the benefit of the Afghan people.
The State of Qatar has remained committed to
restoring security, peace and prosperity in Afghanistan,
in line with our established foreign policy, which
attaches importance to promoting the settlement of
conflicts through peaceful means and mediation. We
have made important achievements through mediation,
in cooperation with our international partners.
Last September, the State of Qatar hosted the Afghan
peace negotiations, which constituted an important
step towards achieving the desired comprehensive
political settlement in Afghanistan, ending violence
and humanitarian suffering and attaining sustainable
stability and prosperity. That was the result of continued
intense efforts through the mediation undertaken most
recently by the State of Qatar in order to bring the
parties to the table for dialogue, including by the hosting
in Doha of the Afghan dialogue conference in July of
last year, in which representatives of Afghan political
parties, civil society and Afghan women participated.
The launch of the Afghan peace negotiations
was based on the important achievement of a peace
agreement between the United States and the Taliban
signed in Doha on 29 February. The agreement was the
culmination of many rounds of negotiations between
the two parties in Doha and constituted an important
step towards ending the war and paving the way for

20-351499/22

A/75/PV.40

intra-Afghan negotiations. It also represented an
additional incentive for stepping up mediation efforts.
Despite the difficulties related to coronavirus
disease-related restrictions, the State of Qatar
continued its mediation to encourage dialogue between
the Afghan parties and was able, last summer, to reach
a ceasefire during the Al-Fitr and Al-Adha holidays.
There was also a successful exchange of prisoners
between the Afghan Government and the Taliban. That
process — it should be emphasized — will be sustained
only if it is inclusive and based on the broad support
and participation of all segments of Afghan society,
including women, girls, young people and minorities.
In conclusion, the State of Qatar will spare no effort
in cooperating with our international partners to ensure
the success of the peace talks and the achievement
of the desired goals. We will continue our solidarity
with, and support for, the Afghan people in order to
realize their aspirations for establishing peace, stability
and prosperity.
Mr. Al Hassan (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): On
behalf of the Government of Oman, it is my honour to
deliver this statement to the General Assembly at its
seventy-fifth session on agenda item 39, entitled “The
situation in Afghanistan”, including on its implications
for international peace and security.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (A/75/378) and commend his efforts to support
Afghanistan in restoring peace and stability and paving
the way towards well-being and prosperity.
Afghanistan is known for its rich history, the
courage of its people and its contribution to human
civilization in that vital region of the world, which
is a crossroads of peoples, nations and cultures. We
commend the political agreement signed by the President
of Afghanistan and the Chairman of the High Council
for National Reconciliation. We also commend regional
and international efforts to facilitate agreements on the
release of all prisoners and detainees, a permanent and
comprehensive ceasefire and the restoration of security
and stability across Afghanistan.
I would like to welcome recent achievements,
including the joint statement by the United States and
the Afghan Government, the United States-Taliban
agreement and the agreement reached a few days ago
between Afghan parties on the rules of procedure for
negotiations. All those agreements aim to achieve peace
10/22

10/12/2020

and reconciliation in Afghanistan. We hope they will
provide Afghanistan with an opportunity to move into
a new phase, thereby ending several years of conflict
and suffering and helping Afghanistan regain its status
at the international level.
We also commend the efforts made by Afghanistan’s
neighbours, in particular Pakistan, Iran, Uzbekistan
and China, as well as other peace partners, including
India, Qatar, Russia, Indonesia, Germany, Norway,
Finland and the European Union.
We welcome the opening of crossings
between Afghanistan, Pakistan and China and the
interconnectedness of road and transportation networks
between Afghanistan and Iran. As the representative
of China stated earlier, that will greatly contribute to
spurring trade and economic exchange and reducing
the effects of war in Afghanistan, thereby restoring the
status of Afghanistan as a hub for international trade.
Afghanistan deserves our support and solidarity, as
confirmed by the international community at the 2020
Afghanistan Conference held in Geneva in November.
We ask that the Afghan people and its leadership be
granted the opportunity to decide their own future
and achieve self-reliance, with full respect for the
sovereignty, independence and unity of Afghanistan.
We call on the international community and the Security
Council to reconsider the international sanctions
imposed on Afghanistan under resolution 1988 (2011).
There is no doubt that restoring security,
stability and prosperity in Afghanistan will not be an
easy task. However, we have great trust in the people
of Afghanistan and their leadership. We believe that
the Afghan people will be able to prioritize national
interests, come together in support of their leadership,
build their own civilian State and end their suffering.
In conclusion, we call on all partners and donor
countries to support Afghanistan and fulfil their
commitments in order to restore security, stability and
peace in Afghanistan. The Afghan leadership must
assume its responsibilities. The Sultanate of Oman will
continue to support Afghanistan in achieving peace
and stability.
Ms. Janson (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
again welcomes the opportunity to co-sponsor and vote
in favour of draft resolution A/75/L.45, on the situation
in Afghanistan.
20-35149

10/12/2020

First, we would like to thank the delegation of
Germany, which once again demonstrated great skill
in the negotiations over the past few weeks, especially
given the unique circumstances of the pandemic.
We can all agree on the turmoil seen over the past
year in Afghanistan in particular, and also around the
world. The coronavirus disease crisis underscores more
than ever the need for international cooperation and
solidarity in addressing cross-border challenges. At the
same time, 2020 has given us new hope for peace, with
the much-anticipated launch of negotiations between
the Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban. But
there too, cooperation among partner States will be
essential in supporting the peace process. It is therefore
regrettable that the draft resolution cannot be adopted
by consensus for the third year in a row.
(spoke in English)
The draft resolution highlights the efforts of the
Government of Afghanistan to respond to the new
challenges and the significant concessions it made to
reach the negotiating table. We applaud the Government
for seizing that historic opportunity for peace and
stability in Afghanistan. It takes courage to negotiate in
good faith amid the highly concerning levels of violence,
mainly caused by the Taliban. Canada reiterates its
deep concern at the high number of civilian casualties
and targeted killings and calls for all Afghan parties
to achieve a permanent and comprehensive ceasefire to
end the conflict in Afghanistan.
The draft resolution also stresses the crucial
importance of protecting the gains of the past 19 years,
notably in the area of human rights, in particular the
human rights of women, children and minorities. An
agreement that does not bring peace to all members of
society, women and men, all ethnicities and all religions,
will not lead to durable peace. Canada also strongly
supports references to the meaningful participation
of women in the peace process, while also noting the
critical urgency of eradicating all forms of sexual and
gender-based violence.
As highlighted in the draft resolution, we all need
to continue our efforts. Canada was proud to reaffirm
our commitment to Afghanistan at the conference held
in Geneva on 24 November. We are also particularly
appreciative of the outstanding efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan in fostering international consensus. This
is a critical moment for the international community to

A/75/PV.40

work together and reinforce its support for the people
of Afghanistan.
Ms. Juul (Norway): First, allow me to commend
Germany for its leadership on draft resolution
A/75/L.45, which was negotiated against a complex
backdrop and under challenging circumstances.
In the midst of a global pandemic, 2020 is also the
year that sparked a glimmer of hope for an end to more
than four decades of conflict in Afghanistan. Norway
welcomes the announcement by the two Afghan
negotiating sides in Doha on 2 December that they
have adopted rules of procedure and have moved on to
discuss the draft agenda. That represents an important
step in a process that must have at its endpoint a durable
and inclusive peace settlement in Afghanistan. We also
commend Qatar’s key role in hosting and facilitating that
phase of negotiations and that important breakthrough.
Building on the important milestone of 2 December,
we encourage both sides to continue to engage with
each other in good faith with a constructive spirit and
ready to find common ground. We also urge both sides
to give priority to ending the ongoing violence, which is
unacceptable. Norway unreservedly condemns all acts
of terrorism, and we support the Secretary-General’s
appeal for a global humanitarian ceasefire.
Experience teaches us that inclusive peace
agreements are more likely to succeed in the long
run. We see the participation of women in all aspects
of the peace and security process, including at the
negotiating table, as crucial in that respect. The peace
negotiations should be Afghan-owned and Afghanled. The international community stands ready to offer
whatever support the parties may wish. Afghanistan’s
neighbours play a vital role in securing, peace, stability
and prosperity. Integrating Afghanistan into the
regional economy will be a major contribution towards
poverty eradication.
We reiterate our support for a political settlement
that protects the rights of all Afghans, including
women, young people and minorities — a settlement
that sustains and builds on the economic, social,
political and development gains achieved since 2001.
The recent donors conference sent a clear message
from the international community that Afghanistan is
expected to continue strengthening its democracy, rule
of law and respect for fundamental human rights. Efforts
to combat corruption must also be redoubled. Norway

20-3514911/22

A/75/PV.40

will continue to provide humanitarian assistance and
watch closely how the coronavirus disease pandemic
continues to evolve and affect Afghanistan.
The protection of civilians needs to be one of our
main priorities. Particular attention should be given to
the protection of children and young people, including
the protection of schools from attack. It is essential that
humanitarian actors obtain safe and unhindered access
to people who are in need of life-saving assistance and
protection. We must also ensure that efforts to prevent
violent extremism do not undermine human rights or
impede the ability of civil society, including women’s
groups, to operate effectively.
On 1 January, Norway will take a seat as an elected
member of the Security Council. We will do our utmost
to support the work of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan to ensure
that the Council supports Afghanistan’s peace and
development processes.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Pakistan and Afghanistan
are linked by the unbreakable bonds of geography,
history, culture ethnicity and faith. Our destinies are
intertwined. Afghanistan has endured endless conflict
and suffering for the past 40 years. We have shared
their trials and tribulations; we hope to share their joy
when peace returns to Afghanistan.
A peaceful and stable Afghanistan is indispensable
for peace and stability in the region and beyond. Prime
Minister Imran Khan has maintained for years that the
conflict in Afghanistan can be ended, not by military
force but through a political settlement that involves the
full spectrum of Afghanistan’s political landscape. We
are gratified that position now reflects the international
consensus.
To help turn that consensus into reality, and
as a shared responsibility, Pakistan has facilitated
the Afghan peace and reconciliation process. The
commencement of the intra-Afghan negotiations in
Doha on 12 September has rekindled hope for peace
through a comprehensive political settlement. It is
only through an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace
process that a comprehensive, inclusive, negotiated
political settlement can be achieved.
Arriving at that inflection point has been an
accomplishment, and that success belongs first and
foremost to the Afghans. Pakistan has worked with
12/22

10/12/2020

the international community and our Afghan brothers
and sisters on the path to peace, while encouraging
a reduction in violence and urging dialogue and
negotiations. The commencement of intra-Afghan
negotiations is the outcome of our combined efforts.
It is now up to Afghan leaders to seize this historic
opportunity, work together constructively and secure
an inclusive, broad-based and comprehensive political
settlement. It is the Afghans who must be the owners
of their destiny and decide their own future without
outside influence or interference.
Pakistan welcomes the recent agreement on
rules and procedures reached by the Afghan parties
in Doha, which reflects the common resolve of the
Afghan parties to secure a negotiated settlement. It is
a significant step towards the successful outcome of
the intra-Afghan negotiations. Pakistan will continue
to support those negotiations and looks forward to an
inclusive, broad-based and comprehensive political
solution that paves the way for a peaceful, stable and
prosperous Afghanistan.
Afghanistan’s neighbours and the international
community must respect the will of the Afghan people,
as expressed through such Afghan-led and Afghanowned negotiations. Spoilers from within or without
must not be allowed to subvert the success of those
negotiations and prevent a comprehensive political
settlement in Afghanistan; such machinations must
be defeated. We hope that, despite multiple challenges
and possible periodic setbacks, all Afghan parties will
persevere in the pursuit of a political settlement.
Terrorism has had a devastating impact on
Afghanistan and its neighbouring countries. We share
the determination of the international community
not to allow Afghanistan’s territory to be used by
Al-Qaida, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant or
other international terrorist groups and their affiliates
to threaten or attack any country. Pakistan also shares
international concerns about the continuing high
level of violence and escalating civilian casualties in
Afghanistan. We call on all parties to the Afghan conflict
to take urgent steps to reduce the level of violence with
a view to the eventual cessation of hostilities.
Bilateral cooperation between Pakistan and
Afghanistan has intensified. Prime Minister Imran
Khan visited Kabul last month at the invitation of
President Ghani. Earlier, Mr. Abdullah Abdullah visited
Islamabad at the invitation of our Prime Minister.
20-35149

10/12/2020

During the Prime Minister’s visit to Kabul, the leaders
agreed on a shared vision to support peace and stability
in both countries and the wider region.
Time-bound actions have been agreed to further
enhance intelligence cooperation, refugee repatriation
and regional connectivity. Pakistan will continue to
manifest its solidarity with the people of Afghanistan.
While the world was closing borders during the
coronavirus disease crisis, Pakistan opened five border
crossings with Afghanistan. We revised our visa policy
to facilitate visits by our Afghan brethren and donated
medical equipment to help them fight the pandemic.
To foster and sustain peace, Afghanistan will
continue to need generous international economic
support and cooperation. It will also need support for
the return of Afghan refugees in dignity and honour.
We trust that such international support will be
manifested at the upcoming Afghanistan Conference
to be held in Geneva. Pakistan has committed
$1 billion to Afghanistan’s development, half of which
has been utilized for infrastructure and capacitybuilding projects.
At this moment of hope, I assure our Afghan
brethren that Pakistan will always support a
peaceful, stable, united, democratic, prosperous and
sovereign Afghanistan that is at peace with itself and
its neighbours.
Mr. Kinna (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom is pleased to participate in today’s debate on
Afghanistan. Before I start, I would like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Germany for introducing
draft resolution A/75/L.45 and for his team’s able
stewardship of the negotiations.
I would also like to thank Afghanistan and all other
delegations that participated in the negotiations. At an
important moment for Afghanistan, the draft resolution
serves to underscore the international community’s
support for Afghanistan and for a fully inclusive political
settlement that delivers lasting peace and stability. We
are pleased to co-sponsor the draft resolution.
Today I want to speak about three key issues — the
next stage of the Afghan peace negotiations, the urgent
need to reduce violence with a view to establishing a
comprehensive ceasefire and the need for sustained
international support for Afghanistan.
First, the United Kingdom welcomes the recent
agreement between the negotiating teams of the Islamic

A/75/PV.40

Republic of Afghanistan and the Taliban on the rules
and procedures for Afghanistan peace negotiations. We
also welcome the holding of the first meeting of the
leadership committee of the High Council for National
Reconciliation. There is still a long way to go, but those
first steps show that all sides are able to work together
in the pursuit of lasting peace. We urge both negotiating
teams to continue that positive momentum and agree on
an agenda for substantive talks.
Let us be under no illusion. The road to peace
will be immensely challenging, will mean making
difficult decisions and will require compromises on all
sides — but there is no alternative. The current peace
talks represent a historic opportunity to end decades of
debilitating conflict by negotiating towards a political
road map for a peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan
for all Afghans. A meaningful peace must ensure that
terrorists are no longer able to use Afghanistan to attack
Afghans and the international community.
A meaningful peace must also safeguard and
build on the universal human rights of all the Afghan
people — including and particularly women, young
people and minority groups — and it must also uphold
the rule of law. Through our co-chairing of the Group of
Friends of Women in Afghanistan, the United Kingdom
has been a strong advocate for female participation and
leadership at all levels in the peace process. Women’s
involvement is essential to sustainable peace. The
voices of Afghan women on all issues must be heard,
and we will continue to support them.
Secondly, the single-biggest obstacle to peace
is the current level of violence. That must stop.
Violence, especially violence driven by Taliban attacks,
continues to kill and maim. Just today we witnessed the
senseless murder of journalist Malalai Maiwand, which
the United Kingdom has condemned. Such violence
not only claims innocent lives but also frustrates the
peace talks.
The United Kingdom calls for an immediate and
significant reduction of violence and the negotiation of a
permanent and comprehensive ceasefire. Demonstrating
a genuine commitment to peace includes demonstrating
a commitment to putting down arms. Talks will take
time, but the Afghan people should be able to feel the
benefits of peace talks right away.
Finally, while the peace process must be Afghanowned and Afghan-led, it is vital that the international
community remain steadfast in its support for

20-3514913/22

A/75/PV.40

10/12/2020

Afghanistan. Indeed, the impact of the coronavirus
disease pandemic this year makes that all the more vital.

Al-Qaida and other terrorist groups, which harms the
country and the region.

For our part, the United Kingdom remains a
committed supporter of Afghanistan and its people. At
the recent 2020 Afghanistan Conference in Geneva, we
announced up to $207 million of further development
funding for 2021. The United Kingdom has also pledged
up to $93 million for the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces for 2021. That support, together with
Afghanistan’s own pursuit of the commitments made in
the Afghanistan Partnership Framework, will help give
peace the best chance to succeed.

Against that backdrop, allow me to underscore
the following.

Indeed, 2020 has been a year of immense challenge
for Afghanistan, but with the start of peace talks the
prospects for 2021 and beyond can be much brighter.
We urge all parties to seize this historic opportunity
for peace and promise that the United Kingdom will
continue to stand with Afghanistan on its path towards
a more peaceful and prosperous future.
Ms.
Handaruningrum
(Indonesia):
The
momentum for Afghanistan to embark on a new journey
is finally here. The formal negotiations, which began
in Doha in September, hold the promise to realize
the reconciliation and peace for which the people of
Afghanistan have so long yearned.
Indonesia welcomes the progress in the Afghan
peace negotiations and hopes there will be further
progress. It also fully supports an inclusive, Afghan-led
and Afghan-owned peace process. The international
community must do its utmost to assist Afghanistan.
That is why my delegation is here to reaffirm
Indonesia’s long-standing support for Afghanistan and
join in adopting a draft resolution that will further
advance commitments for the great future that we
know awaits it.
Afghans have achieved much over the past two
decades. The development and human rights gains,
including for women and girls, must be preserved
and built upon. Threats need to be tackled effectively.
Among them, increased violence and civilian casualties
cause deep concern and also weaken the trust of
ordinary Afghans in the efficacy of the peace process.
Indonesia is also concerned about terrorist acts
in Afghanistan. Attacks on innocent civilians and
infrastructure are reprehensible and must stop. We
condemn those attacks. We also deplore the continued
presence of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
14/22

First, a comprehensive and lasting peace in
Afghanistan is in the best interests of every country.
Peace and increased regional cooperation will promote
the stability and development of the whole region. It
will also extinguish any space for organized crime
and terrorists. While we all have a vital role as
peace enablers, all parties must continue to engage
constructively and de-escalate towards a permanent
and comprehensive ceasefire. The only overriding
interest must be to bring peace and well-being to the
Afghan people. The relevant actors inside and outside
Afghanistan should fully support the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a global ceasefire.
Secondly, the international community must
sustain its support for Afghanistan. We welcome
the recent Geneva conference and its communiqué.
Sustaining international support, including through the
Afghanistan Partnership Framework, is indispensable.
We also commend the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, which will remain
essential for the foreseeable future. Indonesia, along
with Germany, has been co-penholder on Afghanistan
in the Security Council. While Indonesia’s term on
the Council ends this month, we assure members that
we will continue to support our brothers and sisters
in Afghanistan.
Foreign Minister Marsudi personally reinforces
that support. In early March this year, she visited Kabul
and launched the Afghanistan-Indonesia Women’s
Solidarity Network, which is intended to increase
women’s empowerment and the protection of women as
agents of peace. The Network also represents a followup to a dialogue between Afghan and Indonesian women
on the role of women in building and sustaining peace,
which was hosted by Indonesia in November last year.
The Foreign Minister of Indonesia is also a strong
supporter of women’s participation in the peace process
and gladly joined the Group of Friends of Women in
Afghanistan as an honorary member. Indonesia also
participates in the Afghan peace negotiations as a
member of the host country support group.
Thirdly, the inclusive participation of all Afghans
in nation-building is pertinent. We reiterate that it
20-35149

10/12/2020

is important for all Afghan citizens, religions and
ethnicities, including women and young people,
to contribute to their country’s reconstruction and
development. Their diversity and inclusivity will build
the collective national vision that is fundamental for
sustaining peace. The peace process should therefore
ensure the rights, safety and development of all the
people of Afghanistan.
Let me conclude by quoting Albert Camus — “peace
is the only battle worth waging”. Indonesia will do its
part to support peace and development in Afghanistan.
We are also pleased to co-sponsor and support draft
resolution A/75/L.45 and wish to thank Germany and
its team for facilitating it.
Ms. Atiqa Md Akim (Malaysia): Malaysia is
pleased to co-sponsor and support draft resolution
A/75/L. 45, entitled “The situation in Afghanistan”. In
particular, we are pleased to see the inclusion in the
eleventh preambular paragraph of a reference to the call
for a global ceasefire.
We continue to call on all relevant parties to
implement an immediate, permanent and comprehensive
ceasefire in Afghanistan, without any precondition,
in line with the Secretary-General’s call for a global
ceasefire, as supported by Security Council resolutions
2532 (2020) and 2543 (2020) and the statement of
support that was co-initiated by Malaysia and endorsed
in June by 170 States Members of the United Nations,
one non-member observer State and one observer.
Malaysia reiterates its support for the efforts of
the Afghan Government to advance the peace and
reconciliation process while respecting its Constitution,
democracy and the rights of all Afghan people. We
reaffirm that an inclusive, Afghan-led and Afghanowned peace process that involves all parts of Afghan
society is the only path towards a sustainable resolution
of the conflict.

A/75/PV.40

ensuring sustainable development, stability, prosperity
and peace in Afghanistan.
Nearly three years have passed since the
Ambassador of the United Arab Emirates to the
Republic of Afghanistan became a martyr — he was
killed along with five humanitarian workers from my
country and several Afghan civilians during a terrorist
attack in Kandahar in January 2017. At that time, a team
from the United Arab Emirates was in the process of
implementing a number of humanitarian, educational
and developmental projects in Afghanistan. That
incident reminds us that no one is safe until everyone
is safe. Combating terrorism requires international
joint responsibility.
My country will therefore continue to work with
regional and international partners to combat terrorism.
We reiterate our call to the international community to
continue to support the efforts of the Government of
Afghanistan in combating terrorism and to ensure that
it remains a top priority for various countries amid the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
The United Arab Emirates remains committed to
supporting Afghanistan in many fields. For example, we
trained more than 20,000 imams in rural Afghanistan
on the promotion of tolerance and peaceful coexistence.
We also joined the United Nations Group of Friends of
the Victims of Terrorism, established by Afghanistan
and Spain, in order to demonstrate our solidarity with
the victims of terrorism and defend their rights.
My country will continue its endeavours to
achieve peace and stability in Afghanistan by joining
NATO efforts in Afghanistan, including through our
participation since 2003 in the International Security
Assistance Force, which contributes to security and
social development activities.

Ms. Shaheen (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I wish to express my gratitude for
the holding of this important meeting on the situation in
Afghanistan. We hope that draft resolution A/75/L.45,
which reflects continued international efforts to restore
peace and stability in Afghanistan and end the long
suffering of the Afghan people, will be adopted.

With regard to developmental and humanitarian
aid, my country stresses the need to continue to provide
Afghanistan with developmental and humanitarian
assistance. The United Arab Emirates to that end
contributed more than $1.7 billion in humanitarian and
developmental assistance to Afghanistan and provided
it with medical supplies to support its health care
system during the COVID-19 pandemic.

This important debate follows the convening
the 2020 Afghanistan Conference in Geneva, which
contributed to a recommitment to the common goals of

My country also participated in a demining project
in Kandahar from 2011 to 2013, to which we allocated
nearly $27 million, which resulted in the clearing of

20-3514915/22

A/75/PV.40

more than 72 minefields to enable local residents to enjoy
access to basic services, schools and public facilities.
The United Arab Emirates also helped the people
of Afghanistan to realize their quest for peace, stability
and prosperity in all areas, especially with respect to
enabling women and girls in Afghanistan. It cooperated
with UN-Women to train more than 20 Afghan women
as part of an initiative of Sheikha Fatima Bint Mubarak
that provided female trainees with skills and capacities
in the field of peacebuilding. By joining the Group of
Friends of Women in Afghanistan, my country seeks to
support partnership efforts within civil society and the
private sector in Afghanistan in order to meet the needs
and address the challenges of Afghan women.
In accordance with the policy of the United Arab
Emirates, which seeks to ensure respect for the human
rights of people from war-affected and disaster-affected
countries, we continue to work in all international and
regional forums and urge countries hosting Afghan
refugees not to exploit them in regional issues and
conflicts that do not concern them, which is a violation
of international law. We also call for respecting
the rights of refugees while providing them with a
decent life.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Afghanistan is at a critical juncture and, in order to
build a better future for its citizens, it needs strong
international support. Today we will vote in favour
of draft resolution A/75/L.45, on the situation in
Afghanistan, in which the General Assembly sends
a strong message of support to the people and the
Government of Afghanistan in their endeavour to build
a more stable, prosperous and democratic country.
Only an inclusive, Afghan-led and Afghanowned peace process can resolve the current conflict
in Afghanistan. It must build upon and promote past
achievements, including the current Constitution,
while combating terrorism and respecting the right of
the Afghan people to self-determination by holding
elections and preserving the rights of religious and
ethnic minorities and women. From that perspective,
we welcome the General Assembly’s call for the
preservation of Afghanistan’s Constitution and its
rejection of the restoration of the Islamic Emirate.
We commend the positive approach of Afghanistan’s
Government to the peace talks. The Taliban should also
demonstrate the same level of determination and good
faith, including by halting its attacks against the Afghan
16/22

10/12/2020

National Defence and Security Forces. Moreover, all
external actors must avoid interfering in the peace
talks, which must be facilitated by the United Nations.
We welcome in that context the call by the Assembly
for the further engagement of the United Nations in the
peace process.
While welcoming the progress made so far in the
talks, we will also continue to work in coordination
with the United Nations to play a more active role
in contributing to their success. A durable peace in
Afghanistan should not be imposed from outside, and the
peace talks should not be expected to resolve decadesold problems overnight. There is a need for flexibility
and patience on all sides, while placing the interests
of the people of Afghanistan above all other interests,
including those of a specific group. In a multi-ethnic
and diverse society such as that of Afghanistan, no
single group, party or faction, including the Taliban,
can claim to hold power by itself alone.
Despite the initiation of the peace talks,
Afghanistan’s security situation remains a source of
concern, since attacks against civilians and civilian
infrastructure, including educational centres and
diplomatic premises, are on the rise. We strongly
condemn all such attacks, most of which are perpetrated
by terrorist groups, particularly Da’esh, elements of
which are still being transferred from Syria and Iraq
to Afghanistan.
While the presence and activities of Da’esh present
a serious threat to the security of Afghanistan and the
region, it is unfortunate that, due to the objection of
some Western countries, it was not possible to include
in the draft resolution a stand-alone paragraph on the
threats emanating from Da’esh in Afghanistan. Our
genuine support for the draft resolution must not be
construed as an acknowledgment of our support for
the continued presence or activities of foreign forces
in Afghanistan.
However, while many countries have stressed that
the withdrawal of foreign forces from Afghanistan
must not lead to a security vacuum, it is also regrettable
that — again due to the objection of some Western
countries —a call for the orderly and responsible
withdrawal of all foreign forces from Afghanistan
was not included in the draft resolution. A smooth and
effective assumption of the duties of foreign forces
by the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
will be a positive step towards a sustainable peace.
20-35149

10/12/2020

Accordingly, both prior to and simultaneous with the
withdrawal of foreign forces, every effort should be
made to support and strengthen Afghanistan’s military
and security forces.
Along with such efforts, effective assistance must
be extended to Afghanistan in combating the illicit
production of, and trafficking in, narcotic drugs as a
source of financing terrorism and other crimes. For our
part, over the past 40 years, we have played an active
role in combating drug trafficking in the region, in
which nearly 4,000 members of Iran’s law enforcement
forces have been martyred and more than 2,000 others
wounded. Our outstanding activities in that regard have
always been acknowledged at the global level.
According to the World Drugs Report 2020 of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Iran stands
far out at the top of the list of countries that seized
the largest quantities of opiates in 2018, accounting
for 53 per cent of the global total. The international
community should not allow extremists, terrorists and
drug traffickers to use the current economic situation
in Afghanistan to promote their dangerous and heinous
agenda. There is therefore a need for sustained and
increased international support for the economic
development of Afghanistan.
In that context, in addition to hosting and supporting
more than 3 million Afghans, including through the
provision of health services during the pandemic, and
despite the savage economic war being waged by the
United States against our people, we have continued to
promote economic cooperation with Afghanistan, such
as by providing it with electricity.
In order to help Afghanistan as a landlocked
country to overcome related difficulties, further
development of the Chabahar port has been on our
agenda for the past couple of years. Through ongoing
cooperation between the two countries, we also
inaugurated the Khaf-Herat railway, which connects
Afghanistan’s railway to Europe through Iran. All that
bilateral economic cooperation is taking place in the
face of the illegal economic terrorism of the United
States, which targets Iranians and Afghans alike. The
Islamic Republic of Iran is nevertheless determined to
strengthen its bilateral relations with, and support for,
the fraternal people and the Government of the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on agenda item 39.

A/75/PV.40

We will now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/75/L.45.
Before giving the floor to the representative of the
United States, who wishes to speak in explanation of
vote, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): The United
States would like to note that draft resolution A/75/L.45
comes at a critical time in the ongoing negotiations and
must be based on a shared commitment to supporting
the Afghanistan peace negotiations in the pursuit of
an Afghan-owned, Afghan-led resolution to decades
of conflict.
When the Taliban signed the 29 February
agreement to enter into negotiations with the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan, it publicly and explicitly
agreed to prevent Al-Qaida and other terrorist groups
from using the soil of Afghanistan to threaten the
security of the United States and its allies. The Taliban
recognized the legitimate concerns about international
terrorism emanating from Afghanistan and agreed to
prevent international terrorist groups from recruiting,
training or fundraising and that the Taliban would not
host them. Although the Taliban still has more to do,
those commitments and the actions taken since are a
significant step forward.
The United States regrets that progress is not
fully reflected in the draft resolution, which fails to
recognize the distinction between the activities of the
Taliban and those of international terrorist groups,
including the Islamic State in Iraq and the Shams (ISIS)
and Al-Qaida. The Taliban has fought ISIS-Khorasan
Province and taken other steps on its counter-terrorism
commitments. The United States has raised those
concerns with the penholder, Germany.
The level of violence perpetrated by all sides in
Afghanistan is too high, and we must seize the current
moment to accelerate the peace process and alleviate
the suffering of the Afghan people. That means that our
assessment of the situation on the ground cannot be on
autopilot. The recent agreement between the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan and the Taliban on the rules
of procedure for talks and the start of the discussion on
agenda items demonstrate that both sides are engaged
seriously and capable of coming to agreement on
tough issues.

20-3514917/22

A/75/PV.40

10/12/2020

As the Afghanistan peace negotiations proceed
to the next critical phase, it is important that the
international community acknowledge the significant
progress made to date, while pressing both sides to
work together with the urgency required to achieve a
political settlement and a permanent and comprehensive
ceasefire. The time has come for Afghans to unify and
embrace compromise, not to polarize each other. The
international community should also unify in support
of the peace process.
Finally, with respect to the climate change
language, we note that the withdrawal of the United
States from the Paris Agreement on Climate Change
took effect on 4 November. Therefore, references to
climate change are without prejudice to the positions of
the United States.
The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of vote.
The Assembly will now take a decision on
draft resolution A/75/L.45, entitled “The situation
in Afghanistan”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/75/L.45 and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have also
become sponsors of draft resolution A/75/L.45:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
the Dominican Republic, Fiji, Finland, France,
Georgia, Greece, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Italy, Japan,
Kiribati, Kuwait, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Malaysia,
Mali, Monaco, Montenegro, Nepal, Norway, Oman,
Palau, Papua New Guinea, Qatar, the Republic of
Korea, Rwanda, San Marino, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine and
the United Arab Emirates.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Afghanistan on a point of order.
Mrs. Raz (Afghanistan): I take the floor to raise a
point of order under rule 88 of the rules of procedure.
My delegation would like to express its deep regret
that a vote has been requested for draft resolution
A/75/L.45, on the situation in Afghanistan. It is very
18/22

unfortunate that, despite the efforts made by the
facilitator to address the concerns of all delegations in
a balanced manner and despite Afghanistan’s strong
support, the draft resolution did not attain consensus.
We acknowledge the importance of ensuring that
the draft resolution effectively reflects updates and
developments on the ground, in particular the progress
made to date in the peace process. We strongly support
the eighth preambular paragraph and paragraph 42,
which are based on the facts on the ground. Paragraph
19, on peace and reconciliation, welcomes the steps
taken by the Taliban and its commitment to pursuing
the negotiation of an inclusive political settlement. The
Taliban continues to engage in violent and terrorist
activities that directly target civilians, and it maintains
contact with terrorist organizations, specifically
Al-Qaida.
It is the genuine intent of the Government of
Afghanistan, our friends, neighbours and the General
Assembly to incorporate the Taliban as a political party.
It is in the interests of no Afghan for fellow Afghans to
be listed as terrorists. It is our utmost desire and wish
to see the Taliban as a constructive political party in the
country, without a relationship with Al-Qaida or other
terrorist groups and working for prosperity and peace
in Afghanistan.
However, according to the recent report of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015),
concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL/Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, the Taliban maintains
ties with terrorist groups such as Al-Qaida, and almost
all members of the Assembly have included the Taliban
in their domestic terrorist listings.
It is my people’s wish and the Government’s aim at
the negotiating table and in the peace talks to help the
Taliban to become a party we can trust, but that is not
the reality today. We are of the view that the language of
the draft resolution provides a balanced text that notes
positive trends in the Taliban’s willingness to take firm
steps towards peace and reconciliation. However, we
believe that the draft resolution and other documents
by the United Nations must remain unequivocal on
the current standing of the group and its violence and
terrorist activities for as long as it continues to engage
with Al-Qaida and other terrorist groups.
20-35149

10/12/2020

Afghanistan strongly believes that the request
for a vote will not affect the absolute support of the
States Members of the United Nations for our common
objective of attaining peace, prosperity and stability.
Throughout all stages of the negotiation process,
Afghanistan engaged in constructive discussion, in
good faith and with a willingness to compromise,
in order to accommodate realistic proposals that
align with the needs and priorities of the Afghan
Government and people, according to the principles of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States and
non-interference in the internal affairs of States.
I stand before the Assembly today as the
representative of a democratic and sovereign State. I
therefore represent the desires and wishes of my nation,
the hopes of our women, the determination of our young
people, the call of our minorities and the realities of
the new Afghanistan. As my country’s representative,
I strongly believe and am fully convinced that the draft
resolution before us represents the best interests of
people of Afghanistan. It will be disappointing if some
think otherwise.
I would like to take this opportunity to once again
thank the German delegation for its tireless efforts to
find the right balance in the text and to acknowledge
the cooperative spirit of all the other Member States
that were able and willing to find compromise.

A/75/PV.40

Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, North Macedonia,
Norway, Oman, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen
Against:
Russian Federation
Abstaining:
Belarus, China, Pakistan

We call on all Member States to vote in favour of
the draft resolution, while keeping in mind the longstanding support of the General Assembly, its members
and the international community for a peaceful, stable
and prosperous Afghanistan.

Draft resolution A/75/L.45 was adopted by 130
votes to 1, with 3 abstentions (resolution 75/90).

The President: A recorded vote has been requested.

The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote on the resolution just adopted, I
would like to remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan,
Albania,
Algeria,
Andorra,
Argentina,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy,

[Subsequently, the delegation of the Islamic
Republic of Iran informed the Secretariat that it
had intended to vote in favour.]

Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation places particular
importance on the consideration by the General
Assembly of the situation in Afghanistan. Traditionally,
we support the adoption of a truly consensus-based
draft resolution, the text of which not only takes into
account current events but also reflects the consolidated
approaches taken by the international community
towards an effective and lasting settlement of the
situation in Afghanistan.

20-3514919/22

A/75/PV.40

The unity of all Afghan partners is particularly
crucial today against the backdrop of the intra-Afghan
negotiations now under way. Regrettably, for the third
year in a row, during the consultations prior to the
adoption of resolution 75/90 we found the opposite to be
true — specifically, we observed the brazen disregard
of the facilitators for the concerns of the States of the
region and the repeated attempts by certain delegations
to impose a view of the situation that was out of touch
with reality.
That is consistent with information emerging on
the withdrawal of foreign troops from Afghanistan.
Such actions represent clear attempts to disregard the
obvious — that the continued presence of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and illicit drugs issues
pose a threat to the security of the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan and neighbouring Central Asian States.
That is all taking place in the context of an increasing
number of terrorist attacks by ISIL and the blocking of
the most recent report on the opium survey conducted
by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. We
believe that to be an attempt to conceal the true scope
of those threats.
It is frustrating to see the facilitators blatantly
ignoring the efforts of the States directly involved in
securing a peaceful settlement in Afghanistan and
underestimating the role of regional organizations,
including the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and
the Collective Security Treaty Organization, as well
as the importance of regional initiatives. Russia is
working to ensure that all Afghan political authorities
and key external players act in a unified manner based
on a single set of rules. The efforts of the RussiaChina-United States of America troika, plus Pakistan,
are also aimed at promoting a peace process led by
Afghans themselves.
We are convinced that Member States would have
been fully able to reach consensus while negotiating
the draft resolution if the process had been transparent
and objective and if the facilitators had been impartial.
However, the working methods used by the German
delegation are beneath all criticism. What we saw was
the imposition of a pre-established and biased approach
favouring one group of States that blatantly ignored the
proposals supported by the majority of the States of the
region, together with a forced vote on a document that
clearly does not enjoy consensus.
20/22

10/12/2020

Under those conditions, we had no other choice
but to request a vote on draft resolution A/75/L.45
and vote against it. We are moreover of the view that
Berlin should no longer fulfil the role of facilitator for
Afghanistan in the General Assembly. It is clear that
its methods negatively affect progress in resolving the
issues facing Afghanistan.
In conclusion, we wish to stress that, despite the
situation surrounding the just adopted resolution 75/90,
we continue to support Afghanistan during this crucial
period. Our vote against the draft resolution should be
understood exclusively as an objection to the actions
and working methods of the facilitators.
The Russian Federation has continued to support
a fully inclusive peace process led by Afghans
themselves. We will continue to support efforts to end
the war and develop a peaceful, unified, independent
and prosperous Afghanistan, free of terrorism and
illicit drugs.
Mr. Liu Liqun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
has remained a staunch supporter of the Government
and the people of Afghanistan. We support the peace
and reconciliation process in the country and call on the
international community to make a greater investment
in Afghanistan’s prompt achievement of long-term
peace and security.
China remained actively engaged throughout the
consultations on the just adopted resolution 75/90 and,
in the light of the most recent developments and the
genuine needs of Afghanistan, we proposed a number
of constructive amendments to the text that were met
with a favourable response and the support of several
Member States.
However, the text of resolution 75/90 fails to fully
reflect the important concerns of a number of Member
States, and there is room for improvement in many areas.
The facilitator ended the consultations too early, against
the counsel of the various parties, which led to the text
being put to a vote. China finds that deeply regrettable.
The facilitator and a few countries also refused to retain
the consensus language in the paragraphs on regional
cooperation and the fight against the coronavirus
disease, which is not a constructive approach.
For those reasons, China had no choice but to
abstain in the voting on the draft resolution. We hope
that in future the facilitator will communicate with
Member States in a more responsible and constructive
20-35149

10/12/2020

manner and fully respect the legitimate concerns of all
parties in the interest of unity among Member States.
China will continue to work with other countries to
make fresh contributions to the achievement of peace,
stability and development in Afghanistan.
Mr. Ibragimov (Uzbekistan): The policies of the
Republic of Uzbekistan towards Afghanistan reflect
a traditional stance, based on our position that the
establishment of a durable peace in the neighbouring
country of Afghanistan is an important prerequisite
for the stability and prosperity of the whole of
Central Asia. From the perspective of Uzbekistan, the
development and practical implementation of a unified,
comprehensive peace programme for Afghanistan,
supported at the regional and global levels, is the key
condition for advancing peace.
We support the notion that the peace process should
encompass all political forces and ethnic groups in the
country and should be Afghan-led and Afghan-owned.
We believe that the current intra-Afghan negotiations in
Doha should become an important stage for advancing
the overall process towards a political settlement to
the situation in Afghanistan. Therefore, Uzbekistan
supported resolution 75/90 and calls on all Member
States to continue to make efforts that are conducive to
supporting and furthering the intra-Afghan peace talks.
Mr. Usman (Pakistan): Pakistan would like to
express its disappointment with resolution 75/90, which
omitted certain important issues that have traditionally
been reflected in previous resolutions on the situation
in Afghanistan, such as the objective of regional
cooperation, the gravity of the terrorism threat and the
dangers arising from illicit drug production.
Pakistan is also disappointed that the important
negotiating platform that played a critical role in the
commencement of the intra-Afghan dialogue, in
particular the Russia-China-United States of America
troika plus Pakistan format, was not reflected in the
resolution. Regional projects play a crucial role in the
economic development of Afghanistan and of the entire
region. The omission of important references to recent
regional initiatives by the principal sponsor of the
resolution is inexplicable.
Finally, the resolution does not adequately reflect
developments relating to the intra-Afghan peace process.
The parties opened the intra-Afghan negotiations a few
days ago and agreed on the rules and procedures for
those negotiations. It will be difficult to make progress

A/75/PV.40

in the negotiations if one of the parties at the table is
depicted as a terrorist entity. The aim of the resolution
and the General Assembly should be to facilitate the
negotiation process, and not to impede it. For those
reasons, and despite its concurrence with most of the
provisions of the resolution, Pakistan was obliged to
abstain in the voting. We believe that consensus on the
resolution would have been achieved if the facilitator
had been more accommodating.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote on the resolution just adopted.
Before giving the floor to speakers in the exercise
of the right of reply, I would like to remind members
that statements in the exercise of the right of reply are
limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and
five minutes for the second and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): As Germany has been
mentioned specifically, I would like to exercise the
right of reply.
My United States colleague said in his intervention
that we had worked on autopilot with respect to
resolution 75/90. I would like to reject that; Germany
did not work on autopilot. We held close to a record
number of consultations, which I described in my first
intervention. I would also like to ask the representative
of the United States to review the record of today’s
meeting and the statements of the many speakers who
praised the way Germany facilitated the process.
I would also like to respond to the accusations
made by the representative of Russia and others.
First, I would like to ask the representatives if
they actually read the resolution, because large parts
of it concern the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) and it expresses concern is several parts that the
territory of Afghanistan should not be used by ISIL to
threaten to attack any country.
Secondly, regional cooperation is covered and
highlighted in several parts of the resolution. However,
not each and every initiative is mentioned. Germany
has been one of the driving forces of the peace process
in Afghanistan for years, yet we do not make specific
mention of our efforts. I also wonder if colleagues read
the whole text; there is a whole paragraph on illicit
drugs and their dangers.

20-3514921/22

A/75/PV.40

Resolution 75/90 was just adopted by an
overwhelming majority — 130 countries voted in
favour and one country voted against it, while three
countries abstained in the voting. That sends a very
strong message from the General Assembly to the
people of Afghanistan. The General Assembly stands
behind the Afghan people in a very difficult period for
the country. I very much regret that, for the first time
since we began to vote on the draft resolution on the
situation in Afghanistan, Russia voted against it.
We heard the plea of the Ambassador of Afghanistan
to vote in favour of the draft resolution to send a strong
message of support to the Afghan people. Despite that
repeated plea by the Ambassador of Afghanistan, who
speaks on behalf of her country, Russia voted against
the draft resolution. What message is Russia sending
to Afghanistan? It sends the message that Russia
does not stand behind the Afghan people and does
not respond positively to the requests made by the
Ambassador of Afghanistan. Today Russia let down the
Afghan people. It let down people coping with difficult
circumstances. They have to cope with continuous
fighting, climate change and the coronavirus disease.
They have embarked on the very difficult endeavour of
the peace talks.
We all hope that all that has been achieved during
the past few years in the areas of human rights, respect
for women and children and peaceful development
in Afghanistan will not be put in jeopardy. At this
critical time, all of us should have voted in favour of
the resolution to send a strong message to the Afghan
people conveying that, in these difficult times, we stand
behind them.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I thank you, Mr. President, for allowing me to
take the floor again. I will be brief.
As the Permanent Representative of Germany called
on my delegation and other delegations to carefully

22/22

10/12/2020

read resolution 75/90, I would ask him to listen more
carefully to our explanation of vote.
It would appear that our vote against the resolution
came about as a result of difficulties in understanding
each other’s position. In our response, after the
voting, we clearly stated that Russia will continue
to fully support Afghanistan and the peace process
in the country. We explained that our vote is due to
the unconstructive position of the penholder on the
resolution on Afghanistan this year.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 39?
It was so decided.
The President: I would like to congratulate the
General Assembly on the successful conclusion of
today’s meeting. The people of Afghanistan deserve
to live in peace, stability and prosperity. The region
deserves peace, and achieving peace and stability in
Afghanistan is the common desire of the entire United
Nations system.
Today the General Assembly once again underlined
its support to the people of Afghanistan and its path
towards peace, political reconciliation and development.
We are all encouraged by the statements we heard
today, but we must translate our words into action. We
cannot disappoint the people of Afghanistan. There
is still much cause for concern, including the high
levels of violence, the threat of terrorism, the unstable
security situation and increasing civilian casualties.
An inclusive process, in which women, young people
and victims of conflict are meaningfully represented,
is the one and only option. These days, we need success
stories. These days, we need to prove that the United
Nations system delivers. We must help the people of
Afghanistan to ensure that they succeed.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

20-35149
