S/PV.9153

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9153rd meeting

Monday, 17 October 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Biang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Mythen
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti
Letter dated 8 October 2022 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2022/747)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integration Office in
Haiti (S/2022/761)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-63446 (E)
*2263446*

S/PV.9153

The question concerning Haiti

emergency is now at our doorstep. Within four days
of those remarks, the Government confirmed the first
case of cholera in Haiti in more than three years.

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
Letter dated 8 October 2022 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2022/747)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(S/2022/761)
The President (spoke in French): ): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Belize,
the Dominican Republic and Haiti to participate in
this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Jean Victor
Généus, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Worship
of Haiti, and Mr. Roberto Álvarez Gil, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Dominican Republic.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Helen La
Lime, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Haiti and Head of the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Ifigeneia
Kontoleontos, Permanent Observer for the International
Organization of la Francophonie to the United Nations,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/747, which contains the text of a
letter dated 8 October 2022 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council, and
document S/2022/761, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti.
I now give the floor to Ms. La Lime.
Ms. La Lime: When I briefed the Council three
weeks ago (see S/PV.9136), I spoke of three intersecting
crises —economic, security and political — that were
accelerating Haiti’s downward spiral. A humanitarian
2/20

17/10/2022

Within weeks, dozens more cases have been
confirmed — more than half resulting in death, with
hundreds more suspected in the West and Centre
Departments. Twenty-five of those deaths were in the
prison of Port-au-Prince alone. Cases are also suspected
in the prison of Croix-des-Bouquets. As undocumented
cholera cases tear through parts of Port-au-Prince,
particularly in Cité Soleil, gangs continue to blockade
the Varreux terminal, where most of the country’s
fuel is stored. The consequences for Haiti’s basic
infrastructure have been severe, disrupting operations
at the country’s hospitals and water suppliers and
affecting the cholera response. Without fuel, waste is
not removed from neighbourhoods, while torrential
rains promote flooding, which mixes with refuse to
create insalubrious conditions ripe for the spread
of disease.
Neither the heroic work of the police, which remains
critically under-staffed and under-resourced, nor
political efforts have succeeded in easing the situation.
As ever, it is Haiti’s poorest and most vulnerable
citizens who are most affected. The reality is that
without free movement of fuel, Haiti will be unable to
get ahead of the current crisis. For all of the Haitian
National Police’s accomplishments in re-opening roads
and neighbourhoods, the port where fuel is stored
remains a challenge. Furthermore, the paucity of fuel
is now affecting police mobility and response. Appeals
by the diplomatic corps and others, including the
United Nations, for the establishment of a humanitarian
corridor have gone unheeded.
The broader situation is no better. Nearly a
thousand kidnappings have been reported in 2022
alone, and general insecurity continues to prevent
millions of children from attending classes, isolates
entire neighbourhoods and leaves families extorted
and burned in their own homes. It is to be hoped that
this weekend’s arrivals in Port-au-Prince of important
Haitian-purchased tactical equipment, delivered by
Canada and the United States of America, will assist
the police in regaining control of the situation.
Regarding the political situation, resolution 2645
(2022) generated a sense of urgency because, for the
first time, the Council asked the Government to report
on its efforts towards a sustainable, time-bound and
22-63446

17/10/2022

The question concerning Haiti

commonly accepted framework for a political process,
led by Haitians. Acting on the Council’s decision, I
intensified my efforts to bring key actors around the
table and, through constant dialogue, maintained
momentum among relevant stakeholders to establish a
framework for a renewed political process.
Since August, civil society has been driving
an initiative that came close to finally bringing all
stakeholders around a common proposal. With the
support of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti,
economic, social and political actors began to identify
practical ways to move forward, launching a new round
of discussions among the various blocs. However, the
talks faltered, the spirit of compromise receded, and, in
a sad case of déjà vu, vested interests began to redirect
the narrative.
Nevertheless, the talks are continuing and as
late as yesterday, a meeting was held among civil
society representatives, with a view to reviving broad
consensus. The good offices of the United Nations
remain ever more critical to providing opportunities
for Haitians to come together and agree on a path to
stability for the country. Those in the private sector
who have shown a willingness to support reform should
continue to assist in that regard, recognizing that they
have an important role to play.
It is against that backdrop of insecurity and
humanitarian crisis that, on 7 October, the Council of
Ministers authorized the Prime Minister to request the
support of a specialized international armed force, to
help secure the free movement of water, fuel and medical
supplies to prevent the situation from deteriorating
further. I can only reiterate the Secretary-General’s call
on Haiti’s partners to consider that request as a matter
of urgency for the immediate relief of those already
most vulnerable.
As protests demanding the ouster of the Prime
Minister and his Government continue, some see in
them yet another reminder of the role of entrenched
economic and political interests to resist Government
efforts to reform State revenues and customs for the
benefit of the Treasury and the population at large. And
so, the debate on sanctions has taken off. Haitians are
actively using both social media and radio debates to
express support for serious targeted sanctions against
those who are driving violence to prevent changes that
threaten long-standing patterns of corruption.

S/PV.9153

As I noted in my briefing last month, under
such a state of persistent civil unrest, violence and
looting, including of World Food Programme and
UNICEF warehouses, basic rights are being flagrantly
undermined across the country. Gangs continue to
injure, kidnap, rape and kill, and the human rights
report on sexual violence by gangs, released on Friday,
underscores how women and youth are especially
affected. Rape is systematically used as a weapon of
control and terror. Any enhanced security support to
the Haitian National Police should also be accompanied
by support to the justice system, not only to ensure
proper accountability but also to reinforce nationally
led initiatives, such as the proposed judicial units
specialized in adjudicating crimes committed by gangs,
as well as financial crimes.
Economic deprivation is leaving the population
more vulnerable than it has been in years. Gang violence
is critically inhibiting the humanitarian response to a
resurgent disease, as well as to hunger, with a record
4.7 million people facing acute hunger, including tens
of thousands on the brink of starvation. The urgency of
the situation is tearing at the political and social fabric
of the country.
Any comprehensive resolution requires a Haitianled political solution, but a political solution continues
to be elusive and, on its own, is no longer sufficient to
address the current crisis. To support Haitian institutions
in their drive for civic order and accountability and to
save thousands of lives that would otherwise be lost,
members of the Council must act, and decisively so, to
help address the persistent scourges of insecurity and
corruption in Haiti.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. La
Lime for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Let me thank Special Representative La
Lime for her briefing and her work. I would also like to
thank in advance Ms. Kontoleontos of the International
Organization of la Francophonie. And I want to
acknowledge Mr. Généus and Mr. Álvarez Gil, the
Foreign Ministers of Haiti and the Dominican Republic,
as well as Mr. Fuller, the Permanent Representative
of Belize, who is here on behalf of the Caribbean
Community. We look forward to hearing their remarks
and important regional perspectives.

22-634463/20

S/PV.9153

The question concerning Haiti

The New York Times recently published a
heartbreaking story on Haiti. It featured Christelle
Pierre, a civilian who is all too familiar with the
instability and violence that plagues Haiti. Gang
members descended on Christelle’s neighbourhood
in Port-au-Prince when she was six months pregnant,
and left death and destruction in their wake. Her
neighbourhood was burned to the ground. Her husband
was shot in the head and left to burn in the street.
Now Christelle and her newborn baby are homeless,
in a country engulfed in crisis. As she told the Times,
“There is no shelter, no food, no medicine, no work.
There is only chaos.”
If there was ever a moment to come to the aid of
Haitians in dire need, it is now. Faced with extreme
violence and instability, Haiti’s leaders and people
are crying out for help. Haiti’s Prime Minister and
Council of Ministers, as well as the Secretary-General,
have called on the international community to address
the deteriorating security situation and increase our
humanitarian support. In response, our teams are on
the ground, working alongside Haitian health workers
and non-governmental organizations to help address
the cholera outbreak and assist others in need. And
we remain the single largest donor of humanitarian
assistance to Haiti.
In the coming days, the United States will deliver
additional assistance to Haiti, including critical
medical support. We are also deeply focused on the
security situation. Together with Canada, one way
in which we have helped has been by coordinating
the delivery of vital Haitian Government-purchased
security equipment to the Haitian National Police,
including tactical and armoured vehicles and other
supplies. That assistance will help the Haitian National
Police counter gang violence and re-establish stability
and security under the rule of law. And the United
States is proactively going after the bad actors. Our
new visa restriction policies target current and former
Haitian Government officials and other individuals
believed to be connected to street gangs or other
criminal organizations. There must be consequences
for those who support the facilitation of illicit arms or
narcotics trafficking.
But a problem of this magnitude cannot be solved
by one country or even a handful of partners in the
region. It requires a concerted international response.
It requires robust international cooperation. And it
requires urgent action by the Security Council. It is
4/20

17/10/2022

not enough to express our concerns or condemn the
violence. As mandated in the Charter of the United
Nations, we need to mobilize the resources and power
of the Council and the broader United Nations. That is
why the United States and Mexico have worked closely
to draft two new draft resolutions, which we hope the
Council will support unanimously.
The first draft resolution would impose financial
sanctions on the criminal actors who are inflicting
so much suffering on the Haitian people. It is time
to hold them accountable for their actions. It would
target those responsible for gang violence, trafficking
arms, attacking United Nations personnel, kidnapping
innocent citizens and perpetrating human rights
abuses and sexual and gender-based violence. And it
would go after the individuals blocking Haiti’s ports
and the delivery of humanitarian assistance to the
Haitian people. The United Nations sanctions regime
aims to stop those criminal actors from having access
to reputable financial institutions, and it would work
to freeze their assets and prohibit their international
travel. Additionally, its arms-embargo provisions would
prevent the direct or indirect supply, sale, or transfer of
arms to criminal gangs and their leaders, as designated
by the Council. The draft resolution specifically lists
Jimmy Chérizier, also known as Barbecue, as the
subject of such sanctions. He is directly responsible
for the devastating fuel shortage that is crippling the
country. By adopting the draft resolution, we would
take concrete action to hold him and so many other
violent criminals to account.
The second draft resolution we are working on
would authorize a non-United Nations international
security assistance mission to help improve the
security situation and enable the flow of desperately
needed humanitarian aid. It reflects one of the options
that the Secretary-General recommended that the
Security Council consider. It is also a direct response
to the request from Prime Minister Ariel Henry and
the Haitian Council of Ministers for international
assistance to help restore security and alleviate the
humanitarian crisis. And we have consulted broadly
with other stakeholders in Haiti, including members of
civil society and the private sector.
This draft resolution would propose a limited,
carefully scoped, non-United Nations mission led by
a partner country with the deep, necessary experience
required for such an effort to be effective. At the United
Nations and across the United States Government, we
22-63446

17/10/2022

The question concerning Haiti

will work with partners and other Council members to
set defined and specific parameters for the mission,
and the United States will consider the most effective
means to directly support, enable and resource it. This
non-United Nations international security assistance
mission would operate under Chapter VII of the Charter.
And it would facilitate international support to the
Haitian National Police and Coast Guard. By helping
to improve the security situation on the ground, the
delivery of desperately needed aid could reach those in
need and address the ongoing cholera crisis. Ultimately,
such a mission will rely on support from United Nations
Member States, and the draft resolution asks explicitly
for contributions of personnel, equipment and other
resources. This is the moment for the Council — and
the world — to step up.
To be clear, we are keenly aware of the history of
international intervention in Haiti and specifically of
concerns about the Council’s authorization of a response
that could lead to an open-ended peacekeeping role.
The Security Council and the international community
must look at its role differently from the way they have
in the past. We must seek a different course, one that
can better respond to the humanitarian and security
crisis in Haiti and be able to address the needs of the
Haitian people directly. With the dire humanitarian
consequences at a level we have not seen before, we need
effective but targeted international assistance. That
should be coupled with support for political dialogue
and backed by sustained international pressure on the
actors supporting gang activity, which will provide
the Haitian people with the breathing room they
need — breathing room that will allow them to think
beyond survival and focus on charting a better future.
A Member State has reached out to us — the United
Nations — for urgent assistance. Haiti has come to us in
a time of need. As Security Council members charged
with maintaining international peace and security, it
is our responsibility to come together to help restore
peace and security for the people of Haiti. We must
work with Haiti to re-establish the rule of law in a way
that respects human rights. And we must hold those
responsible for so much pain and violence accountable.
Families across Haiti who do not know where their
next meal will come from are counting on us. The
humanitarian and health workers desperately trying to
contain a cholera outbreak are counting on us. Victims
of gang violence like Christelle Pierre are counting on
us. These two draft resolutions will help Haiti build

S/PV.9153

a brighter, more secure future. I ask all members for
their support.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I am grateful for the briefing by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti and
Head of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti,
Ms. Helen La Lime, and I welcome the participation
of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Haiti and the
Dominican Republic, of our colleague from Belize
on behalf of the Caribbean Community and of the
Permanent Observer of the International Organization
of la Francophonie. Their presence at this meeting
clearly demonstrates the international community’s
interest in providing support for the Haitian nation,
whose people continue to suffer from the scourges of
violence and transnational organized crime.
The legacy of colonialism and regrettable postcolonial attitudes have resulted in poverty, exclusion,
inequality and even the environmental degradation of
Haiti, which explain, to a large extent, the prevailing
situation in the country. I mention all of that because
there are still those who think that the social factors
that lead to exclusion, inequality and corruption are not
appropriate agenda items for the Security Council.
Three weeks ago in this Chamber (see S/PV.9136),
we noted the urgent need to respond in a timely manner
to the situation in Haiti. As we remarked at that meeting,
together with the United States, we are working on two
draft resolutions for consideration by members of the
Security Council, to which my American colleague just
referred and which would better respond to the complex
Haitian situation on the ground. First of all, they would
seek to establish a sanctions regime focused on the
actors responsible for the violence and instability and
would impose an arms embargo to prevent the gangs
from obtaining weapons so easily and using them with
such impunity. It must be made clear that this is not
about sanctioning the Government of Haiti, but those
who undermine governance through violence and
continue to terrorize the civilian population. We are
grateful to all members for their comments, and we
hope to have two texts, one after the other, that will
enable the Council to speak as one voice.
In response to resolution 2645 (2022), the
Secretary-General forwarded his recommendations on
how to respond to the security situation in support of
the Haitian authorities and urged us to respond with a
sense of urgency to the request of the Government of

22-634465/20

S/PV.9153

The question concerning Haiti

Haiti to address the humanitarian crisis with regard to
such basic issues as food distribution, drinking water,
fuel and health supplies, which are currently direly
needed to respond to the new outbreak of cholera.
We must respond to that request with a great sense
of responsibility and diligence so that the Security
Council’s response is consistent with the Haitian
Government’s request — an effective response that
does not repeat past mistakes.
In the meantime, Mexico will continue to work
closely with the Haitian people and Government
through its cooperation with the Haitian National Police
by strengthening the training of members of the Haitian
Armed Forces at our Special Forces Training Centre.
Just a few days ago, a new Haitian contingent travelled
to Mexico to receive training from the National Guard,
and, of course, we will increase our humanitarian aid.
The needs in Haiti are immense. We call on all
States to contribute to the basket fund that Canada has
established to support the people of Haiti. Undeniably,
the response by the international community, together
with the United Nations support, must be matched by
the responsible action of all political actors in Haiti.
That will be the only way to overcome the already
protracted crisis. There is an urgent need to build trust
at the domestic and international levels. Genuine and
objective progress in the dialogue between all parties
would be a very important step in that direction at
this time.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): First of all, I would like to
acknowledge the presence of the Foreign Ministers of
Haiti and the Dominican Republic. I would also like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
La Lime for her very sombre briefing.
This briefing aligns with the descriptions from
those on the ground that the situation in Haiti is near its
breaking point. It is truly like hell on earth. It is a hell
created by the parasitic actions of groups capitalizing
on a political, institutional and security vacuum. They
show nothing but contempt for the Haitian people.
I will focus today on three issues of deep concern.
First, the accounts of violence in Haiti, particularly
sexual and gender-based violence, are deeply disturbing.
The report issued by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights is horrific
to read. But for the Haitian people, and in particular
women, girls and boys, that is their reality: collective
6/20

17/10/2022

rape, mutilation, execution and being burned alive. The
violence and depravity exhibited by gangs has only
escalated in recent weeks. They act with almost universal
impunity. The international community cannot leave
Haiti to face this unprecedented challenge alone.
Ireland fully supports the call by the SecretaryGeneral for urgent support to the Haitian National Police
following the request of the Haitian Government. We
are ready to work with colleagues on a draft resolution
on security support in the coming days. Ireland also
remains actively engaged with fellow members of the
Security Council to create a sanctions regime aimed
specifically at those groups.
Secondly, Ireland is deeply concerned about the
confirmation that, for the first time, thousands of people
in Haiti are facing Integrated Food Security Phase
Classification level 5 — catastrophic levels of hunger. It
is clear in reports shared from across Haiti that conflictinduced hunger is killing people. Rural families, urban
communities under siege and the overpopulated prison
population are dying of hunger, without water, and are
denied medical care. Rapidly increasing numbers of
lives are being lost to cholera. Those are preventable
tragedies. They result from blockades, violence and
the destruction of humanitarian aid. They compound
Haiti’s existing vulnerabilities resulting from climate
shocks and natural disasters. Ireland strongly condemns
the denial of, and interference with, life-saving
humanitarian aid. Humanitarian workers must never
be targets. Access to vulnerable populations must be
granted, or further lives will be lost.
Thirdly, three weeks ago, when the Council last met
on Haiti (see S/PV.9136), the elements of a negotiated
political settlement seemed possible. An agreement
seemed to be just around the corner. Yet today we
are no closer to a solution than in September. Ireland
remains deeply concerned about the lack of progress on
the political track. We urge all stakeholders to put other
interests aside and agree on a shared way forward for
the sake of the Haitian people. Ireland continues to hope
that even in these dark days the political will can be
found to make that vital step. There can be no security
or stability in Haiti without functioning institutions
and without a sustainable, inclusive political solution,
owned and led by the Haitian people.
The people of Haiti simply cannot bear any
more. The spiral of chaos has to end. All the relevant
actors in Haiti must assume their responsibility to
22-63446

17/10/2022

The question concerning Haiti

restore stability to the country and to its people. The
international community and the Council must respond
to the calls for urgent action. There is simply no time
to lose.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I join others in thanking
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for her remarks. I welcome the presence of the Foreign
Ministers of Haiti and the Dominican Republic, as
well as the Permanent Representative of Belize, in the
Council today, and thank the Permanent Observer of
the International Organization of la Francophonie for
participating in this meeting.
At our previous meeting on Haiti three weeks ago
(see S/PV.9136), we expressed our concern about the
political and security situation, which has remained
precarious. It is deeply troubling that there have been no
signs of improvement since then. The political impasse
has been further compounded by economic stagnation
and a troubling humanitarian situation. A recent
outbreak of cholera threatens to make an already dire
situation worse. The persistent gang-related violence
and kidnappings, including in the capital of Port-auPrince, have worsened the general insecurity. United
Nations programmes are on hold due to roadblocks,
demonstrations and limited access to fuel. We are also
closely monitoring the situation concerning Indian
citizens currently in areas affected by violence in Haiti
from our Embassy in the Dominican Republic.
We noted the letter from the Haitian authorities
requesting the immediate deployment of an
international specialized force to address the security
and humanitarian crises, including the cholera
outbreak. We have also noted the response from the
Secretary-General, who in a statement issued on the
same day urged the international community, including
the members of the Security Council, to consider the
request by the Haitian Government as a matter of
urgency (S/2022/747).
We continue to believe that in order for the security
solutions for Haiti to be sustainable, they must be
Haitian-owned and -led. Capacity-building for the
Haitian National Police must remain a priority. In July
the Council unanimously adopted resolution 2645
(2022), renewing the United Nations Integrated Office
in Haiti’s mandate for one more year. At the time we
worked with other delegations to suggest an increase in
the number of police and correction units. We are now
working with other Council members to address the

S/PV.9153

issue of gang violence, which in turn is exacerbating
every other problem faced by the Haitian people. We
continue to believe that no solutions to the political,
socioeconomic and security crises will emerge without
the direct involvement of Haitian stakeholders and the
support of Haiti’s neighbours. We therefore welcome
the engagement of regional partners, the Caribbean
Community and Haiti’s neighbour, the Dominican
Republic, on issues of immediate concern, including
capacity-building initiatives for the Haitian National
Police and controlling the flow of small arms and light
weapons into Haiti.
India firmly believes in the need for sustained
efforts by Haiti and its international partners, including
in the Council, to reverse the current situation. We
enjoy long-standing relations with Haiti and its people.
In the past, we have contributed to capacity-building
and training initiatives in Haiti, and we stand ready to
do so again in our collective quest to help our Haitian
brothers and sisters in their hour of need.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to thank
Special Representative La Lime for her comprehensive
report (S/2022/761). I also recognize the presence of
Mr. Jean Victor Généus, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Worship of Haiti, Mr. Roberto Álvarez Gil, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Dominican Republic, the
Permanent Representative of Belize and the Permanent
Observer of the International Organization of
la Francophonie.
Less than a month ago, on September 26, we heard
comprehensive briefings on the situation in Haiti,
with the participation of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and the World Food Programme (see
S/PV.9136). During the meeting, we were once again
informed of the calamitous situation in the country,
aggravated by the fuel supply cut-off in Port-au-Prince
due to criminal activity, with far-reaching humanitarian
consequences for Haiti. We are concerned about the
possibility that the situation may deteriorate further. On
the political front, talks have not advanced, frustrating
the expectation that an agreement between the main
political groups was close to being announced. To
make matters worse, the current outbreak of cholera in
Haiti, if not rapidly controlled, could take many more
lives. The Council must act in order to help the Haitian
Government regain control of the situation and avoid
further escalation.

22-634467/20

S/PV.9153

The question concerning Haiti

During the negotiation of resolution 2645
(2022), which renewed the mandate of the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti, we established a
fruitful dialogue among the Council members. As
a consequence, today we are working on a new draft
resolution that will implement provisions foreseen in
resolution 2645 (2022), particularly on prohibiting the
transfer of small arms, light weapons and ammunition
to non-State actors in Haiti and imposing measures
such as asset freezes and travel bans on those engaging
in or supporting gang violence. As we further negotiate
the new draft resolution, Brazil wants to make sure
that if such measures are adopted, they will not have
adverse humanitarian consequences for the civilian
population. Developing appropriate listing criteria,
conditions and mechanisms for lifting the sanctions,
humanitarian exemptions and carve-outs are essential
for the effectiveness of this new sanctions regime. We
also look forward to seeing the second draft resolution
announced today by the co-penholders.
We took note of the options conveyed by the
Secretary-General in his letter dated 8 October for
improving security in Haiti (S/2022/747). We also took
note of the Haitian Government’s appeal for a specialized
armed force to help control the humanitarian crisis in the
country. We must all examine how best to assist Haiti.
Brazil has a long-standing commitment to contributing
to peace, development and stability in Haiti and to
supporting its people. We share the view that besides
security measures, socioeconomic progress in Haiti is
key to addressing the current crisis in an effective and
sustainable way. In that regard, we reiterate our opinion
that Haiti could further benefit from participating in
the Peacebuilding Commission so as to discuss ways
to strengthen its institutions and exchange ideas on the
successful experiences of other countries facing similar
economic and political challenges.
As a long-standing partner, we are glad that two
of the most important Brazilian cooperation projects
in Haiti will be concluded in 2022. Through bilateral
cooperation, three hospitals are already functioning
and represent an important contribution to the Haitian
health system, while a professional training centre will
soon be inaugurated in the city of Les Cayes. Before the
end of the year, Brazil will also donate $650,000 to the
fund created for the reconstruction of Haiti’s southern
peninsula, which was severely hit by an earthquake
in 2021.
8/20

17/10/2022

We once again exhort all Haitian political actors to
engage constructively in the current dialogue and agree
on a political way forward as soon as possible. A Haitianled solution to the crisis is central to curbing violence,
enabling a resumption of the normal functioning of
Haitian institutions and paving the way for free and fair
elections as soon as the security situation permits.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that Brazil
remains committed to Haiti and to the Haitian people.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council (A3), namely, Ghana, Kenya
and Gabon.
We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Helen La Lime for her briefing.
We also welcome the participation of His Excellency
Mr. Jean Victor Généus, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Worship of Haiti, His Excellency Mr. Roberto
Álvarez Gil, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Dominican Republic, the Permanent Representative of
Belize, and Her Excellency Ms. Ifigeneia Kontoleontos,
Permanent Observer for the International Organization
of the Francophonie to the United Nations.
We the African members of the Security Council
have every reason to be extremely unsettled by the
situation in Haiti. Witnessing the widespread lack of
security, the growing deterioration of the humanitarian
and public-health situation status, and the lack of
political cohesion, we recognize historical and global
causal factors that we have also suffered from. Since
our last meeting (see S/PV.9136), the situation has not
improved. It has sadly worsened.
We again reiterate our call for action that is
supported and accepted by Haitian-led and Haitianowned political, humanitarian and security initiatives.
We therefore urge Haiti’s Government, political class
and civil society to deliver mediated starting points
on a process that will overcome the political impasse,
address insecurity, begin the recovery of the rule of law,
deliver humanitarian aid and offer economic relief. At
a minimum, dialogue must achieve an agreed common
approach to deliver political reforms that include a
constitutional basis and then free and fair democratic
elections. All attempts should be made to make the
dialogue inclusive, particularly by ensuring that it has
the strong participation of women and youth.
22-63446

17/10/2022

The question concerning Haiti

All stakeholders need to respond to the urgency
of the situation. Lack of agreement on a way forward
threatens to make the security and humanitarian
situation slide out of control, with dire costs for the
people of Haiti, and particularly the most vulnerable.
It makes it more difficult for even the most wellintentioned external actors to offer the immediate relief
that millions of Haitians desperately need.
The people of Haiti do not have to walk alone. We
encourage them to take advantage of the instruments
available to them through regional organizations,
particularly the Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
In this regard, we therefore welcome the commitment of
support made by the forty-third regular meeting of the
Conference of Heads of Government of the Caribbean
Community, held from 3 to 5 July, in Suriname. We
urge the African Union and African States to work with
CARICOM in support of Haiti.
The A3 is exceedingly troubled by the surge in
violence and the impunity benefiting armed gangs.
We commend the bravery and dedicated efforts by
the Haitian National Police to address the situation.
But amid insurmountable odds, gang violence, sexual
and gender-based violence and kidnappings have all
continued unabated.
We strongly condemn all actors that are blocking
the movement of food and fuel and in any way
impeding trade and humanitarian access, leading to
severe shortages in food supplies, access to water,
electricity and other essential public services. If this
situation continues, what is already an emergency will
further worsen. The A3 therefore welcomes the request
by the Government of Haiti for international support
to counter the armed gangs and restore normalcy. We
also welcome the Secretary-General’s timely letter
(S/2022/747) detailing the options available to support
this request. We therefore reiterate our call for urgent
international support to counter gang violence and
strengthen the capacity of the Haitian National Police.
We recognize Haiti’s difficult and tragic experience
with external intervention. We urge the international
community to take this into account in making any
offers for involvement. All efforts on behalf of Haiti
should be sensitive to the need to ensure trust and to
further, in a transparent manner, the security and
humanitarian well-being of the people.
Aware of the contribution that illicit arms make to
worsening insecurity, the A3 welcomes the finalization

S/PV.9153

of the National Action Plan to implement the Roadmap
for Implementing the Caribbean Priority Actions on
the Illicit Proliferation of Firearms and Ammunition
across the Caribbean in a Sustainable Manner by
2030. We call upon the United Nations system and the
international community to support national authorities
in implementing the Action Plan.
We also support efforts by Member States and the
international community to block the flow of weapons
to gangs and any associated parties. However, this
should not be done in a way that impedes the efforts of
the police to enforce law and order. We encourage the
actions already initiated by the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, in particular through police training,
to assist the Haitian authorities in border management,
stopping illegal trafficking in arms and illicit drugs and
countering organized crime, as well as in strengthening
the State’s capacity in the collection of public revenues.
We urge the Security Council and Member States
to act not only against the gangs but also their sponsors
and facilitators. To do this requires a clear process
of investigation and reporting that needs urgently to
be established.
The A3 deplores the persistent human rights
violations against vulnerable people. In particular,
we regret the inability to enforce pending warrants
for prominent individuals credibly linked to those
violations. It is crucial to secure justice for all victims
of atrocities.
To cut off the flow of weapons and financing to the
gangs, and to ensure accountability for human rights
violations, we support the proposed sanctions resolution
as an important step. Of critical importance is the need
to resuscitate the entire criminal justice system. We call
for urgent support for Haiti to carry out comprehensive
justice sector reforms aimed at addressing prolonged
pretrial detentions, the establishment of legal aid
offices, the expediting of court cases and the setting up
of functioning court registries.
We note from the lessons of history that peace and
development are inseparable. The A3 reiterates that
efforts aimed at addressing the political and security
situation must be accompanied by the rollout of a
comprehensive social and economic programme. In this
regard, the International Monetary Fund must commit
to pursuing this objective.

22-634469/20

S/PV.9153

The question concerning Haiti

We are disturbed by the inhumane large-scale
deportations of Haitians in search of safety witnessed in
recent weeks and months. We urge the strict observance
of international human rights and refugee laws by all
neighbouring and nearby States.
We call on Haitians to rally around a common
ideal of rebuilding their country. The A3 once again
reaffirms its support for the work of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti. Its role in assisting Haiti
to navigate its multiple crises is critical. We therefore
continue to urge its further strengthening to provide the
support that is commensurate with Haiti’s needs.
In conclusion, the A3 stands in solidarity with
Haiti. We will continue to do our utmost to listen to
the people of Haiti and act in their interest during this
moment of extreme peril.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General La Lime for her briefing and
insights on the deteriorating situation in Haiti, and
we welcome her suggestions and recommendations.
I also welcome the participation of Foreign Minister
Généus of Haiti and Foreign Minister Álvarez Gil of
the Dominican Republic, as well as the representatives
of the International Organization of the Francophonie
and Belize at this meeting.
The situation is desperate and hardly needs any
comment. I will therefore limit my statement to a
few key remarks. First, the irony could not be more
painful: Haiti, the first Black Republic, is today the
poorest nation in the Americas and is facing an acute
political, economic, security and health crisis, which
has paralysed the country and sparked a breakdown of
law and order. As has been amply highlighted, almost
everything in the country seems to be at a standstill.
There is one exception: gang violence and lawlessness.
Gangs own the streets, having substituted official
law with their own, paralysing normal life. They are
preventing economic activity, including the distribution
of diesel and petrol, and bringing transport to a halt,
with resulting widespread looting and shootouts
becoming increasingly common. Gangs are now getting
together and dictating their terms to political actors. It
is a symptom of their power and of what is coming if
the situation is not immediately and properly addressed
and reversed.
When nearly half of Haiti’s population is
experiencing high levels of acute food insecurity, with
thousands of citizens at the capital are suffering famine
10/20

17/10/2022

conditions, when all safeguards to prevent human rights
violations and widespread abuse have been abandoned,
when the State authority is nowhere to be found, the
situation has reached the breaking point. People are
right to ask, “Where is the State?”, “Where is the
political class?”, “Who is behind the wheel?”
This dire situation will only get worse if some
degree of security and rule of law is not immediately
restored. Combating gangs and their brutal violence,
criminal activity, corruption, smuggling and trafficking
in weapons should be the top priority. This is a must.
Otherwise gangs will only rise, and their suffocating
power and metastatic grip will only increase. The
security material provided by the United States and
Canada is a most welcome move.
As if that were not enough, this complex situation
has enabled an outbreak of cholera, bringing back
painful memories. The lack of fuel has forced hospitals
and health centres to cut services; water delivery
companies are shut, thereby creating conditions for an
exponential increase of the disease across the country.
It is therefore paramount to create a humanitarian
corridor so as to allow fuel to reach the main hospitals
and other cholera-response centres in order to limit
its spread.
Among other crimes, armed gangs have used rape,
including collective rapes, and other forms of sexual
violence to instil fear, punish, subjugate and inflict
pain on local populations, with the ultimate goal of
expanding their influence. It is dangerous to be a girl or
a woman in Haiti today. That is the direct consequence
of widespread impunity and easy access to high-calibre
weapons and ammunition trafficked from abroad. This
must be reversed for life to have meaning and for any
prospects for the future. In that respect, support for
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime action on
the ground is paramount.
Haiti needs help; it needs it now as a matter of the
highest priority. We support the two draft resolutions
proposed by the United States and Mexico and are
in favour of sanctioning those responsible, who are
strangulating an entire country and its population. We
also fully support a strong and robust security mandate
in order to provide authorities and law-enforcement
bodies with the necessary means to guarantee safe and
adequate conditions of life.
But let us be clear — it would be illusory to believe
that solutions can only come from outside. The political
22-63446

17/10/2022

The question concerning Haiti

class of Haiti should get its act together, leave aside its
vested interests and any other interests but one — the
one that the country needs and that its desperate people
hope for. Political actors cannot be bystanders of a
house on fire; they should be the first ones to put it out.
Only that can help restore normalcy in order to tackle
other major issues and create — at the appropriate
time — the basis for elections.
We stand with Haiti and its people. The best way
for all of us to show our solidarity is to act with urgency
in considering the Government’s request for the support
of a united Council.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General La Lime for her briefing. I
also welcome the Foreign Ministers of Haiti and the
Dominican Republic, as well as the representatives
of Belize and the International Organization of the
Francophonie, to this meeting.
Norway welcomes the convening of this meeting
today. The situation in Haiti is alarming. We are appalled
by the reported levels of violence in Haiti, including
widespread sexual and gender-based violence, as
reflected in the joint United Nations Integrated Office
in Haiti-Office of United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights report published just on Thursday
(S/2022/761). It is also reported that many children have
been killed or injured in crossfire, even while in their
homes and schools, and boys and girls are being coerced
to engage in gang activity. The population, especially
the children, in Haiti must be protected, and impunity
for violations and abuses of human rights must end.
We note the request by the Government of Haiti for
a specialized armed force to address the acute security
crisis. We welcome today’s discussions on how we best
can support the Haitian National Police’s efforts to
address the security situation.
We commend the tireless efforts of the United
Nations and humanitarian workers in Haiti during this
difficult period. Their work is critical, particularly with
the worrisome resurgence of cholera. Swift action must
be taken now to stop its spread. But that cannot happen
if it remains impossible to reach areas in need with
basic services like clean water. We therefore reiterate
the need for humanitarians to be granted access, to
have their freedom of movement ensured and for their
supplies to be respected.

S/PV.9153

With food insecurity on the rise, we strongly
condemn the looting of World Food Programme
warehouses, which severely diminishes critical
provisions. Civilians should not have to bear the brunt
of criminality, yet that is what we are seeing every
day. Political compromises must be found to forge
reconciliation and a path towards elections. The only
solution for Haiti is one created by Haitians themselves.
Steps must be taken to restore order and trust for the
sake of the Haitian people.
Norway believes that sanctions, as proposed by the
United States and Mexico, can be an important tool
to address violence committed by armed groups and
criminal networks. For the efficiency of the sanctions
regime, it must include safeguards for due process.
The Security Council should have a clear view on how
to deal with this issue going forward. One option is
to look to existing processing, such as the Office of
the Ombudsperson.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General La Lime for
her sobering briefing this afternoon. I recognize the
presence of the representatives of Haiti, the Dominican
Republic, Belize and the International Organization of
la Francophonie in today’s Council meeting.
I would like to make three points today on behalf of
the United Kingdom.
First, we remain deeply concerned about the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation within Haiti,
with armed gangs blockading roads and restricting the
transport of fuel throughout the country. As a result,
medical services are unable to reach those most in need,
including people affected by the cholera outbreaks,
which have exacerbated the misery of the Haitian
people. Fuel must be able to reach hospitals, and routes
into hospitals must be cleared so that those affected
can reach them. Perpetrators of gang violence must
be held to account and denied the capacity to spread
further instability and suffering. In that connection, we
welcome the sanctions draft resolution proposed by the
United States and Mexico as a positive contribution to
the security and stability of Haiti.
Secondly,
we
acknowledge
the
Haitian
Government’s urgent request for international support
in tackling the current security situation. We welcome
further Council discussion on the authorization of an
international security assistance mission, as proposed
by the Secretary-General. Lead by Haitian needs,

22-6344611/20

S/PV.9153

The question concerning Haiti

the international community should help restore
effective governance and combat endemic gang
violence. International efforts should also support an
environment in which free and fair elections can be
held as soon as possible.
Thirdly, the United Kingdom’s offers its full
support to the United Nations Integrated Office in
Haiti (BINUH), which continues to operate in deeply
challenging circumstances. BINUH has provided
invaluable assistance to the Haitian Government over
the course of its mandate. It will play a key role in
creating the space for political stakeholders to agree
a solution that restores security and stability for the
Haitian people.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Helen
La Lime for her thorough briefing and her efforts
in Haiti. We also welcome the participation of the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Haiti and the Dominican
Republic as well as the representatives of Belize and
the International Organization of la Francophonie in
today’s meeting.
We strongly condemn the dangerous increase in the
levels of violence directly targeting civilians in Haiti due
to the continued control of gangs over neighbourhoods
and critical infrastructure in the country, accompanied
by killings, abduction and recruitment of children.
We also condemn in the strongest terms acts of sexual
and gender-based violence and their use to terrorize,
humiliate and control the population. All those
developments once again point to the dire need for
an end to the violence and for calm. In that regard,
we welcome the Government’s efforts to seek urgent
solutions to address violence and insecurity. We also
welcome national, regional and international initiatives
towards developing strategies for the capacity-building
of national institutions to tackle corruption and empower
the State in order to promote its broader presence,
particularly in the long term. We also look forward to
discussing the options set out in the Secretary-General’s
recent letter (S/2022/747) and to working together in
the Security Council, including with the co-penholders,
through the two draft resolutions to support the Haitian
people at this critical juncture.
The recent reports on the resurgence of cholera,
in addition to complex socioeconomic challenges
facing Haiti as well as severe food insecurity and
water shortages in conjunction with the closing of fuel
12/20

17/10/2022

facilities, particularly the main fuel terminal, further
exacerbate those challenges. We cannot let that situation
continue as it is, otherwise we will end up with another
dangerous health crisis. In that context, we condemn the
obstruction of deliveries of humanitarian aid and basic
services to those in need, and in particular the looting
of critical facilities. We reiterate the importance of
ensuring the safe, immediate and unhindered delivery
of humanitarian aid to mitigate the suffering of the
most vulnerable populations in Haiti. It is especially
relevant to keep that matter under consideration during
our current discussions on sanctions measures, so as to
prevent any unintended damage that might affect the
humanitarian efforts in Haiti.
There cannot be a sustainable response to the
economic, humanitarian and security crises in
Haiti without finding a Haitian-led and Haitianowned political solution. In that context, we note the
developments that the Government informed us about
with regard to the political track, and we call on all
relevant actors to engage in good faith to reach a
political settlement and support the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) and its critical role
in that regard. For all efforts to be sustainable, national
dialogue must be inclusive, particularly with the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women and the
inclusion of young people, so as to create an environment
conducive to conducting peaceful elections as soon as
the security situation permits. Any delay in efforts to
find a political solution will only prompt the gangs to
continue to escalate the violence.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates stresses
that it will continue to participate constructively in
discussions on the means to deter armed groups in Haiti,
including through the sanctions measures currently
under consideration. We reaffirm our appreciation
of the efforts of BINUH and all United Nations staff
in Haiti. The United Arab Emirates also reiterates its
solidarity with the people of Haiti in their plight.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
La Lime for her briefing. I welcome the presence of the
Foreign Ministers of Haiti and the Dominican Republic
and other representatives to today’s meeting.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/761)
submitted last week and today’s briefing by the Special
Representative both describe an unprecedented crisis in
Haiti. The level of chaos, complexities and difficulties
22-63446

17/10/2022

The question concerning Haiti

may very well be beyond our imagining. China cares
deeply about the worsening humanitarian situation and
the recent cholera outbreak in Haiti. We express our
profound concern over the inability and inaction of the
Government, while gang violence is directed against
civilians with impunity. We express our deep sympathy
to the Haitian people, especially women and children,
for their dire misery, caused by the current chaos.
The political parties in Haiti, ignoring its people’s
suffering, are still engaged in fighting over party and
personal interests. That is more than disappointing. All
Haitian political parties and factions should demonstrate
a sense of responsibility and duty by strengthening
dialogue and coming together to reach an agreement
on a political framework and transitional arrangement
to help break the current political impasse and restore
constitutional order.
The United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(BINUH) must take concrete actions to urge and
encourage Haitian political parties and groups to bridge
their differences through dialogue and consultation
and develop a road map for the political process. We
welcome the readiness expressed by the members of the
Caribbean Community to facilitate the Haitian political
process and help the country emerge from the political
stalemate as soon as possible.
Eradicating the scourge of gang violence is both
a starting point for any improvement in the current
situation and a prerequisite for a solution in the country.
Council members and the Secretary-General have
a clear understanding and a strong consensus in that
regard. Resolution 2645 (2022), adopted by the Security
Council in July, indicated that the Council was ready
to take mandatory measures against gang members
and their supporters. Last week, the co-penholders
on Haiti, the United States and Mexico, circulated
a draft resolution on imposing sanctions on criminal
gangs, for which we express our appreciation. China
supports targeted sanctions, including a travel ban,
an assets freeze and an arms embargo, inter alia, on
gang members and their supporters. We hope that those
measures will be robust and effective and that they will
truly make a difference in deterring gang violence,
cracking down on violent crime and cutting off the
supply of funding and weapons to criminal gangs.
We hope that the co-penholders will listen to
Member States and take our views into account,
continuously improve the draft resolution and fine-tune

S/PV.9153

all the provisions with a view to ensuring that the
sanctions are robust and address the core of the problem.
We must prevent gang members from using potential
loopholes to evade sanctions, on the one hand, and, on
the other, avert a situation where implementation is
only superficial and merely becomes a formality with
no real impact.
The Secretary-General’s recent proposal to support
Haiti in improving its security situation deserves to be
studied carefully. China is ready to hold an in-depth
exchange of views with others. We have taken note
of the recent call by the Haitian Prime Minister for a
special force to be sent to Haiti. We have also taken
note of the immediate opposition from some political
parties and groups to the presence of a foreign armed
force in Haiti. At a time when the Haitian Government
lacks legitimacy and is unable to govern, will sending
such a rapid-reaction force to Haiti be met with the
understanding, support and cooperation of the parties
in Haiti, or will it face resistance from, or even trigger
violent confrontation among, the population? We need to
carefully consider such issues in an integrated manner.
Since the 1990s, the United Nations has deployed
successive missions, including the International
Civilian Mission in Haiti, the United Nations Mission
in Haiti, the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti, the United Nations Mission for Justice Support
in Haiti and now BINUH. Sadly, none of those missions
achieved their intended objective. The United Nations
work in Haiti over the past 30 years has proved that
a rapid solution brought from outside will result
in only temporary results, with no lasting impact
Without a strong desire, a sense of common purpose
and collaboration among all sectors of Haitian society,
outside advocacy and efforts will ultimately not be of
much help. After all, the key to resolving the Haitian
issue is in the hands of the Haitian people themselves.
The international community should take the long
view by supporting Haitian people in their search for
a comprehensive, home-grown solution based on their
own unique situation.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Ms. Helen La Lime for her briefing.
We welcome the participation of the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Haiti and the Dominican Republic
at our meeting.
Unfortunately, in the three weeks since the Council
last met on Haiti (see S/PV.9136), the situation in the

22-6344613/20

S/PV.9153

The question concerning Haiti

country has become a worst-case scenario. The fuel
terminal and several other port facilities in Port-auPrince are not under the Government’s control. That
has exacerbated Haiti’s already precarious political,
socioeconomic and humanitarian situation. As we
understand it, criminal gangs are preventing people
from leaving the capital, which restricts their circulation
and deprives them of access to basic goods and services.
There is a near total shortage of everything, from
medicine to food and water. On the streets of Port-auPrince and other towns, violence and lawlessness reign.
The current paralysis of the entire system of
Government institutions undermines any effort to
rectify the situation in other areas. In addition to all the
troubles that the Haitian people must endure, there is
also an outbreak of cholera.
Of course, all those problems are interconnected
and cannot be resolved easily. Their root cause lies in
the stagnation of the political process. In that regard,
we see no alternative to restoring constitutional order
in Haiti through dialogue with the participation of
broad sectors of Haitian society, holding elections
and conducting reforms. As noted in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2022/761), a necessary condition
for improving security in the country is settling the
political crisis.
We have taken note of the report of the Government
of Haiti on the national dialogue process. We note the
positive role played by the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti in advancing the process. We understand
that the problems in the negotiation process are, to a
large extent, connected to the deteriorating security
situation and lawlessness. Nonetheless, we call on all
parties to put aside their opportunistic differences and
continue negotiations.
As rightly stated in the Government’s document,
the humanitarian crisis in the country should enable all
actors to understand that the interests of society must
become the highest priority.
The general situation in the country is, of course,
affected by the fact that Haitians have not yet seen an
open and full investigation into the assassination of
former President Moïse. More than a year after that
terrible tragedy, which shook Haiti and to a large
extent was the trigger of the current crisis, no credible
version of the events that, inter alia, could explain the
involvement of foreign nationals in that crime has been
presented to Haitian society.
14/20

17/10/2022

In that context, we stress that external interference
in Haiti’s political processes and the subordination of
the country to the ambitions of prominent regional
players who view the American continent as their
backyard is unacceptable.
Together with the resolution of political problems,
the capacity of the Haitian National Police must be
strengthened, and the urgent issue of access to critical
infrastructure must be addressed. We understand that
the country’s law enforcement cannot accomplish
that alone.
We have considered the Secretary-General’s
proposal for an international response to Prime Minister
Henry’s appeal. We have also noted that there are
varying opinions on that matter within Haitian society.
Many opposition groups call to not allow foreign
intervention by rightly noting the less-than-successful
experience, to put it mildly, with foreign interference
in the country’s affairs. We call for taking into account
such opinions and carefully considering all possible
implications of bringing foreign international and
regional contingents to the island.
We do not share the desire of the co-penholders to
mix the issue of unblocking Haiti’s port infrastructure
with the issue of introducing a sanctions regime in the
country. We do not support the attempts to quickly push
a draft resolution on sanctions through the Council.
Let me recall that we agreed to discuss the Council’s
restrictive measures on the condition that their future
effectiveness, targeted nature and humanitarian
consequences be carefully considered.
Security Council sanctions are a serious and longterm instrument that requires in-depth analysis and
detailed negotiations on the text, especially given that
the last time the Council introduced a sanctions regime
was five years ago. Expecting that a hastily drafted
document, following its adoption by the Council, will
magically rid Haiti of all its troubles is, at the very
least, naive.
In the case of Haiti, every effort must be made to
ensure that the measures taken are aimed at restoring
State control and are not perceived, as is often the case,
as a way of punishing the entire country and its people.
Sanctions must not become an impediment to providing
socioeconomic assistance to the country, nor should
they stifle the political process at its initial stages.
22-63446

17/10/2022

The question concerning Haiti

S/PV.9153

We call on the sponsors of the document to abandon
the tactics of a negotiations race and artificial deadlines
and to finally pay attention to the constructive proposals
and concerns of many Council members.

provinces. In that regard, the blocking of the Varreux
oil terminal is unacceptable, as it compromises the
delivery of humanitarian aid and the fight against
the epidemic.

Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank Special Representative La Lime for
her briefing. I welcome the presence at this meeting of
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Worship of Haiti
and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Dominican
Republic, as well as of the Permanent Representative
of Belize to the United Nations and the Permanent
Observer for the International Organization of la
Francophonie to the United Nations.

France cannot resign itself to the current spiral.
We are ready to do more, together with our partners.
We will actively contribute to discussions on the draft
resolutions that were submitted by the United States and
Mexico. We will continue, as long as it is necessary, to
mobilize the international community to come to the
aid of the Haitian people.

While the situation in Haiti continues to deteriorate
on all fronts, cholera has made a comeback on the
island. That is all the more alarming since humanitarian
and medical assistance to fight the epidemic cannot be
freely provided.
France therefore took solemn note of the request
made by the Prime Minister on 6 October. We call on
the international community to remain mobilized and
to redouble their efforts to help Haiti.
We share the observation made by the SecretaryGeneral in his letter of 8 October (S/2022/747). The
health and security situation calls for a more robust
response from the international community. Our
objective must be to more effectively support the
Haitian National Police, which is on the front lines in
combating the gangs. That is why France is in favour
of imposing sanctions on all those who threaten peace
and security in Haiti. We must increase the pressure on
criminal groups, especially gangs, those who help them
and those who finance them. We hope that the work that
has begun in the Security Council will be completed as
soon as possible.
Rebuilding an effective justice system and
combating impunity must also be a priority if we hope
to eventually put an end to the violence.
France will continue to urge all Haitian political
actors to find an agreement leading to democratic
elections when the security conditions are met. In the
current context, the political class must demonstrate
responsibility to resume dialogue and overcome
the impasse.
France will also continue to mobilize to facilitate
the delivery of supplies to the most vulnerable in the
poor neighbourhoods of Port-au-Prince and in the

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Worship
of Haiti.
Mr. Généus (Haiti) (spoke in French): First, allow
me to acknowledge Gabon’s presidency of the Council
in the month of October. I once again commend the
work of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Haiti, Ms. Helen La Lime, and thank her
for her briefing.
I would also like to express my sincere gratitude to
the members of the Council for their growing interest in
the Republic of Haiti, as demonstrated by their respective
statements. I took note of their timely remarks.
I welcome the presence here today of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Dominican Republic and
commend his country’s efforts to assist us at this
challenging time. I also welcome the representative
of Belize, on behalf of the Caribbean Community,
and the observer of the International Organization of
la Francophonie.
For Haitians, today’s meeting to discuss the
situation in Haiti is highly symbolic. We must recall that
17 October is an important date, commemorating the
216th anniversary of the death of the father of Haitian
independence, Emperor Jean-Jacques Dessalines. He is
the icon of the Haitian revolution of 1804. It was under
his leadership that our sacred union, sealed by generals
of various political ideologies and backgrounds, was
established to end the inhuman system of slavery
and create the first Black State in the world. He thus
reinvented the word liberty and forever changed the
course of world history by imposing the universal
values of respect and human dignity that are enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations.
I have the delicate duty of conveying to the Security
Council a distress call from an entire population that is

22-6344615/20

S/PV.9153

The question concerning Haiti

suffering and of declaring loud and clear that Haitians
are not living, they are merely surviving. I speak to the
Council on behalf of 4 million children who cannot
attend school because of gang violence. I also speak
on behalf of all of the women and girls who have been
raped and the innocent people who have been murdered.
I take this opportunity to convey to the international
community and the Security Council the sincere
gratitude of my Prime Minister, Mr. Ariel Henry, and
of his Government for the speed with which the Council
and Member States have considered the question
concerning Haiti and demonstrated their commitment
to our fight against armed gangs and their sponsors,
who terrorize the population. That is a step in the
right direction.
I also welcome the measures that the American and
Mexican Administrations plan to take to against gang
leaders and those who fund them. I also welcome all
measures already taken by the Council and those that it
intends to adopt to stop the scourge, which is a topic of
major concern for the international community.
I am describing to the Council the stark and
unfathomable plight of the Haitian people, as I have
done in every international forum. Once again, my
Government requests active solidarity to address
these major challenges. Since 12 September, the
situation has dangerously deteriorated in my country.
Tragic and regrettable events take place each
day — lives lost, kidnappings, the destruction of public
and private property, rape, theft, looting, threats and
intimidation — that plunge the country further into
chaos, with extremely serious consequences for all its
people. In addition, cholera has resurfaced.
Through its resolution 2645 (2022), which was
unanimously adopted on 15 July, the Council has
extended the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti (BINUH) for a year, until 15 July 2023.
Pursuant to paragraph 3 of that resolution, the Council
requests the Government of Haiti to provide an update
on the national dialogue process, which brings together
all Haitian parties, by 17 October. I am here at today’s
meeting to provide a summary of the document that
the Prime Minister transmitted to the Council, through
the Secretary-General, in a letter dated 8 October
(S/2022/747).
In recent weeks, we have witnessed a considerable
deterioration in the socioeconomic situation of the
country. The Thor oil terminal, at the southern edge of
16/20

17/10/2022

the capital, had significant difficulty in providing fuel
via the usual means because of the activity of gangs
that control the neighbourhood. On 12 October, armed
gangs seized and took over the Varreux oil terminal,
the largest in the country. Attempts by law enforcement
officials to remove roadblocks failed, as they were met
with fire from large-calibre weapons. This resulted in
fuel shortages, with disastrous consequences for the
country. Hospitals were forced to close their doors or
significantly reduce their operations.
Drinking water no longer flows from taps. Pumping
stations have stopped for lack of fuel. Public transport
is limited. Supplying the capital and provincial towns
with food is becoming difficult — this could swiftly
compound the humanitarian crisis. Twelve thousand
jobs are threatened in the free zone of Caracol, which
could close its doors for lack of fuel.
The removal of Government fuel subsidies was one
of the causes of the sociopolitical unrest that rocked
the country and led to looting and targeted acts of
aggression against members of the Government and
political figures and their property.
This sociopolitical turmoil was also funded
by economic actors whose immediate interests
were threatened. They object to the removal of the
$400 million subsidies for oil imports. That measure
sparked discontent among the mafia sectors. They
capitalized on the situation to cause trouble and paralyse
the country and sought to thwart the transition process
by any means possible.
That is the unstable and dangerous environment
in which the dispossessed Haitian population lives and
the situation with which they are forced to contend
every day. Haitians eagerly await a return to normalcy
and, in particular, security — the primary basic good.
Haiti needs urgent robust support to assist the Haitian
National Police in stemming the humanitarian crisis
by neutralizing the armed gangs in order to guarantee
seamless fuel distribution and facilitate the resumption
of operations.
In that regard, the Prime Minister, Mr. Ariel
Henry, with a mandate from the Council of Ministers,
addressed a letter dated 8 October to Secretary-General
António Guterres, requesting the active solidarity of
countries that are friends of Haiti.
With regard to progress in the national dialogue
that brings together Haitian stakeholders, in addition
22-63446

17/10/2022

The question concerning Haiti

to the initiatives taken by the Government and the main
results achieved since Prime Minister Ariel Henry took
office in July 2021, we must underscore, during the socalled post-resolution period, the salient points of the
political talks that took place. The first is the troika
initiative, which brings together the academia, private
and religious sectors. It serves as a facilitator and has
the support of BINUH. Despite its efforts, results were
not encouraging.
The 11 September Facilitation and Dialogue
Commission is a personal initiative of the Prime
Minister. It started specifically with a visit to the
home of one of the leaders of the Montana Group.
The initiative, called the “national compromise”,
was initiated by civil society members in Haiti, with
the support of BINUH, and has sparked considerable
hope. Several major concessions have been made
on both sides. Nonetheless, at the last minute, the
lack of understanding demonstrated by some and the
intransigence of others upended the agreement made
with a branch of the Montana Group.
To broaden the negotiating framework, the Prime
Minister included the private sector in the discussions on
the future of the country. The private sector supported
the Government’s principal macroeconomic reforms, in
particular those related to customs and tax revenues.
The document on the national compromise I mentioned
was shared with the private sector, which is aware of the
national pact for the implementation of a development
plan for the next 20 years. The stakeholders concerned
appear to want to openly adhere to the approach
and seem ready to sign the agreement, alongside the
political sector and civil society.
In his letter dated 8 October to the Council, in
response to the request of the Haitian Government, the
Secretary-General specifically urged the international
community, including members of the Council, to
urgently consider the request of the Haitian Government
to address the crisis. Today Haiti faces major security,
political, economic and social challenges. The
humanitarian crisis and the resurgence of cholera
exacerbate the situation.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the Haitian
Government’s commitment to redoubling its efforts
to reach a political agreement that would enable the
re-establishment of democratic institutions, through
the organization of general elections as soon as
security conditions allow, in order to hand over power

S/PV.9153

to the democratically elected officials, freely chosen by
the people.
The President (spoke in French): I now give
the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Dominican Republic.
Mr. Álvarez Gil (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): Much has been said and written about the
crisis that threatens the existence of a large part of
the Haitian population, who are stoically enduring the
terrifying normalization of violence and deterioration
of the environment and the health sector, which has
shocked the international community. We thank the
members of the Security Council for their commitment
to responding to this emergency situation, and the
Secretary-General for his considerable efforts in
starting the process to respond to the Haitian crisis.
In the light of what we all already know, it is now
reasonable to expect that the Security Council will
respond favourably to the repeated requests for action,
in particular the request of the Haitian authorities
themselves, addressed to the Council and the
international community, for urgent assistance to curb
the excesses, abuses and crimes committed by armed
gangs. Those crimes seriously affect the welfare of the
Haitian people, depriving them of access to food and
basic health services, which, according to reports of
the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti, victimize
women and children in particular, as Ambassador La
Lime told us today.
Our country has already expressed its support in
response to the request for assistance from the Prime
Minister of Haiti, and we have acted accordingly.
Similarly, we strongly support a sanctions regime and
an arms embargo, adopted by the Security Council,
against individuals and institutions, as our Government
has already implemented.
As if those woes were not enough, there is now a new
cholera outbreak in Haiti, which could mean thousands
more lives lost. Given the way in which cholera spreads
and the disastrous effects it has had in the recent past,
the international community must take swift action. In
the light of the tragic situation, the Haitian authorities
and people await an effective response that will provide
some hope of relief from the disastrous consequences
they now experience.
As we have already stated, all efforts to achieve peace
in that country must be accompanied by an inclusive

22-6344617/20

S/PV.9153

The question concerning Haiti

political process, led by the Haitians themselves,
in order to bring about the necessary national unity
to address the root causes of the protracted crisis.
However, we are at a turning point. The priority is to
achieve peace and deliver as much humanitarian aid as
possible to alleviate the suffering of the Haitian people.
Meanwhile, in view of the alarming health situation
and given how easily and quickly diseases naturally
spread, our country implements health programmes
and conducts active epidemiological surveillance at
its borders, along with other measures to protect the
people of the Dominican Republic from health threats.
We face an unprecedented humanitarian and
security crisis in Haiti. It must be addressed with the
urgency it deserves. There is no time to waste. We again
call upon the Security Council to use all the resources
and means at its disposal to reverse the situation and
prevent the effects of the crisis from spreading beyond
the borders of our neighbouring country. Eleven million
Haitians demand a response from the only multilateral
Organization that has the mandate and responsibility to
provide it.
It is clear to us that the principal mandate of the
Security Council is to maintain international peace and
security. However, that mandate will never be delivered
if a citizen, a human being, cannot give a neighbour
a brotherly embrace, in peace, as is the case in Haiti
today. That is a key part of the human spirit.

17/10/2022

gang violence, sexual and gender-based violence and
kidnappings continue unabated, eroding the security
landscape, plunging the country into lawlessness,
claiming hundreds of Haitian lives and disrupting the
proper functioning of Haitian society.
CARICOM firmly condemns the incessant
warfare and actions of the gangs that have essentially
paralysed the country. We emphasize the critical need
to strengthen the capacity of the Haitian National
Police in a concerted effort to fully restore security and
enable the rule of law to prevail. In that connection,
the Heads of Government of the Caribbean Community
have taken note of the appeal of Prime Minister Henry
for urgent help from Haiti’s international partners
in the form of short-term assistance to address the
security and humanitarian crises. CARICOM’s Heads
of Government are therefore conducting internal
consultations to determine how best to respond to
Mr. Henry’s call. Strengthening the State’s security
apparatus must also extend to measures to combat
corruption and illicit financial and weapons flows.
The combination of those scourges is a direct threat
to the people of Haiti and could have a dangerously
destabilizing spillover effect on neighbouring States in
the region.

We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Helen La Lime, for her
briefing and appreciate the efforts of the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti in the country’s
stabilization process.

CARICOM is deeply alarmed by the ongoing
gang blockade of fuel, preventing people’s access
to essential services such as health care, safe and
reliable drinking water and proper sanitation, which
are basic human rights, indispensable to sustaining
lives and maintaining dignity. They are also critical
in thwarting the wider spread of cholera, which has
regrettably resurfaced in the country. This issue must
be confronted immediately to prevent a repetition of
the tremendous suffering that Haitians experienced in
years gone by. The growing food insecurity is also of
grave concern. Millions are facing acute hunger, and
the situation is now exacerbated by global food prices
and soaring inflation. Vulnerabilities are high as Haiti
struggles with multiple crises at once.

CARICOM remains extremely concerned about
the situation in our sister nation, Haiti. Peace, security,
stability and prosperity are the legitimate aspirations of
all peoples, and they are long overdue for the Haitian
people. However, there can be no lasting stability in
Haiti without a long-term strategy for sustainable
development that seeks to strengthen the country’s
institutions and its economy. Unquestionably, a
crucial aspect of stability is security — and in Haiti,

We consider it urgent to ensure that all national
stakeholders engage in meaningful and constructive
political dialogue, guided by a spirit of compromise.
Personal and partisan interests must be set aside to
bridge the existing political chasm, build confidence
and effectively facilitate the political process. But
the Haitian people cannot go it alone. They require
meaningful support from various regional, hemispheric
and international partners to assist in implementing the

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belize.
Mr. Fuller (Belize): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the 14 member States of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM).

18/20

22-63446

17/10/2022

The question concerning Haiti

way forward. CARICOM, of which Haiti is a valued
member, has offered its instruments and tools and is
well placed to provide support for the electoral process
and a good-offices role in a dialogue with national
stakeholders. Nor can we discount the potential role
and contributions of the Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States, the Organization of American
States and the African Union in that regard. Above
all, the efforts to tackle the seemingly insurmountable
challenges faced by the Haitian people must be Haitianled and -owned. In that regard, an inclusive inter-Haitian
dialogue process, with the full and equal participation
of women and young people, is critical and must be
accompanied by a national reconciliation process.
We reaffirm our solidarity with the Haitian
people in addressing the underlying drivers of the
country’s instability and insecurity. Haiti’s legacy
of underdevelopment cannot be divorced from the
historic injustices it has endured through enslavement,
colonialism and imperialism. Accordingly, the noble
cause of reparative justice can be sidestepped no longer.
Haiti fatigue is not a concept that must be allowed to
take root in our collective consciousness. We cannot
lose compassion in addressing the Haitian crisis. It is
our solemn obligation to remain fully engaged on the
situation in Haiti and to assist our brothers and sisters
who yearn for and deserve a new beginning.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the observer of the International Organization
of la Francophonie.
Mrs. Kontoleontos (spoke in French): On behalf of
the Secretary-General of the International Organization
of la Francophonie, Ms. Louise Mushikiwabo, I
would like to thank the Security Council and you,
Mr. President, for inviting our organization to today’s
meeting on the situation in Haiti. I also want to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Integrated Office in
Haiti for her briefing. And I welcome the presence of
Mr. Généus, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Worship
of Haiti, Mr. Álvarez Gil, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Dominican Republic, and the representative of
Belize at today’s meeting.
The International Organization of la Francophonie
has always affirmed its solidarity with Haiti both on
the political front and through its technical support to
various institutions. Our Secretary-General regularly
brings together representatives of its member States

S/PV.9153

and Governments to discuss the situation in Haiti. She
has sent two missions to identify ways and means to
achieve a peaceful and consensus-based solution to
the country’s challenges. In the past few months she
has engaged in consultations with various bilateral and
multilateral partners with a view to promoting concerted
efforts to resolve the issue of an inter-Haitian dialogue.
On the technical front, the Organization of la
Francophonie has continued to develop cooperation
programmes in support of Haiti’s education system,
political stability, consolidation of democracy and
capacity-building for national institutions in areas such
as elections and the rule of law, among others. Together
with UN-Women, we launched an initiative aimed at
building women candidates’ capacity for political
leadership roles. In partnership with UNESCO, young
Haitians working in the media have been trained in the
fundamentals of journalism and fact-checking, as well
as in the techniques of professional election coverage.
The situation in Haiti is out of control. The
security crisis has become an entrenched political
crisis and now a humanitarian one. The human security
situation continues to deteriorate on the food security,
environmental, health and physical safety fronts, and
has been compounded by armed gang violence. The
threats to security come from internal actors who
are well known throughout the country. The gangs
stoke violence and organize kidnappings. They have
overpowered the State and its ability to conduct its
sovereign functions in the area of domestic security.
Insecurity and poverty feed into each other, and the
worsening poverty provides numerous opportunities for
violent organized-crime networks that are increasingly
recruiting young people in a vicious circle that urgently
needs to be broken.
Furthermore, national production has been at
a standstill for several years. Haiti produces only
13.6 per cent of its consumption of rice, its main food
staple. The erosion of the country’s economic viability
and political legitimacy has prevented the State from
taking effective action to combat the proliferation and
use of small arms and light weapons in the country,
particularly by non-State actors. Haiti also needs
support through assistance in resuming agricultural
production and manufacturing in order to significantly
reduce unemployment among young people.
On the political front, the failure of the recent
civil-society initiative to sign a political agreement

22-6344619/20

S/PV.9153

The question concerning Haiti

between the Prime Minister and opposition groups
demonstrates the challenge of organizing a constructive
and home-grown national dialogue. The continuing
political impasse creates a climate of defiance towards
the political and economic elites.
What is urgent for Haiti right now is a restoration of
security and a response to the humanitarian crisis. The
situation poses a serious and genuine threat to stability
and security in every other country of the Caribbean, the
Americas and beyond. The International Organization
of la Francophonie fully supports the options and
initiatives of its partners in that regard, as well as the
current initiative in the Council to impose sanctions on
gang leaders and their backers. We are committed to
ongoing advocacy to ensure that combating that gangs
is prioritized even above the organization of elections.
In her communiqué dated 6 October our SecretaryGeneral condemns the continuing looting and violence
in Haiti. She requests that national and international

20/20

17/10/2022

efforts be taken to respond to the humanitarian
emergency and urges the national authorities and all
national stakeholders to create conditions that can
enable the delivery of the basic goods and fuel that
are needed to ensure the proper functioning of health
services and the availability of drinking water. We
welcome the relations that have been established with
the Caribbean Community as we work together to
help Haitian stakeholders seek Haitian solutions. The
Organization of la Francophonie remains committed
to an inter-Haitian political dialogue, supported by the
international community, and we stand ready to play
our role in mobilizing partners in that regard.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

22-63446
