IV.

35/124.

93

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political Committee

International co-operation to avert new flows of
refugees

The General Assembly,
Gravely concerned over the increasing flows of
refugees in many parts of the world,
Deeply disturbed by the human suffering affecting
millions of men, women and children who flee or are
forcibly expelled from their homelands and seek refuge
in other countries,
Reaffirming the right of refugees to return to their
homes in their homelands,
Commending the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees for his untiring humanitarian and social efforts,
Commending also all Governments, United Nations
organs, the specialized agencies and intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations which have provided aid for their contributions, and stressing the importance of their efforts in this field,
Noting that, in addition to creating individual human
misery, flows of refugees can impose great political, economic and social burdens upon the international community as a whole, with particularly dire effects on
developing countries with limited resources of their
own,
Considering that massive flows of refugees may not
only affect the domestic order and stability of receiving
States but also jeopardize the stability of entire regions
and thus endanger international peace and security,
Conscious of its duty to examine in depth all aspects of
the refugee problem and to study the means and
resources provided by the relevant provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations in order to maintain international peace and security,
Reaffirming the inviolability of existing international
norms and principles governing responsibilities of
States, especially regarding the protection of refugees.
and reaffirming the framework of competences of international organizations and institutions,

Reaffirming its resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October
1970, by which it approved the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations,
Convinced, therefore, that the United Nations is called
upon to consider, in addition to humanitarian and social relief, suitable means to avert new flows of refugees,
l. Strongly condemns all policies and practices of oppressive and racist regimes as well as aggression, alien
domination and foreign occupation, which are primarily
responsible for the massive flows of refugees throughout the world and which result in inhuman suffering;
2. Invites all Member States to convey to the
Secretary-General their comments and suggestions on
international co-operation to avert new flows of refugees and to facilitate the return of those refugees who
wish to return;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session, for its further examination and thorough study, the views, comments and suggestions expressed by Member States, together with those expressed on the item at its thirty-fifth
session, including all additional contributions per-

taining to the matter which he may receive from other
United Nations organs;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "International cooperation to avert new flows of refugees".

92nd plenary meeting
I I December 1980

35/201.

Questions relating to information

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 3535 (XXX) of 17 December
1975. 31/139 of 16 December 1976, 33/115 A to C of
18 December 1978 and its other resolutions on the question of information, in particular resolutions 34 / 181 and
34/182 of 18 December 1979,

Recalling article 19 of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 21 which provides that everyone has the
right to freedom of opinion and expression and that this
right includes freedom to hold opinions without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and
ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers, and
article 29, which stipulates that these rights and
freedoms may in no case be exercised contrary to the
purposes and principles of the United Nations,
Recalling also articles 19 and 20 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,"
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December '. 974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16
September 1975 on development and international
economic co-operation,
Recalling the recommendations on the question of information and communication contained in the Final
Declaration of the Sixth Conference of Heads of State
or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
Havana from 3 to 9 September I 979, 25 which emphasized, inter alia, that co-operation in the field of information
,titutes an integral part of the struggle for the
creation ~• new international relations in general and of
a new world information and communication order in
particular,
Recalling the Declaration on Fundamental Principles
concerning the Contribution of the Mass Media to
Strengthening Peace and International Understanding,
to the Promotion of Human Rights and to Countering
Racialism, Apartheid and Incitement to War/' adopted
on 28 November 1978 by the General Conference of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, as well as the resolutions on information and
mass communications adopted by the General Conf~rence at its nineteenth. twentieth and twenty-first sessions.
Taking note of the Final Act of the Conference on
Security and Co-operation in Europe. signed at Helsinki
on I August 1975.
-

,, Resolution 217 A (Ill).
·'' Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
Sec A/34/542, annex, sect. I, paras. 280-299.
•,, l:nited Nations Educational. Scientific and Cultural Organi7ation, Records of the General Conference. Twentieth Session, vol. 1.
R esolw ions, pp. I 00- I 04.

94

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

Recalling also the Declaration on the Preparation of
Societies for Life in Peace, 27
Reaffirming the primary role which the General
Assembly is to play in elaborating, co-ordinating and
harmonizing United Nations policies and activities in
the field of information, and recognizing the central and
important role of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization in the field of information and communication and in the implementation of the relevant decisions in this area adopted by the
General Conference of that organization and of the relevant parts of the Assembly resolutions on the subject,
Considering that the publication of the final report of
the International Commission for the Study of Communication Problems 2x is a valuable contribution to the
study of information and communication problems and
that the debate on the report could also help to stimulate
the participation of Governments, professional circles
and the public in the process of the establishment of a
new world information and communication order.
Conscious of the complementarity of the activities in
the field of information and communication and the
need to strengthen co-operation and co-ordination between the organs, organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system that deal with different aspects of information and communication,
Recalling the need to strengthen the co-ordination of
the activities of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization with the other specialized agencies concerned, particularly with the International Telecommunication Union, in the field of
information and communication,
Mindful of the need for all to collaborate in the
establishment of a new world information and communication order based, inter alia, on the free circulation
and wider and better balanced dissemination of information, guaranteeing the diversity of the sources of information and free access to information, and, in particular, the urgent need to change the dependent status
of the developing countries in the field of information
and communication, and intended also to strengthen
peace and international understanding,
Affirming that the establishment of a new world information and communication order is linked to the
new international economic order and is an integral part
of the international development process,
Taking into account with satisfaction the report of the
Committee on lnformation 2" and the report of the Ad
Hoe Working Group of the Committee annexed thereto,
Taking note with satisfaction of the report of the
Secretary-General on questions relating to information, in
Also taking note with satisfaction of the report of the
Director-General of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, '1
Further taking note with satisfaction of the establishment by the General Conference of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization at its
twenty-first session of the International Programme for
the Development of Communication, 12
"Resolution 33/73.
" Published in !°980 by the United Nations Educational. Scientific
and Cultural Organization under the title "Many Voices, One World"
'" Official Records of the General Assemhly. Thirty,/ifth Se.1sio11.
Supplement No. 21 (A/35/21).•
"'A/35/504 and Corr. I.
" See A/35/362.
"See A/35/362/ Add. I. annex I.

Reaffirming the need to ensure a linguistic balance in
the dissemination of information by the United
Nations and an equitable geographical distribution of
personnel, particularly with regard to the senior and
decision-making posts of the D_epartment of Public Information of the Secretariat, in accordance with Article
IOL paragraph 3. of the Charter of the United Nations,

1. Expresses its satisfaction with the relevant resolutions as adopted by the General Conference of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization at its twenty-first session, held at Belgrade
from 23 September to 28 October 1980, in particular the
resolution on the report of the Director-General on the
findings of the International Commission for the Study
of Communication: 11
2. Takes note of the invitation of the DirectorGeneral of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization to take immediate steps to
initiate studies with a view to drawing up the fundamental principles underlying a new world information
and communication order and exploring the possibility
and desirability of such studies serving as a basis for a
Declaration on the Establishment of a New World Information and Communication Order:
3. Expresses its satisfaction at the establishment
within the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization of the International Programme for
the Development of Communication, which constitutes
an important step in the establishment of a new world
information and communication order and which aims
at the development of infrastructures of communications of the developing countries in order to contribute
lo narrowing the gap in the fields of information and
communication between developed and developing
countries as well as among developing countries themselves:
4. Invites Governments, non-governmental organizations and other entities in Member States to extend financial as well as technical support for the
development of communication structures in developing
countries and, in particular, to the International Programme for the Development of Communication:
5. Calls upon the Secretary-General to render full
co-operation and support to the International Programme for the Development of Communication and to
seek and encourage interagency co-operation and the
participation of the agencies in the activities of the Programme and its Intergovernmental Council:
6. Invites Member States to facilitate the widespread
circulation and study of the final report of the International Commission for the Study of Communication
Problems." to take into account its recommendations in
the preparation and strengthening of their national communication capabilities and to include the questions
relating to information and communication in their
development strategy:

7. Takes note of the significant activities which the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization is undertaking with regard to the effects of
the activities of transnational corporations in developing countries within the fields of its competence:
8. Reaffirms the vital need, at the operational level,
for co-operation and co-ordination between the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organiza., !hid. annex II

IV.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political Committee
---

-

------

tion and other organizations of the United Nations
system that are concerned with the question of information and communication;
9. Requests the Director-General of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to submit a progress report on the implementation
of the International Programme for the Development of
Communication to the General Assembly at its thirtysixth session;

II
l. Expresses its satisfaction with the work of the
Committee on Information as reflected in its report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session;n
2. Approves the report of the Committee on Information and the recommendations of its Ad Hoe Working Group contained therein; 34
3. Reaffirms the mandate given to the Committee on
Information in General Assembly resolution 34 / I 82;
4. Decides to increase the membership of the Committee on Information from sixty-six to sixty-seven, the
new member to be appointed by the President of the
General Assembly after consultation with the regional
groups, as specified in the note by the Secretary-General
dated 10 April 1980; 11
5. Requests the Committee on Information to seek
the co-operation and active participation of all organizations of the United Nations system, particularly the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, in the fulfilment of its mandate;
6. Expresses its appreciation to the Joint United
Nations Information Committee for its efforts towards
improving co-ordination of the public information activities of the various organizations of the United Nations
system, and calls upon it further to improve and
strengthen such co-operation and co-ordination by
reporting through the Administrative Committee on
Co-ordination to the Committee on Information regarding the extent of and prospects for such cooperation and co-ordination;
7. Notes with satisfaction that the Department of
Public Information of the Secretariat has already established constructive relationships with specialized
bodies for co-operation between the non-aligned countries in the field of information and communication, as
well as with other international and regional information organizations which are, inter alia, disseminating or
ready to disseminate information from United Nations
sources, and requests the Committee on Information to
continue to examine the co-operation of the Department with those bodies and organizations with a view to
promoting and further developing that co-operation;
8. Notes with satisfaction the contribution made by
Governments, non-governmental organizations and
other entities in disseminating material prepared by the
Department of Public Information about the United
Nations and its activities and requests that the Department should continue to examine ways further to utilize
their contributions in this regard;
. 9. Reaffirms the importance of the rapidly increasing role of United Nations public information programn:ies in fostering public understanding and support
of Umted Nations activities, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to review the current activities of the De" Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-fifth Session.
Sufsplement No. 21 (A/35/21), annex, sect. V.
'A/34/853.

---

9S

-

partment of Public Information with a view to ensuring
a better and more efficient use of its available resources;
I0. Reiterates the recommendations of the Committee on Information that additional resources for the Department of Public Information should be commensurate with the increase in the activities of the United
Nations that the Department is called upon to cover for
the purpose of public information, recommends that the
Secretary-General should provide such resources to the
Department for this purpose and requests the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination to review the relative growth rate of the Department and report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session;
11. Reaffirms the importance of the role played by
Development Forum and its decision that the continued
publication of that periodical as an interagency project
is essential, and that the Secretary-General should continue his review of its financial status, continue to seek
to ensure long-term financial support for that publication from the organizations of the United Nations
system and report on this subject to the Committee on
Information at its next session;
12. Expresses its appreciation of the report on
United Nations information centres submitted by the
Joint Inspection Unit,'" as well as the comments of the
Secretary-General thereon 17 for the purpose of making
necessary improvements;
13. Invites mass media organizations in Member
States to promote, in the context of the establishment of
a new, more just and more effective world information
and communication order in keeping with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, understanding of the efforts of the United Nations
system to achieve international social justice and
economic development. international peace and security
and the progressive elimination of international inequities and tensions;
14. Requests the Committee on Information to
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session;

III
I. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that:
(a) The Department of Public Information, both
in regard to general information about the United
Nations and the fundamental questions with which it is
concerned, shall continue to orient its work towards dissemination of information mainly on problems concerning international peace and security, disarmament,
peace-keeping and peace-making operations, decolonization, the promotion of human rights, the
struggle against racial discrimination, the integration of
women in the struggle for peace and development, the
establishment of the new international economic order
and the establishment of a new world information and
communication order:
(b) Special attention shall be given to the activities
of the United Nations against apartheid and the work of
the United Nations Council for Namibia;
(c) United Nations efforts to provide broadcast
media with programmes on women shall be continued;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to implement the
recommendations of the Ad Hoe Working Group of the
Committee on Information, as approved by the Com.,. i\ 1 34 '-179.
•\ 'J4.iJ79/i\dd.1

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

96

mittee in its report 4, and to report on the progress
achieved to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to take urgent
measures to redress the present geographical imbalance
in the staff of the Department of Public Information in
order to ensure equitable participation of personnel
from all countries, especially from the developing countries, particularly in posts at the senior and decisionmaking levels, in accordance with Article IOI, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations, and to
submit a progress report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Committee on Information on a plan for regionalizing
the Radio and Visual Services Division in a manner that
would permit each regional section to be responsible for
all radio, television and film productions for their
respective regions;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Committee on Information an over-all plan on the
system of United Nations information centres, focusing
on the evolving relationship between the Department of
Public Information, at United Nations Headquarters,
and the centres;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, in view of the increased volume and complexity of the activities of the
United Nations information centres, to improve:
(a) The network of information centres by reviewing
their functions and role in the structure of the Department of Public Information and by establishing, to the
extent possible within existing resources, new centres,
where deemed necessary, in particular one in Zimbabwe
and one in Bangladesh, taking into account, inter a/ia,
the need to ensure regional balance;
(b) The capabilities of the centres by providing staff
at a level commensurate with their increased responsibilities, particularly in the case of centres with large
jurisdictions;
(c) The availability of technical equipment, including telex facilities, to the information centres so as
to increase the dissemination of information on the
United Nations system;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
Department of Public Information shall remain the
focal point for co-ordination and implementation of the
public information activities of the United Nations;
8.. _Requests the Secretary-General to take immediately the necessary measures to ensure balance in
the use of official languages in the publications and programmes of the Department of Public Information and
to s~rengthen t~e effectiveness of the adaptation unitestablished for this purpose so that the best use is made of
the resources for informing the public about United
Nations actvities;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to initiate, as
~arly as possible, in-service training programmes, rangmg from two to four months, for journalists and broadcasters from developing countries, as envisaged in his
report t? the General Assembly, 38 designed to benefit
~he_ maximum nu_mber possible of such persons, to comc1de to the maximum extent possible with the sessions
of the General Assembly;
3

10. Also requests the Secretary-General to take the
necessary measures:
" A/35/603.

(a) To strengthen and improve the regional structure in the Radio Service of the Department of Public
Information, paying particular attention to adequate
programming in the various languages of the regions,
and in this regard to provide the Committee on Information at its next session with a plan for the establishment, as a matter of priority, of a separate Caribbean Unit and for the expansion of the African Unit of
the Radio Service;
(b) To make specific proposals to the Committee on
Information to increase the present number of shortwave broadcasts of the United Nations in order to place
them on a daily schedule;
(c) To prepare on an urgent basis, for consideration
by the Committee on Information, the technical, financial and legal studies regarding international short-wave
broadcasts by the United Nations using its own facilities
and frequencies;
(d) To clarify, as a matter of urgency, with the host
country the legal questions concerned with the proposal
to introduce frequency modulation broadcasts by the
United Nations in the Headquarters area, and to submit
a report to the Committee on Information, including a
detailed study on the technical and financial aspects of
tr.e question;
(e) To provide the Information Service at Geneva
with the equipment necessary for the electronic recording and dissemination of visual information on
United Nations activities, as far as possible from within
existing resources;
(/) To provide adequate resources to the Department of Public Information to enable it to ensure full
coverage, through press releases, of all important
meetings and events at the United Nations;
(g) To ensure that adequate facilities, allowing for
better coverage and transmission of news, shall be
made available, to the extent possible within existing
resources, to journalists, particularly those from the
developing countries, during the sessions of the General
Assembly;

(~) To ~llot permanent working space equitably at
UnJted N at1ons Headquarters to representatives of news
media, giving special attention to the needs of those
from the developing countries;
(i)_ . To_ examine the poss\bility of strengthening the
partJc1pat10n of the developing countries in the utilization_ of satellites for television broadcasting of United
Nations programmes to the various regions, and to
make recommendations to the Committee on Information in this regard;
(j) To initiate the production of television programmes in Spanish;

11. Further requests the Secretary-General to explore the possibility of increasing the number of United
Nations radio broadcasts to southern Africa by utilizing
the facilities of more Member States;
12. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary<";ieneral for the progress achieved in the implementation of the recommendations contained in the 1979 report of the Ad H oc Working Group of the Committee to
Review United Nations Public Information Policies and
Activities, 39 and requests the Secretary-General to continue the implementation of all those recommendations;
'" Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-fourth Session.
Supplement No. 21 (i\O4/21 and Corr. I), annex Ill, sect. C.

IV.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political Committee

--------------------~

13. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the
implementation of the present resolution to the General
Assembly at its thirty-sixth session;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
the thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Questions
relating to information".
97th plenary meeting
16 December 1980

•• •
At the 97th plenary meeting, following the adoption of the above

resolution, the President of the General Assembly announced that,
in accordance with section II, paragraph 4, of the resolution, he had appointed GREECE a member of the Committee on Information.

97

As a result, the Committee is composed of the following Member
States: ALGERIA, ARGENTINA, BANGLADESH, BELGIUM, BENIN,
BRAZIL,

BULGARIA,

BURUNDI, CHILE, COLOMBIA, CONGO, COSTA

RICA, CUBA, CYPRUS, DENMARK, ECUADOR, EGYPT, EL S111.VADOR,
ETHIOPIA, FINLAND, FRANCE, UERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBUC.
GERMANY, FEDERAL REPUBLIC 01', GHANA, GREECE, GUATEMM.A,
GUINEA, GUYANA, INDIA. INDONESIA, (TALY, (VORY COAST. JAPAN.
JORDAN, KENYA, LEBANON, MONGOUA, MOROCCO, NFTHLRL/\NDS,
NIGI-_R, NIGERIA, PAKISTAN, Prnu, PHILIPPINES. POLAND, PORTUGAi.
ROMANIA, SINGAPORE, SOMALIA, SPAIN, SRI LANKA, SUDAN, SYRIAN
ARAB REPUBLIC, TOGO, TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO. TUNISIA, TURKEY,
UKRAINIAN SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLIC, UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST
REPUBLICS, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN
(REI.AND, UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA, UNITED STATES Of
AMI-RICA, VFNEZ!IELA, V11:TN,\M, YEMEN, YUGOSLAVIAandZAIRI ..
