TWENTY-SIXTH

YEAR

MEETING:

NEW

2 DECEMBER 197 1

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1605) , , . . . . . . . , , , , . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . , .

1

,., ,. .,,...... ,. . .., ,,. ... ..... , ,..,. .

1

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
fal Letter dated 24 November 197 1 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/ 10396);
fb) Fourth report of the Committee established in pursuance of Security Council
resolution 253 (1968) (S/10229 and Add.1 and 2) . . . . . . . . . . . I . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda

S/PV.l605

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in.which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

i

SIXTEEN

HUNDRED

AND FIFTH

MEETING

2 December

1971, at 3.30 p.m.

Held in New York on Thursday,
President: Mr. 1. TAYLOR-KAMARA

(Sierra Leone).

chamber on the understanding that they will be invited to
the Council table whenever called upon to speak.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.

At the invitation of the President,Mr. J. Baroody (Saudi
Arabiaj, Mr. S. A. Salim {United Republic of Tanzania),
Mr. .I. Odero-Jowi (Kenya), Mr. V, Mwaanga (Zambia} and
Mr. R. Akwei (Ghana) took the pIacesreservedfor them in
the Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT: The frrst name on the list of speakers
is that of the representative of Zambia. I invite him to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 605)

1. Adoption of the agenda.

4. Mr. MWAANGA (Zambia): Mr. President, I should like
to thank you and all the members of the Security Council
for granting my request to make a statement on behalf of
the Government of Zambia on the all-important question of
Southern Rhodesia. But first of all allow me to perform a
very pleasant duty, that of conveying to you the warm
congratulations of the delegation of Zambia on your
assumption of the high office of President of the Security
Council for the month of December. You have had a very
distinguished career in your own country, having been a
senior and respected Minister in the Government of Sierra
Leone. During the short time you have been Permanent
Representative to the United Nations, you have already
proved to be a worthy representative of your great country,
which has traditionally and historically maintained the
most cordial of relations with mine.

2. Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
[a) Letter dated 24 November 1971 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/l 0396);
(b] Fourth report of the Committee established in
pursuance of
Security Council resolution
2.53 (1968) (S/l 0229 and Add.1 and 2).
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
(u) Letter dated 24 November 1971 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/10396);
(bj Fourth report of the Committee established in pursuante of Security
Council resolution 253 (1968)
(S/10229 and Add.1 and 2)”

5. I would be failing in my duty if I did not express my
gratitude and satisfaction to your outstanding predecessor,
Ambassador Kulaga of Poland, for the outstanding qualities
of leadership he displayed in, presiding over the deliberations of the Council during the month of November. he is a
gentleman among gentlemen and a truly tine diplomat who
represents the very best of everything that is good in our
profession.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
by the Council I invite the representatives
of Saudi Arabia, the United Republic of Tanzania, Kenya,
Zambia and Ghana to participate without the right to vote
in the discussion of the present item.
taken previously

6. The question of Southern Rhodesia is a matter of
immediate concern to the people of Zambia because events
in that rebel colony do have a direct bearing on them, On
25 November 1971[1602nd meeting/ the Security Council
was given details of the so-called agreement which was
reached In Salisbury between the British Foreign and
Commonwealth Secretary, Sir Alec Douglas-Home, and the
Rhodesian rebel leader, Ian Smith, guaranteeing Smith’s
illegal independence and sealing the betrayal of the 5 million African people of Zambabwe.

2. In accordance with the usual practice of the Council
and in view of the limited number of seats available at the
Council table, I invite the representatives of Saudi Arabia,
the United Republic of Tanzania, Kenya, Zambia and
Ghana to take the places reserved for them in the Council

* Subsequently issued as Official
Records
of theSecurityCouncil,
Twenty-sixth Year, SpecialSupplementNos.2 and Corrigendum 7. The British Permanent Representative, Sir Colin Crowe,
arrd 2A.
who is a very fine gentleman indeed, did his best to explain

1

.‘:’

what is obviously a clumsy and racist-oriented agreement.
The time-table of this immeasurable disaster makes distasteful reading. I shall briefly recount it for the purposes of this
important debate:

December 1969: The then British Foreign Secretary,
Michael Stewart, names 13 countries still having’ties with
Rhodesia.
January 1970: Rhodesia declares itself a republic, w#,
du Pont as President.

April 1964: Ian Smith succeds Winston Field as Prime
Minister of Southern Rhodesia.

June 1970: The Conservative Government takes power
in Britain.

October 1964: Harold Wilson, then Prime Minister of
Britain, sends message to Smith warning him not to
declare independence but promising to take no action
against him if he does.

July 1970: Smith warns that there will be no dramatic
change in the new Government’s attitude towards Rho.
desia.

November 1965 : Smith makes a unilateral declaration
of independence. Security Council adopts re+olutions 202
(1965) of 6 May 1965 and 217 (1965) of 20 November
1965. The latter, among other things,

November 1970: Fifth anniversary of the unilateral
declaration of independence. Smith announces that he
will negotiate settlement from a position of power and
will not compromise his “principles”, The Security
Council adopts resolution 288 (1970) of 17 November
1970 which, <among other things, calls upon the United
Kingdom as the administering Power in discharge of its
responsibility

‘6I . . calls upon the . . . United Kingdom to take
all . . s appropriate measures which would prove affective in eliminating the authority of the usurpers and
in bringing the minority rt?gime in Southern Rhodesia
to an immediate end.”

“to take urgent and effective measures to bring to
an end the illegal rebellion in Southern Rhodesia and
enable the people to exercise their right to seIf-deter.
mination, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and in conformity with the objectives of
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) . . .“.

March 1966: British Navy stops a Greek oil tanker,
Joanna V, from offloading oil for Rhodesia at Beira.
Security Council adopts resolution 221 (1966) of 9 April
1966.
December 1966: Wilson and Smith meet for settlement
talks on board HMS Tiger off the coast of Malta. Smith
rejects Wilson’s proposals for settlement.

February 1971: Secret discussions start between Salisbury and London.

In the same month Britain imposes sanctions on
Rhodesia. Wilson tells delegates to Lagos Commonwealth
leaders’ conference that sanctions would bring the Smith
r&ime down in weeks rather than months, and the
Security Council adopts resolution 232 (f 966) of 16
December 1966,

June 1971: British emissary Lord Goodman flies to
Salisbury for talks with Smith regime.
November 197 1: British Government votes to continue
sanctions against Rhodesia. British Foreign Secretary Sir
Alec Douglas-Home flies to Salisbury for talks. General
Assembly adopts a resolution calling on Britain not to
grant independence before majority rule. Nevertheless,
agreement is signed and announced in London and in
Salisbury.

May 1968: The United Nations imposes comprehensive
sanctions on Rhodesia. The Security Council adopts
resolution 253 (1968).

8. The Government and people of Zambia were shocked
to hear the details of the agreement which was signed ifl
Salisbury by Sir Alec and Smith.1 What shocked us is not
that there was a cheap and shameful sell-out of the African
people of Zimbabwe but the extent to which Her Majesty’s
Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary went in appeasing
the rebel leader Ian Smith. It once again demonstrated the
British Government’s lack of concern and insensitivity for
the welfare of, the 5 million African people of Zimbabwe.

August 1968: Rhodesian Appeals Court rules that
Smith’s rbgime has de facto but not de jure status. The
High Court judge in the rebel colony endorses the legality
of the regime when sentencing 32 Africans to death for
possessionof arms.
October 1968: Wilson and Smith hold second settlement talks-this time aboard HMS Fearless off the coast
of Gibraltar. Smith again turns down British proposals.
June 1969: Smith wins landslide victory in referendum
for apartheid.type Constitution and declaration of a
republic, Sir Humphrey Gibbs, then British Governor of
Rhodesia, resigns.

9. We consider it the height of absurdity for Sir Alec to
have begun his political career as Chamberlain’s Parlip
mentary Private Secretary, with a shameful surrender st
Munich in 1939 at the hands of none other than Adolf
Hitler, and to end it with a shameful surrender at SaLisbaV
in 1971 at the hands of none other than the rebel leader Ian

July 1969: Last members of British diplomatic mission
leave Salisbury.

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, fientPixfh
Year, Supplement for October, November and December 19711
document S/10405.

November 1969: Rhodesian Parliament gives final
approval for declaration of an apartheid republic.
2

Smith. We consider the signing of this sell-out agreement by
Sir Alec to , be a treacherous act, which will produce
unpleasant and far-reaching consequences, not only for the
British Government, but more so for the white minority
rCgime in Salisbury. This agreement of betrayal, in our
opinion, contains, inter alia, twelve main elements which
need to be stated and analysed briefly, These are:
First, a complicated electoral arrangement which casts grave
doubts on the possibility of eventual majority rule;
Second, no specific time-scale defined for movement of
Africans towards parliamentary parity, let alone eventual
majority rule;

must indeed be acknowledged as complex, because of the
fancy and deliberately vague provisions and complex
machinery for constitutional amendment. A group of
distinguished economists and constitutional experts at the
University of Salisbury in Rhodesia,’ the University of
Zambia and Queen’s University in Belfast have estimated
that, even assuming that all circumstances will be favourable to the speediest attainment of parity in the Rhodesian
Parliament, the earliest this can be achieved is the year
2026. On the same basis the earliest date for the achievement of majority rule will be the year 2035, that is, 64
years from now. These estimates, which have been described as over-optimistic, are based on the following
assumptions:

Third, commission appointed by Britain to assessviews of
all Rhodesia’s racial groups on acceptability of such
socalled settlement proposals;

First, that there will be no manipulation of the law and no
constitutional changes made by the Smith regime;

Fourth, the rebel regime’s so-called intention to make
progress towards ending racial discrimination by a review
of existing legislation;

Second, that there will be an acceleration in the rate of
growth of African secondary educational opportunities to
the level rendering African school-leavers eligible for the
African higher roll;

Fifth, the so-called independent commission to study racial
discrimination and make recommendations to the rebel
r&$ne ;

Third, that possession by all Africans with educational
qualifications will have the requisite financial qualifications for the proposed franchise;

Sixth, a development programme with aid up to $120
million over ten years to be provided to promote
educational and job opportunities for Africans;

Fourth, that there will be no rise ih the kvel of financial
qualification-which is highly unlikeIy since the Constitution provides for automatic increases Proportionate to
inflation;

Seventh, no immediate change in the present status of
Rhodesia or its illegal 1969 Constitution;

Fifth, that every eligible African will register aa a voteiwhich again is highly unlikely;’

Eighth, the so-called new declaration of rights guaranteeing
individual rights and’ freedoms, including accessto the
High Court for complainants;

Sixth, that there will be no increase in the current net
balance and rates of wtite’imrnigratiod
to Rhodesiaagain highly unlikely given the Smith r@lme’s pig-headed
determination to bring in as many white. immigrants as
possible ;

Mr-A, promise by the rebel regime not to evict Africans
from certain white-designated areas pending a report by
the commission;

Seventh, that the current output and rates of increase of
qualified white, Asian and Euro-African school-leavers
will remain constant.

Tenth, review of cases of all detainees and restricted
persons;
Eleventh, steps to enable more Africans to compete on
equal terms with white Bhodesians in public service;

12. As regards the qualifications proposed in the White
Paper, we are of the opinion that only the proposals for the
African higher roll are significant in relation to the vital
question of majority rule in Southern Rhodesia. The level
of voting qualifications for the lower roll is irrelevant in
that Africans already control the lower roll seats and this
franchise, however narrow or broad, will not give Africans a
larger number of seats in Parliament. For that reason the
lower roll is therefore irrelevant to the question of majority
rule. The African higher roll qualifications must therefore
be considered crucial for the purpose of this mathematical
exercise. Here it is disturbing to note that there has been no
movement from the 1969 Electoral Act in the BritishRhodesian White Paper. When measured against the preunilateral declaration of independence position, the proposals contained in the White Paper are highly retrogressive,
to say the least. The 1971 proposals as contained in the
White Paper require applicants for enrolment as voters on
the African higher roll to have an income of not less than

Twelfth, the rebel regime’s “Wish” to revoke the state of
emergency after sanctions have been lifted.
10. My very distinguished brother and colleague Ambassador Salim of Tanzania very ably and eloquently analysed
the British White Paper entitled “Proposals for a Settlement” in great detail on 30 November [1603rd meeting]
and explained why it is impossible for us to accept these
proposals as falling within the so-called five principleswhich, in any case, we have never accepted. Our position on
this matter has always been and continues to be that there
should be no independence in Southern Rhodesia before
majority rule.
11.
just

I propose’ to deal with some of the points that I have
enumerated. Evaluation of the Rhodesian settlement
3

$1,800 per annum during the two years preceding the date
of their claim for enrolment or to own immovable property
worth not less than $3,600 net.

gress of Africans. A generous estimate has revealed &a:
there were about 20,000 Africans in Southern ~ho
with four years of secondary education in 1970, A fu
2,600 Africans were expected to complete form IV in !?“~?a
and there were about 1,000 other Africans
acquiring equivalent qualifications. The African set
school system in Southern Rhodesia has been expan
a pathetically low rate. Assuming that the introduc
British aid of $120 million for the next 10 yeas .i
expand the African secondary school system by 50 per MXI
per annum for each of the first five years of aid; that floga
further five years it will expand the African s
school system another 33-l/2 per cent; and that
aid stops it will expand at varying rates of 15 per cent FX
10 years, 10 per cent for another 10 years and IO Per ti1”;:
for the remaining 10 years, per annum, it would not er’%
meet the requirements of parity, let alone majority r&z, $2
the foreseeable future.

13. Alternatively, if voters have four years’ secondary
education of “prescribed standard” and an income of not
less than $1,200 per annum for two years preceding the
date of their claim for enrolment or own immovable
property worth not less than $2,400 net, they can register
as voters. The pre-unilateral declaration of independence
position was that the gross value of the property, including
mortgages and unpaid instalments of the purchase price,
was taken into account in determining the voting qualifications. The required gross value was smaller too: an
uneducated person owning property worth $3,360 grossper
annum was eligible to vote, while one with four years of
secondary education only needed to own property worth
$1 ,I 00 gross. I ask members of the Council to compare this
with the new figure of $2,400 net per annum. This in actual
fact means that the property qualification is hardly
attainable by Africans. Furthermore, an additional optional
qualification consisting of a combination of primary education and either an income of $1,056 per annum or property
worth $2,200 per annum has been dropped in the proposed
Constitution. So has the provision for chiefs and headmen
to acquire higher roll qualifications.

17. We can only draw one conclusion from these prop
sals, which is that African majority rule has been post
indefinitely. It is likely on the most favourable assurnPt%z~
to take 55 years, that is, up to the year 2026, before thee
are sufficient qualified Africans to achieve parity in rbf:
Rhodesian Parliament. Then there will be a further five-ye~
period of delay before the last school-leavers meel r!z+z
voting age requirement of 21 years. Thereafter if TV
estimated that it will take four years before the machinP~
for the introduction of 10 common roll seats can eP:
completed. This makes the year 2035 the earliest posaifi
date for majority rule, assuming that there will be a IO pi
cent annual increase in the African secondary school outp~
after British aid is ended, and also assuming that there a+%?
be scrupulous honesty on the part of Ian Smith and h&
successors,which is highly unlikely.

14. The economic prospects for the Africans in Rhodesia
are still very bleak. In 1968 the annual average income of
the 700,000 African workers‘ in Southern Rhodesia was
$288 per annum. It is estimated that the four highest
income groups of African workers are those in the fields of
communications, banking, education and health. This is
where most of the educated Africans are employed. It is
estimated that this category of Africans earned in 1968
annual average salaries of $638, $620, $542 and $532 per
annum respectively. This must be compared. with the
annual averagesalaries of the 280,000 Africans employed in
the agricultural industry, who in 1968 earned an averageof
$144 per annum. This figure should be compared with
average incomes in 1968 of white workers’ in the same
industry of $2,836 and $3,102 per annum.

18. These figures could very well be disputed by tb,r
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom, but b
the absence of any official estimates as to how long it &
going to take to achieve parity, let alone majority rule,
under the proposed Constitution we are bound to accepr
these figures as fair. Indeed, only last night Sir tit<
Douglas-Home, the British Foreign Secretary, informed 15s
House of Commons that he was not in a position ta a!
how long it would take to achieve either parity or majori@
rule in Southern Rhodesia. As a matter of fact, at an earfief
session he had said that he could not calculate the tinte @q
the basis of the clock or the calendar but rather on the baais
of what was going to be achieved.

15. In the 10 years before the unilateral declaration of
independence African salaries rose from an averageof $150
per annum to $256 per annum, representing an average
increase of 7.06 per cent per annum. In the two years
preceding the unilateral declaration of independence the
rate slowed to 4.6 per cent. Although a consumer survey in
1970-based on a sample of 1,000 Africans) showed that
6 per cent of African households had a personal income of
$1,320 per annum, this figure gives an exaggerated picture
of African incomes for the purposes of the proposed
franchise. It is exaggerated because it applies only to
African urban households. It is exaggerated because it
includes non-indigenous Africans who currently number
320,000 out of the total African labour force of 700,000
workers. It is exaggerated because it also includes all
incomings and income of other members of the household
which are not taken into account in assessingincome for
the purposes of the proposed franchise.

19. Ian Smith, the rebel leader in Southern Rhodesia, told
a British television audience last night that he knew that the
Africans would not be able to take over power in Rhodesk
today because they are not ready to govern themselves.tie
said he knew that they would not be ready after ten Yeats.
He added that he does not know, what is going to haPPenIn
one hundred or one thousand years becausehe will not b*
alive to be able to tell.
20. ‘Ibis is the nature of the terms of the proposak the
British Government intends to put to the People Of
Rhodesia. In a country where the highest Courts oflswsrr
being used to administer mock justice and to iubberstamp
white oppression it does not console the Africans to knoa’

16. One of the most limiting factors in the proposed
Constitution is undoubtedly the rate of educational pro4

that they will now have accessto the High Court for their
complaints.

end Ndabaningi Sithole, President of ZANU and all political
prisoners and detainees. We demand the immediate restoration of all political rights to the ‘African people of
Zimbabwe. We demand a return to sanity in Southern
Rhodesia and respect for the Africans on the basis of
equality.

21, Equally, having examined the provisions in the proposal for a review of existing legislation by an independent
commission to make progress towards ending racial discrimination, I should like to highlight a few of its obnoxious
elements. First, with regard to the special duty of the
commission to scrutinize the provisions of that unmitigated
evil the Land Tenure Act, it would indeed be ominous if
under the guise of “in the light of the national interest”
existing inequalities and discrimination were to be perpetuated. Secondly, the Rhodesian regime, in commending to
Parliament the changes that might be suggested by the
commission, has at its disposal a convenient loop-hole
whereby it need not so recommend if a change suggested by
the Commission was subject to considerations “that any
Government would be obliged to regard as of an overriding
character”.

26. Under the prevailing circumstances, the African people
of Zimbabwe have no alternative but to take up arms and
fight white oppression. This is the only honourable course
left for them. We therefore urge the Security Council to
make direct financial and military contributions to the
people of Zimbabwe to enable them to continue their
struggle against the racist thugs led by Ian Smith. The
Home-Smith agreement does not guarantee independence
before majority rule. It does not alter the status of the
unilateral declaration of independence. It is a white man’s
deal not worked out with the participation of the black
majority. It is ridden with the most undisguised form of
racism. It guarantees the continued oppression of the
African people and it represents a total British surrender of
constitutional responsibility for the rebel colony.

22. The Home-Smith agreement has placed the African
people of Zimbabwe in perpetual bondage and at the mercy
of white settlers for ever, Sir Alec has now awarded Ian
Smith and his fellow white settlers a certificate of respectability while at the same time giving racism an international
certificate of respectability which the white racists will
fully make use of at the expense of the African majority.

27. For those and other reasons it is our considered
judgement that this is a British act of betrayal and
treachery. We firmly reject it, Finally and most importantly, I wish to state that messages smuggled out of
Southern Rhodesia from Mr. Nkomo and the Reverend
Sithole have requested the Zambian delegation to inform
this Council that they totally reject the Anglo-Rhodesian
agreement in no uncertain terms as a cheap sell-out. We are
therefore sure that the people of Zimbabwe will accordingly reject this agreement with the contempt it deservesif
and when it is put to a genuine test.

23. The test of acceptability needs to be looked at in its
proper perspective. The public debate over the test of
acceptability is going to be conducted in Rhodesia under
the present state of emergency with the apparatus of a
police state fully intact. The press is entirely controlled by
the white racists, who obviously favour the proposed
settlement. Radio and television time is to be allotted only
to the parties now represented in the rebel Parliament, thus
denying any opportunities to the two major African
nationalist parties, the Zimbabwe African People’s Union
(ZAPU) and the Zimbabwe African National Union
(ZANU). These two political parties, which are banned but
wllicl~
genuinely represent African opinion, are therefore
automatically excluded from mobilizing African public
opinion. What this means in practical terms is that the great
mass of Africans who live in the so-called tribal reserveswill
be paraded before the Pearce fact-finding commission at
public meetings where their predictable role will be to
applaud what is said in their name by their chiefs, who are
paid agents of Ian Smith, and by their tribal councillors.
What chance has any commission-no matter how trustworthy its credentials-of establishing the true feelings of
the Africans under such carefully manipulated conditions?
Given these conditions, the Commission’s report will not
carry any semblance of conviction in the international
community.

28. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Zambia, Mr. Mwaanga, for his kind remarks and warm
words of welcome addressedto me and my country.
29. I invite the representative of Ghana to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
30. Mr. AKWEI (Ghana): Mr. President, I thank you and
the members of the Council for acceding to my request to
be allowed to participate in this important debate on
Southern Rhdoesia. I do so with more than satisfaction,
seeing that the Council is meeting under the presidency of a
distinguished son of Africa hailing from a neighbouring
country, Sierra Leone, with which Ghana has the strongest
ties of friendship and fraternal solidarity. Your presidency
inspires us with the confidence that this Council will at last
grapple with this problem of Rhodesia, which has vexed the
African continent for so long, with foresight, resolution,
humanity and a sense of commitment to the high purposes
of this Organization.

24. Contrary to the apparent effort by Sir Colin Crowe in
his statement on 25 November 1971 [IdUZnd meeting/ to
belittle the value and importance of a referendum, we
strongly feel that the true test of acceptability of these
proposals would be the holding of a nation-wide referendum based on one-man-one-vote under the supervision of
tlze United Nations.

31. There is one principle which must be established first
and recognized by all when dealing with this problem of
Southern Rhodesia in the United Nations: that is, United
Nations responsibility in the solution of the problem. When
the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom made
his statement on Thursday, 25 November 1971, he seemed
anxious to emphasize British responsibility as the first
premise of his argument. But, of course, this was a

25. We demand the immediate and unconditional release
of Mr. Joshua Nlcomo, President of ZAPU, and the Rever5

i,i

disingenuous move to give a false setting to the whole
debate. Everyone knows the United Nations involvemem
and, therefore, assumption of some responsibility for the
Southern Rhodesian problem did not start with the
unilateral declaration of independence in 1965. By resolution 1514 (XV), the General Assembly adopted what has
since become known as the Magna Carta of decolonization
dealing with the ending of colonization in general,

recommendation of this Council. Thus, no matter wh-at
takes place elsewhere between the British Government and
Ian Smith, this Council has a duty to discharge, m
obligation to take decisions, a residual responsibility, if 1
may so describe it, not to abandon the people ef
Zimbabwe. If this were not so, then we would seelisle
value in continuing to debate the merits and demerits of the
Home&&h proposals. The British Government, therefox,
has a duty to this Council to state unequivocally what ID
attitude is on this point.

32. Serious United Nations involvement began in 1961
with the adoption of a constitution which gave rise to
African opposition because of fears of independence under
minority white rule. By resolution 1747 (XVI) of 1962, the
General Assembly declared Southern Rhodesia a Non-SelfGoverning Territory and requested the British Government,
inter alia, to convene a constitutional conference in which
all political parties could participate for the purpose of
formulating a constitution for Southern Rhodesia in place
of the Constitution of 1961 on the basis of “one man, one
vote” and majority rule. Resolution 1755 (XVII) dealt with
the situation in Southern Rhodesia and urged the speedy
release of detained African leaders of ZAPU. Resolution
1760 (XVII) regretted British inaction on the Southern
Rhodesian situation and made concrete proposals for the
settlement of the issue. Since then, every session of the
General Assembly has been seized of the question of
Southern Rhodesia, and the Security Council became seized
of the matter in 1963 when, on the initiative of Ghana, the
Council was requested to prevent the transfer of sovereignty and of arms and military aircraft to the racist regime
of Southern Rhodesia on the break-up of the Federation in
1963. That move was, of course, frustrated by the British
veto.

35. Our belief that the United Nations has a joint
responsibility in solving the Rhodesian problem makes ir
pertinent to recall the principles which the United Nations,
by overwhelming majorities in its various organs and
Committees, has decided that a solution of the Southern
Rhodesian problem should be based upon. On successhv
occasions the United Nations has stated that there should
be no independence without majority rule; that all detain&
political leaders should be released; that there should be fu.Il
freedom of movement and assembly to ensure norm&i
political activity; that there should be a national convention
of all political leaders to devise a freely acceptable
constitution based on the principle. of one man, one vote;
that lack of educational, economic or property qualit%+
tions should not be a barrier to the franchise; that aparrhtd
legislation should be repealed and racial discriminatiorn
ended. Above all, the General Assembly has called for r-d!
moral and material support to the people of Zimbabwe in
their legitimate struggle to overthrow the Smith regime.
36. Most of the above principles have also been adapted
by the Organization of African Unity, a sister organization
of the United Nations, in formal relations of co-operation
with it and bearing special responsibility for the continent
of Africa, and therefore for Rhodesia, a responsibility which
none can deny.

33. The question whether the Security Council meeting in
3965 was called on British initiative to buttress British
responsibility is a moot point. It is pertinent to recall that
when the unilateral declaration of independence was made
in November 1965 the General Assembly went into
emergency session the same day and recommended urgent
consideration of the matter by the Security Council.
Requ.ests for a Security Council meeting also came from a
number of African States. This Council meeting took place
the following day. Thus, despite what the British call their
“primary responsibility” in the matter, the whole logic and
history of the development of the Rhadesian problem is a
recognition of shared responsibility with the United Nations, particularly this Council. Indeed, it would be strange
ta think that the British Government has submitted the
so”called Home-Smith agreement to this Council merely for
information purposes, for the Council to take it or leave it.
Nor could the Council be invited to look on passively while
the British settle agreements about Rhodesia on terms
contrary to United Nations decisions and resolutions. It
would be extremely odd for the British Government to take
such an attitude, for it would be tantamount to the United
Kingdom Government dictating to this Council and the
United Nations.

37. Against these principles, what has the British Goverument proposed as its guidelines? First, it has sought to
negotiate with a rebel and illegal regime which it has itself
tried to bring down, consistent with a request of the
General Assembly.
38. The so-called five principles have been repeatedly
stated by successive British Governments as though they
constituted an improvement in themselves upon the United
Nations principles. Suffice it to say that these live
principles have been rejected by the Organization of
African Unity, in no uncertain terms, as inadequate and
therefore unacceptable. Prime Minister Wilson introduced
later a sixth principle to the effect that there should be no
oppression of majority by minority or of minority by
majority. This sixth principle wasrepudiated by successive
Conservative Governments. The six principles formed the
basis of the Tiger talks in ‘1966 and the Fearless talks in
1968. The principle of majority rule accepted at the
Commonwealth Prime Ministers Conference in 1966, v/hen
the application of “one man, one vote” to Southem
Rhodesia was adopted, was subsequently, however,
dropped by successiveBritish Governments. The question
might well be asked, why did the Conservatives reject Ilre
sixth principle? The only answer is: they never contearplated a settlement that would ensure this most desirable
guarantee.

34. We hold the view that unless British action is meant to
be irresponsible and in flagrant defiance of the international
community, that Government has an obligation to take into
account the Council’s views on the proposed settlement
with Ian Smith, and to abide by every decision and
6

47. The argument that Britain had the right to legislate or
control Southern Rhodesia without the- consent of the
Rhodesian legislature is also firmly established in British
constitutional history, where numerous examples can be
found. In this respect leading British authorities like Sir
Arthur Keith and Halsbury’s Laws of England have always
drawn a parallel between Southern Rhodesia and Malta.
The Maltese and Southern Rhodesian Constitutions were
enacted by Britain by the same process, letters patent from
the Crown, shortly after each other: the Maltese Constitution in 1921 and the Southern Rhodesian Constitution in
1923. Yet in 1936 the British Parliament revoked the
Maltese Constitution without regard to any so-called
parliamentary “convention” or consent by the local legislature. The British Parliament could, therefore, as late as
1960 still control the Southern Rhodesian Government,
and therefore its army, in order to correct colonial
injustices or set aside a colonial constitution unsuitable for
the conditions of its time. Indeed, as the report of the
Committee of Officials on the Review of the Constitution
of the Federation pointed out in 1960, Southern Rhodesia
had not enjoyed control of its own internal affairs for forty
years. The colony in 1960 was legally still subordinate to
the British Government and Parliament. The United Kingdom appointed the Governor, who could refuse in law to
accept the advice of his colonial Ministers, and this was
expressly so stated in his official instructions, Thus there is
notlring unique, as Sir Colin claims, about the colonial
situation of Southern Rhodesia. What may be unique is the
consistent determination of the British Government to
depart from the normal practices and principles of its own
colonial policy in Southern Rhodesia. Nor can this behaviour be said to be even unique, when one recalls the way in
which Britain abandoned the black Africans when handing
over power to the South African whites in respect of both
South Africa and South West Africa.

39. Various proposals for action have been adopted by the
united Nations for a solution of the Rhodesian question.
All measures, including the use of force by Britain, were
recommended by the Organization for the termination of
the unilateral declaration of independence. A sanctions
programme was adopted at first on a voluntary basis; this
waslater stepped up to a selective mandatory basis, then
later to a so-called comprehensive mandatory basis, although even this was not comprehensive. The legitimacy of
the struggle for independence was recognized, and all
possible assistance was recommended to be given to the
freedom fighters of Zimbabwe. Similar programmes of
action were adopted by the Organization of African Unity.
Let me state clearly the position the Ghana Government
has consistently taken on the question of measures to bring
down the Smith regime. We have never believed that
sanctions alone could topple the Smith regime. We have
argued consistently that sanctions, to succeed, must be
backed by force and must be comprehensive without any
exception whatsoever.
40. What has been the response of Britain to these
recommendations? First as regards the question of force,
the British position has been the well-known racist theory
of “kith and kin”. Britain’s defence of its position, as
repeated by Sir Colin Crowe in his last statement, is that it
was neither “feasible nor desirable” to use force against
Southern Rhodesia. It was not feasible because, according
to Sir Colin, “Rhodesia had been virtually self-governing
and possessed its own forces for nearly half a century”, a
fact which “would have required an invasion in the middle
of a continent” [ibid., para. 91. Britain has been repeating
that argument since the early 1960s on the basis of a
so-called “parliamentary convention”. The claim that in
1923 the British Government signed away its power to
control Southern Rhodesia is both historically and legally
false, What happened in 1923 was that, on the strength of
the pIebiscite voted on by the white minority, Britain
“annexed” Southern Rhodesia to the British Crown and
granted to its Legislative Assembly, elected on an exclusively settler basis, so-called powers of “self-government”.
The British Government, however, reserved the right to
veto any Southern Rhodesian legislation that adversely
affected the interest of the African inhabitants, ran counter
to Britain’s international obligations or affected the remaining rights of the British South African Company.

43. The Southern Rhodesian Government had in 1960 no
armed forces under its control, so it was false to say that
the British could not physically enforce their will. During
the period of the Federation, the British Government built
up a strong army and an air force in the Territory. In
practice those forces were under the control of Britain,
though in name they belonged to the Federation. In any
case, when the break-up of the Federation took place in
1963 it was the British Government which, claiming to have
no control over Southern Rhodesian armed forces, actually
gave away the bulk of the Federation’s army and air force
to the racist government of Southern Rhodesia, despite the
efforts of Ghana and others in this Council to prevent this
move. Thus, having armed the rebels, Britain then turned
back to claim inability to control those it had armed.

41, Indeed, Southern Rhodesia in 1923 enjoyed the same
kind of “self-government” that Ghana enjoyed in 1956, one
year before independence. In the case of Ghana, however,
the British Government made it absolutely clear that the
new constitution that would come into force on independence would be the responsibility of the British Government. Further, the British insisted that a series of constitutional conferences should be held in an attempt to get
universal agreement concerning the type of constitution
that should be adopted. When there was no agreement
concerning the future form of the State, the British
Government insisted that an election should be held. Thus
the British Government insisted first on a constitutional
conference, and later an election washeld on the basis of
“one man, one vote”. The same line of conduct as was
followed in Ghana has been followed in all other British
African territories before they obtained independence.

44. In any case, even after the unilateral declaration of
independence Britain still had the power to use force
immediately to topple the regime if it had wanted to. This
has been the imperial tactic of colonial Britain against other
territories which were not white. No considerations of
bloodshed or the so-called incalculable consequences of War
or violence deterred the United Kingdom Government from
taking military action in its erstwhile colonies of Kenya,
Cyprus, British Guyana or little Anguilla. No consideration
of the incalculable consequences of war deterred Britain
from going to war against the Nazi racists. Ghana and
7

Zambia had indeed offered the United Kingdom military
facilities in their own territories if it would take action
either to end the rebellion or to protect those African
States which were threatened by the rebel Rhodesian
regime. All this wasignored. The British plea of inability to
use force can, therefore, not be seen in any other light than
that of cynicism and unconcern fox the human rights of
Africans. Indeed this is painfully borne out by the fact that
Mr. Wilson, then Prime Minister, declared that the only
situation in which he would use force was to “restore law
and order” in Rhodesia. Since Britain did not, apparently,
consider the invasion of Rhodesia by South African forces
in August 1967 the kind of breach of law and order it had
in mind, it could only be concluded that British troops, if
they were used, would be used only against the African
liberation forces. The secret wasthus let out that it wasnot
the unfeasibility of the use of force that prevented Britain
from using force. On the contrary, Britain could use force
but it would use it only against African freedom fighters.

that result. No, it is not lack of British power to do
anything. It is lack of British interest or will to act in
accordance with justice and Britain’s obligations under the
Charter. It is inaction based on unconcern with the fate of
blacks in Africa. For this, those responsible cannot escape
the harshest judgement of history. They will be cop
demned. But they should note that the liberation move
merit in Africa will be intensified with the support of the
Organization of African Unity. Apartheid will inevitably be
crushed and freedom for the African will triumph.
47. Is it not a matter of interest that when Lord Home
was negotiating with the rebel regime the United States
Congress was passing legislation to end the sanctions on the
importation of Rhodesian chrome? Of course, we are
concerned that the legislation has received presidential
signature even if its implementation
will be delayed till
there is a settlement of the Rhodesian question. We have
noted the denial by Ambassador Bush of collusion between
the British and Americans against the black people of
Zimbabwe. But surely no one can fail to take note of the
strange coincidence of American and British actions in this
matter. Nor have we failed to notice that the relevant
legislation was initiated and piloted in Congress by racists
from the American South.

45. Nor is that attitude absent from the general position
of the United Kingdom Government on the question of
sanctions. Against the protestations of African and Asian
States, Britain at first would accept only voluntary sanctions. Only when these failed, as the Africans had warned
they would, did the United Kingdom agree to selective
mandatory sanctions. Selective mandatory sanctions were
also insisted upon for some time before comprehensive
mandatory sanctions were accepted by the British. Even
then the sanctions programme was not at all comprehensive, the so-called humanitarian exemptions being insisted
upon.

48. Those who in this day and age still dream of the
superiority of the white man, of the so-called mission of
Western white civilization, would do well to stop and think
before they plunge Africa into racial hatred and conflagration. Those in positions of leadersllip should ponder in
which direction they seek to use their power. It is strange
that Sir Colin Crowe believes that the Home-Smith proposals are a serious attempt to halt the deterioration in
Southern Rhodesia and provide a solution in terms of
Security Council resolution 288 (1970). That resolution
calls on Britain:

46. But the Ghana delegation has consistently argued that
sanctions could not possibly achieve anything unless the
sanctions-busters were brought to book, unless the racist
r@imes of Portugal and South Africa, which deliberately
aided and abetted the sanctions-breaking, were themselves
subjected to sanctions. To this day Britain remains opposed
to that common-sense course, hiding behind a strange
policy of ‘“Izo recognition, no force, no confrontation”. To
this hide-bound policy was added a sanctions policy of too
little, too late, till today we have the strange situation of a
so-called boom in a supposedly sanctions-ridden economy.
We are now told that although sanctions have bitten
Rhodesia they have not bitten hard enough and they are
hurting the poor Africans more than the whites. We are told
that despite sanctions, or rather because of sanctions,
apartheid is spreading faster and wider into Southern
Rhodesia and that it is time now to rescue the Africans
from apartheid. We are not told by Sir Colin that the
reactionary business lobbies of Southern Rhodesia, South
Africa, the United Kingdom and the United States are the
ones that want sanctions removed so that they can renew
their profitable business interests in Southern Rhodesia.
Nor are we told that it is the Western representatives on the
Council that have aided and abetted these racist and
reactionary business interests by their negative votes on this
Council. We are not told by Sir Colin that it is Britain and
France, permanent members of this Council, which have
defied decisions of this Council by selling arms and
amunition to the racist regime of South Africa, In about
three or so places in Sir Colin’s statement, he pleads that
Britain had no power to impose its will or prevent this or

“to take urgent and effective measures to end the ilZega1
rebellion . . . and enable the people to exercise their d&t
to self-determination, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations and in conformity with the objectives
of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV)“.
What an irony to claim that the Home-Smith proposals
meet the requirements of that resolution. To this irony is
added blackmail when Sir Colin Crowe claims that this is
“probably ,the last chance”. There is no last chance till
self-determination and independence based on majority nlle
is achieved, no matter what settlements are arranged behirnl
the backs of the people of Zimbabwe.
49. But let us first see how the proposals meet the
so-called five principles set by the British themselves. Let
me repeat that the United Nations and the Orgamzation ef
African Unity have not accepted these principles.
50. First when we examine the manner in which the
Home-S&h
proposals have been negotiated there is ne
escaping the fact that these have been negotiated with the
rebel regime. It is known that the Reverend Sithole, one ef
the nationalist leaders, as well as several others at Present
under detention or serving sentences,were denied accesste
Lord Home. Hence, it cannot be said that tms is an
8

agreement reached with the leaders of all shades of political
opinion in the Territory. We therefore support the request
of the Permanent Representative of the Soviet Union,
supported by Somalia, that the two nationalist leadersMr. Nkomo and the Reverend Sithole-be enabled to
address this Council and that any memoranda they may
have given to Lord Home be made available for study by
this Council. We hope the British delegation will pronounce
itself on this request-indeed I think it has already.

56. TO turn to the constitutional arrangements, it is
shocking to find that the basis of these is the 1969
Constitution, which wascondemned by this very Council at
the time. It is true some modifications have been intro.
duced to the proposals, but we do not consider that these
go far enough to make any great difference to the racial
balance in the House of Assembly for the foreseeable
future.
57. The creation of a higher African roll and the automatic increase of members elected to the point where
parity is reached is only a disguised mechanism for actual
indefinite delay of the anival of parity. We know that the
Southern Rhodesian Government has been strenuously
recruiting white immigrants into the Territory, and there is
every reason to expect that the rate of immigration will be
stepped up in the future. On this basis, when will the
expected increase of registered voters on the higher African
roll ever reach the 6 per cent of the European roll to attract
the automatic increase? Secondly, the stringent income
and property qualifications for both the higher African roll
and the lower roll make it almost unbelievable that this
parity will ever be reached in the foreseeable future.

5.1. Secondly, concerning the test of acceptability we are
informed that a commission will be appointed to carry out
this test, We submit that the responsibility for explaining
the terms of the settlement to the people of Rhodesia as a
whole is not the proper function of such a commission. It is
the function of the political leaders of the people. One
cannot exclude the possibility of the commission conducting a propaganda campaign, under the guise of explaining the proposals to the people, designed to get the
people to accept an otherwise unacceptable settlement.
52. In this respect the delegation of Ghana notes with
dissatisfaction that only political parties “represented in the
House of Assembly” will be given radio and television time.
Persons in detention or under restriction will be allowed to
express their views only to the commission, not to the
people of Zimbabwe. Further, political detainees and
restrictees will not be Considered for release till after the
test of acceptability. The claim, therefore, that “before and
during the test of acceptability normal political activities
will be permitted” is false.

58. In any casehow is such a provision reconciled with the
principles of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) that
neither economic, nor educational nor property quahfications should stand in the way of the exercise of the
inalienable right of people to self-determination and independence? And how does the British Government guarantee that there will be no retrogressive change in the
electoral provisions or even in the whole Constitution to
accord with the wishes of the white Rhodesian minority?
An independent and sovereign country is free to do what it
likes even with its own Constitution and many countries
have in fact exercised this right soon after independence.
Can it be claimed by any representatives here that voters in
their countries are subjected to such income and property
qualifications as have been accepted by the British Government for Southern Rhodesia? Can it be denied that in
places like the southern States of this country these criteria
are often used only as stratagems to deny voting rights to
black Americans?

53. It is further claimed that the test of acceptability will
be under the control of the British Government. In this
respect the question put by the Ambassador of Somalia
whether the British. Government will be in control of law
and order enforcement agencies is pertinent and vital to a
full, free and fair ascertainment. Is there any guarantee of
such British control?
54. To judge from the complicated nature of the proposals, a time-table of the conduct of the test of acceptability
seems called for. How, much time will be allowed for
normal political activities before the test? And how long
will the test last? In our view, nothing useful will be gained
by limiting the time allowed for these undertakings. The
very method agreed upon of testing acceptability falls far
short of the only democratic process acceptable to civilized
men in expressing their views, that is, through a vote on the
basis of “one man, one vote”.

59. Moreover, the proposals provide that before the
additional 10 seats are created to advance beyond parity to
majority rule an independent commission will have to
decide whether the creation of such seats is acceptable to
the Rhodesian people as a whole or what other alternatives
are acceptable. It is thought that by making a decision not
to create these 10 seats tantamount to a constitutional
amendment a sufficient guarantee has been won. But, as
already stated, any sovereign Government can amend its
Constitution or change it completely. There is therefore no
guarantee against what the Rhodesian racists can do.

55. Further, who will constitute the commission to test
the acceptability of the proposals? So far we have been
told only of a British Lord who will be chairman, two
vice-chairmen and a number of commissioners whose
experience and independence of the Rhodesian authorities
can be relied upon. In view of press reports that the
composition of the commission will be heavily weighted
against the black Africans in Zimbabwe, the international
community must know who the commissioners would be,
and how many there would be, before satisfaction can be
f& about their experience and independence. It cannot be
ignored that in the present circumstances hardly any white
Rhodesian can be found who can be sufficiently independent of the racist regime.

60. What is more serious, legal provision has been created
to enable ,the advance from parity to majority rule to be
blocked by allowing for so-called alternatives. What could
be justifiable alternatives to the creation of these additional
seats if there is a determination to move towards majority
rule from parity? It is clear that the racists will use this
when the time comes to prevent the creation of the 10
common-roll seats. Thus the first principle of unimpeded
9

progress towards majority rule is already endangered and
compromised.

but legal provision has been created for retrcgretive
amendments to the Constitution to retard African advance
ment. There is no immediate improvement in the politic$
representation of Africans; perhaps there might he jn tke
distant future, but not now. Nor will racial discrinnnacirnq
end with the inauguration of the Constitutional prop
How could this be claimed when the validity of all cx&a@
legislation, including the notorious Land Tenure Act, L
virtually guaranteed. And as for the acceptability of tti
proposals to the people of Rhodesia as a whole, the dub&m
method proposed for ascertaining this fact including prjvare
meetings and the conditions inside Rhodesia under which
the test will be made-and we must remember that the
emergency conditions will still obtain-cannot establish tht
true feelings of the black Africans on the proposals. T%e
result will only be one of intimidation, or at best gtle~s
work.

61. The most bizarre aspect of the proposals is the
so-called new declaration of rights enforceable by the High
Court. Apart from the pertinent question which the
Ambassador of Somalia has put to the British delegation on
this matter one might well ask whether the concept is itself
credible, bearing in mind the known objectives and behaviour of the Rhodesian Government since 1923. Is it
conceivable that the Rhodesian authorities can be depended
upon to honour and enforce these rights? Are the Courts
not the same ones which after the unilateral declaration of
independence were supposed to be loyal to the British
Crown but in effect chose to be loyal to the Smith regime?
Moreover, these Courts stood by and watched Ian Smith
and his collaborators pass a series of discriminatory laws
against Africans and are enforcing those laws today. How
then can they be depended upon to set up any other object
of allegiance other than the racist regime? What is worse,
under the proposals the Courts will be prevented from
ruling on legislation already passed and it is the bulk of this
that has been responsible for the denial of those samerights
which are intended to be guaranteed by the declaration.

65. Even the British senseof justice and fair play seems tc
have been outraged by the proposals, judging fram press
comments and editorials which have appeared recently b-r
Britain, and here I quote from a recent issue of the Dr3i&
Mail:

“The new terms will be guaranteed neither by Britaip
nor by any mtemational body. They will work only if the
Rhodesian Government wants to make them work. in our
heart of hearts we cannot be happy about a deal which ir
so fragile and depends so much on the goodwill of the
leaders of the Rhodesian front.”

62. Nor are the provisions relating to the review of racially
discriminating laws and land settlement in keeping with the
relevant portions of the fourth British principle. There is to
be no review of already existing laws, only future ones. The
so-called review of the Land Tenure Act by which virtually
half of the land is given to 5 million Africans and half to
only 25,000 whites, is hedged with so many contingencies
as not to deceive anyone as to its true import. One would
have expected the British to insist on an immediate repeal
of this law. Instead the Africans are promised a commission
which will scrutinize the law and make recommendations
which are not even binding on the Government. A spurious
land board is also envisaged to preside over the long-term
resolution of land problems.

66. In fact, the settlement is a sell-out of Zimbabwe. Xc
wonder Mr. Smith was so happy at the conclusion of lht
agreement. Surely the British must have worked out an
approximate time-table by which, under the Home-Smith
proposals, the people of Zimbabwe can attain independence
by a certain date, other things being equal, We have heard
statements made recently ‘by Lord Home that he cannot
calculate either by the clock or by the calendar. But surely
there must have been some kind of approximate calculations as to how long it was going to take the Africans to
reach majorityrule, if there had been the British detertin.
tion to see them advance fowards the stage where the5
would exercise majority rule. What is the time-table-or are
the British afraid to tell us? The Ghana delegation &
gravely concerned at the prospects for Zimbabwe. Indeed it
is our belief that, far from the settlement leading to the
dawn of hope, it will rather lead to frustration and despair
and constitute therefore an invitation to violence and
revolution.

63. We have taken note of a proposed development
programme that will be financed from a British subsidy of
%5million a year for 10 years to be matched by a
contribution from the Southern Rhodesian Government.
How much matching the Southern Rhodesian Government
will contribute is not stated. Judging from the niggardly
provision that that Government has so far made for
expenditure on African development and education, how
can it be guaranteed that its matching will be substantial?
Moreover, who will administer this fund? Does the British
Government have the confidence that people who have
stated flatly that power will never pass to Africans in their
lifetime can honestly administer this fund for the benefit of
Africans? We do not share such confidence and it were
better that the administration of such development fund
were entrusted to an unofficial body in Rhodesia with an
African majority.

67. In the light of this conclusion, and as I indicated at the
beginning of my statement, there is a clear and inescapable
duty on the part of this Council not to endorse or accept
the settlement proposals nor recommend their acceptance
to the people of Zimbabwe. The duty of the United
Nations is to maintain sanctions, to strengthen and widen
sanctions and to apply them effectively against pcru@l
and South Africa, to isolate’the racist regime of Ian Smith
and never to recognize any granting of independence to
that Government on the basis of the HomeSmith PrcP@
sals. To do that would be to condone apartheid and iiS
spread and to face the prospect of admitting Yet another
apartheid-ridden State into the ranks of this Gr!ganizanon*

64. Indeed a careful analysis of the settlement terms seems
only to convince the impartial that they not only do not
conform in any way to consistently asserted United Nations
principles, but are not even reconcilable in any significant
way to the five principles set by the British Government
itself. Not only has progress to majority rule been impaired,
10

The Organization of African Unity has already, by adopting
the Lusaka Manifesto,2 declared that South Africa should
be expelled from this Organization if it refuses to abandon
tile policy of apartheid.

obliged to draw the attention of the Security Council to the
fact that the Council was seized of the question of
Southern Rhodesia on the initiative of the United King
dom, which described itself as the “administering Power”
and has been so recognized in all Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions every year since 1965. Britain
cannot, therefore, at this late hour say that it has never in
fact been an “administering Power”.

68. Consistency forbids us to envisage the admission of
another legalized racist State such as Southern Rhodesia
would be. We should hold firm to the principle of
NIBMAR-no
independence before majority rule-renew
our dedication to the brave freedom-fighters of Zimbabwe,
and mobilize support both moral and material for their
legitimate struggle. However long and arduous the road, our
commitment, as a world Organization, is not to the weak
and self-seeking Government of the United Kingdom, which
is undoubtedly anxious to scuttle Rhodesian freedom on
any terms, but to the true independence of Zimbabwe in
accordance with the ideals of the United Nations.

76. Resolution 217 (1965) of the Security Council,
recognizing that the United Kingdom as the administering
Power, considered the unilateral declaration of independence as an act of rebellion, reaffirmed its resolution
216 (196S), condemned the ‘unilateral declaration of
independence, called upon all States not to recognize
Smith’s illegal racist minority r&irne; reaffirmed General
AsssmbIy resolution 1514 (XV) on the Declaration of the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, called on Britain to quell the rebellion of the racist
minority; called on the British Government to take all other
appropriate measures which would prove effective in
eliminating the authority of the usurpers, also called upon
the British Government to take immediate measures in
order to allow the people of Southern Rhodesia to
determine their own future consistent with the objectives
of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), and called
upon the Organization of African Unity to do all in its
power to assist in the implementation of the present
resolution, in conformity with Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations.

69. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of Ghana
for the kind remarks which he addressed to me.
70. I invite the representative of Kenya to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement,
71. Mr. ODERO-JOWI (Kenya): Mr. President, permit me
to thank you and the members of the Council for allowing
me to participate in this debate on a subject of vital
concern to Africa and to my country. Under your able and
distinguished guidance, as a true son of Africa and as
representative of a country that for long has been anxious
about the future of Africans in Southern Rhodesia, my
delegation is confident that, with the support of the
Council, you will steer this debate to a successfulconclusion ,

77. Security Council resolution 232 (1966) recognized the
United Kingdom as the administering Power and, among
other things, reaffirmed the inalienable rights of the people
of Southern Rhodesia to freedom and independence in
accsrdance with the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples contained
in General Assembly resolution 1.514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 and recognized the legitimacy of their struggle to
secure enjoyment of their rights as set forth in the Charter
of the United Nations.

72. Before taking part in the debate may I, on behalf of
delegation, express Kenya’s satisfaction at seeing
representatives of the People’s Republic of China assume
their rightful place in this august Council?
my

73. During his speech in the Security Council last Thursday, 25 November, the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom, Sir Colin Crowe, set out the terms that
have since been distributed as a White Paper entitled
“Rhodesia: Proposals for a Settlement” which were accepted yesterday by the British Parliament. He described
the Douglas-Home-Smith
agreement at Salisbury as an
“honourable solution” to the problems of Southern Rhodesia .

78. Security Council resolution 2.53 (1968) of 29 May
1968 reaffirmed all previous resolutions, reading in part as
follows:
“‘Affirming the primary responsibility of the United
Kingdom to enable the people of Southern Rhodesia to
achieve self-determination and independence , . .

74. The Kenya Government considers that the proposals
contained in the White Paper are not only totally unacceptable, but that they constitute a shameful betrayal of the
people of Zimbabwe and a flagrant violation of resolutions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly and of
the principles and obligations of the Charter of the United
Nations.

“Recognizing the legitimacy of the struggle of the
people of Southern Rhodesia to secure the enjoyment of
their rights as set forth in the Charter of the United
Nations and in conformity with the objectives of General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
“Reuffirming its determination that the present situation in Southern Rhodesia constitutes a threat to international peace and security,

75. Although Sir Colin Crowe took pains to excuse the
refusal of the British Government to topple the illegal racist
minority regime at Salisbury by force, my delegation is

“Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United

Nations,
2 SeeOfficial Records of the General Assembly, lbenty-fourth

“. . .

Session,Annexes,agendaitem 106, document.A/7754.
11

“2. Cal& upon the United Kingdom as the administering Power in the discharge of its responsibility to take
urgently all effective measures to bring to an end the
rebellion in Southern Rhodesia, and enable the people to
secure the enjoyment of their rights as set forth in the
Charter of the United Nations and in conformity with the
objectives of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);“.
79. As late as 18 March 1970, this Council, in its
resolution 277 (1970), noted with grave concern that:
“the situation in Southern Rhodesia continues to deteriorate as a result of the introduction by the illegal regime of
new measures, including the purported assumption of
republican status, aimed at repressing the African people
in violation
of General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV).

(c) That the future of the people of Zimbabwe should
not be discussed except with the full participation af
African nationalist leaders, with any proposals thereby
resulting being subject to the approval of the people, freely
given;
(d/ That Britain, having brought about the existing
situation in Southern Rhodesia, has a duty and responsibility-in temls of Security Council resolution 217 (1965),
which has never been rescinded, and all the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions-to
eliminate the authority of the usurpers and to take
immediate measures to allow the people of Southern
Rhodesia to determine their own future, in accordance with
the terms of the Charter of the United Nations and General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV).

..

“Reaffirming that the present situation in Southern
Rhodesia constitutes a threat to international peace and
security,
‘Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter,
“1. Condemns the illegal proclamation of republican
status . . . by the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia;“.

It called upon Member States not to recognize the illegal
r&ime, and urged the British Government, as the administering Power, to discharge its responsibility to enable
the .people of Zimbabwe to exercise their right to
self-determination and independence in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and in conformity with
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), and urged Member States “to increase moral and material assistanceto the
people of Southern Rhodesia in their . . . struggle to achieve
freedom and independence”,

82. The secret negotiations between the emissaries of the
British Government and the illegal racist minority regime in
Southern Rhodesia were held in total disregard of the
wishes of the United Nations as expressed long ago in
General Assembly resolution 2138 (XXI) of 22 October
1966, and as recently as 22 November 1971 in resolution
2769 (XXVI). The British Government could not have been
in any doubt that what fts emissaries were doing was
contrary to its obligation under the Charter of the United
Nations.
83. The British Foreign Secretary, having decided-again,
contrary to the wishes of the United Nations-to hold talks
with the illegal racist minority rigime at Salisbury, must be
left in no doubt whatsoever that the United Nations would
not recognize any settlement not based on the principle of
no independence before majority African rule, or concluded otherwise than with majority African nationalist
leaders.
84. On those grounds, my delegation finds the terms of
the so-called negotiated settlement unacceptable. As my
Minister said on 26 November 1971, the acceptance of
those terms by the Foreign Secretary constitutes “capitula.
tion to the wishes of the rebel leaders”. I regard this as a
privilege-if I may so call it-not accorded to any other
rebel in British colonial history.

80. All Security Council resolutions on Southern Rhodesia-from resolution 216 (1965) of 12 November 1965
right up to resolution 277 (1970) of 18 March 1970-were
voluntarily and affirmatively endorsed by the British
Government and, under Article 25 of the United Nations
Charter, must be held to be binding on the United
Kingdom. If the United Kingdom had chosen not to be
bound by any of those resolutions the remedy wassimple:
it could have vetoed them and they would not have come
down to US as Security Council resolutions.

85. The objections of my Government to the proposals
contained in the British White Paper-that is, Command
Paper 4835-entitled
“Rhodesia: Proposal for a Settlement” can be summarlzed as follows.

81, I have not referred to the relevant General Assembly
resolutions, which are in fact more far-reaching than the
Security Council resolutions. These are also interesting and
leave no doubt in anybody’s mind what the world
community and nations think about Southern Rhodesia.
Read along with Security Council resolutions, they have
consistently maintained the following principles:

86. First, the negotiations, both secret and otherwise,
between the British Government and the Southern RhodeSian rebels must be considered null and void, having beenin
violation of all relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions.
87. Second, although the British Foreign Secretary received a delegation of Africans who put their viewsto him
at Salisbury, and although he saw Mr. Joshua Nkomc and
received a smuggled document from imprisoned Reverend
Sithole, it cannot be held that there was the fullest
consultation between the British Foreign Secretary and ati
nationalist leaders within the terms of General Assembly
resolution 2769 (XXVI).

(a) That Smith’s regime is illegal and that Member States

should not recognize it or have any dealings with it;
(b) That the people of Zimbabwe have an inalienable
right to self-determination and independence, on the basis
of one man, dne vote, now and not in the vague,
undetermined future;

12

88. Third, the proposals contained in the White &per
constitute a denial of the right of self-determination and
independence to the people of Zimbabwe in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations and all relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions. Those
proposals do not even give the moral guarantee of African
majority rule in the foreseeable future.

89. Fourth, the socalled guarantees embodied in the
proposals of the White Paper are illusory and worthless for
the following reasons:

British Government, having at no time been adopted either
by the General Assembly or the Security Council. But even
using these five principles as a test the proposals, in the
view Of my delegation, fail to meet the test of any of them.
93. The Permanent Representative of the United King
dam, in the course of his speech, gave what my delegation
considered an unfortunate impression, namely, that owing
to changes of Government in the United Kingdom, the
present British Government was not bound by the oblige
tions freely assumed by the former Government. this the
only basis upon which the British Government can justify
going back on its international obligations? We trust that
the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom does
not wish to give this Council such an unfortunate imprep
sion.
IS

(a) It is unrealistic to expect a European majority of
two-thirds to be restrained from abrogating any provision
of a constitution in the same manner in which unilateral
independence was declared in 1965;
(b) The proposed constitution does not guarantee the
abolition of racial discrimination or the repeal of existing
discriminatory legislation now or in the foreseeable future;

94. The Permanent Representative ofthe United
gave this Council the impression that, in deciding to
capitulate to the traitor, Smith, the British Government was
motivated by concern over the plight of the African people
of Zimbabwe who, according to the British Government, do
not know what is good for them. This pretended solicitude
over the interests of Zimbabwe Africans by the British
Government is an insult to the African people of Zimbabwe
and to the intelligence of representatives in this Council.
Instead of shedding crocodile- tears at the prospect of
Africans in Zimbabwe coming under the hated regime of
apartheid, the British delegation should have been straightforward and admitted to the pressures of the ruling
Conservative Party interest concerned with economic costs
of sanctions to Britain.
Kingdom

aho

(c) The power to detain without trial is allowed in the
proposed constitution, and that makes a mockery of the
right of personal liberty and means that all or any
opposition members can be detained;
{d) The freedoms of assembly, association and expression
are qualified by the so-called interests of defence, public
safety and public order-of course, those will be determined
by rebel Smith and his henchmen;

(e] Freedom from arbitrary search or entry is also
qualified by the so-called interests of defence, public safety
and public order; and

95, The Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom
tried to convince this Council that the terms of the
Douglas-Home-Smith agreement were in conformity with
the so-called five principles invented by the British. My
delegation wishes to reaffirm most categorically that the
Kenya Government rejects and has never accepted the five
principles. In any case, my delegation maintains that the
Douglas-Home proposals do not stand the test even of the
five principles.

(fl Forced or communal labour is retained under the
pretext of “normal communal or other civic obligations”.
90. Since the Security Council recognizes the situation in
Rhodesia as a threat to world peace and security, the
British Government could easily have obtained accessto
Southern Rhodesia through the co-operation of Zambia and
other African countries. Zambia has at all times expressed
its readiness to make a base in its territory available for the
use of any British forces on their way to Southern
Rhodesia. The British Government, having refused to
establish a physical presence in Southern Rhodesia, is not
now in a position to ensure that the terms of any
settlement will be implemented after sanctions have been
lifted and the racist minority regime given independence.

96. I shall now turn to each of the so-called principles.
The first principle relates to unimpeded progress towards
majority rule. The socalled principle of progress towards
majority rule is not satisfied by the Douglas-Home proposals. Progress in this connexion is so intertwined with so
many checks and balances as well as delaying tactics that
every impediment has been placed in the way of African
majority rule. The voting system has been made unnecessarily complicated to ensure that parity between Africans
and white Rhodesian members of the House of the
Assembly is reached only after an arduous and lengthy
process. According to the London Sunday lTmes of 28
November 1971, experts estimate that assuming the agreement is implemented in good faith by Smith and his gang, it
may take 64 years or more to achieve only a small African
majority. Even this estimate may be upset if Smith embarks
on a large scale white immigration policy. The DouglasHome-Smith proposals, therefore, cannot be regarded in
any way as guaranteeing unimpeded progress towards
majority rule and, having regard to all other circumstances,
cannot be regarded asjust or equitable.

91. Security Council resolution 217 (1965) and all relevant Security Council and General Assembly resolutions
require the British Government to reestablish a physical
presence in Southern Rhodesia.
92. My delegation, therefore, considers that the proposals
contained in the White Paper not only violate, but have no
bearing .whatsoever on, Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions. As far as the question of whether the
proposals meet the test of the so-called five principles is
concerned, the views of my Government on these are Well
known. And as the Security Council is aware, these
so-called five principles are a unilateral creation of the
13

97. The second principle relates to the guarantee against
retrogressive constitutional amendment. There is no guarantee that once Smith has obtained recognition of his regime
as an independent republic he will allow himself to be
obstructed by the so-called blocking mechanisms of only at
most 10 elected African members in the House of Assembly
of 68. As the London Observer commented in an editorial,
there is “no straightforward way of guaranteeing any
constitution against abuse once the instrument of independence has been signed unless the British army is willing and
able to rule the country”. In 1965 Smith already abrogated
the 1961 Constitution by his unilateral declaration of
independence. There is no guarantee that he will not scrap
any new constitution in the future if he finds it inconvenient. In this regard, the so-called “civilized” white minority in Southern Rhodesia cannot be exempt from prevalent
political or army coups after independence is granted to
that colony. It may be ,noted that the army and security
forces in Southern Rhodesia are predominantly white.
98. The third principle relates to the immediate improvement in African political status. The idea that the “settlement” provides for the immediate improvement of the
African political status is an illusion. British propagandists
use the so-called 1969 Constitution as a yardstick and yet
the British Government got the Security Council in 1965 to
declare that the world community did not recognize that
illegal racist Smith rkgime and in 1969 the Security Council
declared that it did not recognize Smith’s declaration of,a
republic. How can an illegal act be used as a yardstick to
measure anything? The fact is that there has been no
change in the status of the African in Southern Rhodesia,
His status still remains one of inferiority in his own
country. He is still not trusted to decide as an individual
what he wants or what is good for him. He is not
considered civilized. The whole basis of the so-called
settlement is that the African is not an equal of the
European in dignity and worth and will never be in the
foreseeable future. Yet the African, already unequal in
political, administrative and economic terms, is expected to
be nursed by his oppressor to acquire equality of status.
Could anything be so remote when measured against
reality?
99. I shall now take the fourth principle, progress towards
ending racial discrimination. Unless possible marking time
can be regarded as progress, there, is no$ing in the
agreement which guarantees where even a start on the
actual ending of discrimination will be made. In fact ‘the
Land Tenure Act, which is ntanifestly discriminatory, is not
to be repealed forthwith but will merely be reviewed by a
commission whose recommendations will not be binding.
The so-called bill of rights will not affect the existing
administrative or legislative measures that are racially
discriminatory. In fact, the proposed new section 84 B
reads as follows:
“No court shall declare any provision of an Act enacted
or statutory instrument made before the futed date as
defined in paragraph 14 of the Declaration of Rights to
be uItra vires on the grounds that the provision is
inconsistent with the provisions of the Declaration of
Rights set out in Chapter VI of the Constitution of
Rhodesia, 1961, or Chapter VII of the Constitution of
Rhodesia, 1965, as the case may be.”

100. The fifth principle is the test of acceptability, The
test of acceptability “by the people of Rhodesia as a
whole” is bogus and illusory. The people of Zimbabwe are
not to be given any alternative to the Douglas-Home&&
proposals. All Sir Colin Crowe had to say in the Security
Council was:
“If the evidence-which will be fully, freely and fairly
collected-is to the effect that the Rhodesian people asa
whole do not accept these proposals, then they will have
been made in vain” [1602nd meeting, para. 541.
101. The phrase “‘the Rhodesian people as a whole”, if it
is meant to be a genuine test, should have read ‘acceptable
to the majority of the people of Southern Rhodesia” or
“acceptable to the majority of all sections of the popula.
tion of Southern Rhodesia” -under a referendum basedon
one man, one vote. The Commission which it is proposed
would look into the question of acceptability is virtdly
given a mandate to sell the proposals to the people of
Southern Rhodesia on the pretext of explaining them, This
commission is in fact virtually being encouraged to ignore
any views the British Government may find embarrassing.
As the Nairobi newspaper Lily N&ion stated on 27
November 1971,
“Let the agreement be put to the people in the country
with ‘one man to one vote’ applied. White Rhodesians
and the British Government know what the outcome of
this would be and what they are really telling us right
now is that they dread the verdict of the majority.”
My delegation therefore submits that the so-called test of
acceptability is but mere window-dressing to camouflage
blackmail.
102. In today’s New York ZJ’mesSmith is reported to have
said in a television interview that black Africans will not be
in power in Rhodesia for at least 10 years and to have
added that he believes they will not be fit to be in control.
That was Smith’s attitude yesterday, and we have no reason
to believe it has changed. As long as Smith holds powerin
Rhodesia the Africans do not stand a chance of ensuring
their rights to govern the country.
103. I am sure the British Government is aware of this. In
view of this, my delegation cannot avoid drawing the
conclusion that the so-called settlement is nothing but a
sell-out.
104. At the commencement of the debate my colleague
Ambassador M&k of the USSR put forward the suggestion
that the detained national leaders Mr. Nkomo and
Mr. Sithole be invited to appear before this Council to give
evidence. I am happy to note that that suggestion has been
accepted by the British delegation. My delegation hop@
that the arrival of these two nationalists will now be
speeded up so that within the next week or so we can sit
here and listen to them.
105. It is impossible for us to take comfort in the British
White Paper and the arrangements the British have worked
out with the rebel Smith. There is enough evidence to
indicate that the so-called arrangements are merely a se&.%

convenient steps the British have resorted to in order to
xay the people of Zimbabwe in the same manner they
.rayed Africans in South Africa in 1910. That being the
e, my delegation is of the opinion that this Council must
seized of this matter and that the international commuy must bring pressure to bear on the United Kingdom to
lure that justice is done. The yardstick for that justice
-ashas been reiterated repeatedly in this Council and in
neral Assembly resolutions, and as it must be-no
lependence before majority African rule in Zimbabwe.
5. That is what my delegation stands for and those are
: viewsof my country.
7. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
nya for the kind remarks he addressed to me.
3, Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): As I menned this morning, I do not want to interrupt the broad
:ep of this debate, still less to interrupt the expression of
wsby other delegations on the agreed proposals and the
newhat lengthy exposition I gave of them in the Council
: week. I shall not at this stage, therefore, attempt to
wer each and every point that has been raised so
-even though some of them represent misunderstandings
ich have been given currency but which have been
rected elsewhere. The answers to some of them can in
t already be found in the text of the proposals, and some
Lersare unanswerable-for example, because they conn the very nature of the responsibilities which everyone
ees are primarily a matter for the British Government.
some points I still await information from my Governnt. But there are some questions I can answernow, and
as the representative of Somalia suggested at the
until’s meeting on 30 November [1603rd meeting], it
uld help the debate to proceed, I can give one or two
rifications, particularly about the test of acceptability,
9. On the test of acceptability, the specific point raised
Ambassador Farah in this connexion was whether it was
firm intention of the United Kingdom Government to
ahead with the test of acceptability. I confirm that this
0.

3. Then we were asked, “What if the answerto the test
acceptability is ‘no’? ” What would we do if the test of
:eptability demonstrated that the people of Rhodesia
:cted the settlement? That, I am afraid, is a good
ample of an unanswerable question, because we cannot
ke commitments about hypothetical situations.
I. We have also been asked ab0u.t the timing of the test
acceptability. On that I can say that the Commission has
:n appointed and has already started organizing itself
:h a view to starting work in Rhodesia as soon as
Gsible. The chairman, as I informed the Council last
ek, is Lord Pearce. In answer to the representative of
ana I can add that the two additional commissioners so
named are Lord Harlech, who wasknown to many here
ne years ago as Mr. Ormsby-Gore when he was Minister
State in the Foreign Office, and Sir Maurice Dorman, a
mer Governor-General of your own country, Mr. PresiIt I The commissioners will take whatever period of time
:y need to do the job to their satisfaction, Their first task

will be to ensure that the proposals are as fully understood
throughout Rhodesia as possible. They will ensure that any
written explanations of the proposals, including those in
the vernacular, are clear and unbiased.
112. Another set of questions concerns the consultations
with African political leaders and parties during the
Secretary of State’s visit to Salisbury, I have sought the
necessary information and the following is a list of the
groups of Rhodesians whose views the Secretary of State
sought in Salisbury on the dates indicated. There were in all
97 such persons involved.
113. On Tuesday, 16 November, he saw 10 members of
African businessmen’s associations; 3 members of African
teachers’ association; 5 African journalists; 7 from the
Rhodesian Asian Association; 8 indirectly elected Members
of Parliament-that
is all of them; 6 from the National
Association of Coloured Peoples; 4 from the medical
profession; 2 from the National Peoples’ Union; 2 from the
Christian Council of Rhodesia; 6 from the Centre Party;
that is a total of 53 for Tuesday, the 16th.
114. On Wednesday, the 17th, he saw 2 from sport
organizations; 2 from the University of Rhodesia; 4 exdetainees-Mr, Edison Sithole, Josiah Chinamo, Cephas
Msipa, and Michael Maweme; 1 trade union representative;
3 from the African Student Board; 10 Senators; and 3 wives
of detainees-Mrs. Stella Madzimbamute, Mrs. Nyandoro
and Mrs. Mutasa, a total of 36 for that day.
115. On Friday, 19 November, he saw 7 citizens of
Salisbury, including the President of the YWCA, the
Chairman of the Harare,-which is a township-Advisory
Board, a hostel director and business men. And on Saturday
the 2Oth, he sawMr. Joshua Nkomo for an hour and a half.
That is a grand total of 97.
116. A further question was whether it was our intention
to make available the written and other communications
received during these contacts? The answer to that is no.
These discussions were confidential and they did not
constitute the test of acceptability. The range of opinions
expressed in them was a wide one. It included at one
extreme the view that Britain ought to have used force and
that force wasstill the only answer. At the other extreme it
included the views of some Europeans who said they
wished to retain the right to use additional discrimination
and to perpetuate minority rule. As the proposals show, Sir
Alec Douglas-Home rejected each of these extreme views.
But these opinions were submitted to Her Majesty’s
Government and we could not make them individually
available without the agreement of those who submitted
them. The fact that some of the information found its way
into the press obviously does not alter this, in the interests
of the people concerned.
117, Then the Ambassador of Burundi asked the question,
which was subsequently repeated by others, whether there
were any guarantees that the development funds to be
provided by the British Government would in fact be used
in accordance with the decisions contained in the agreement? The answer is that there will be comprehensive
discussions with the Rhodesians about the development

15

programme before any projects are selected or money
disbursed. The British Government will therefore be in a
position to ensure that the funds are in fact used for the
purposes described in the proposals,
118. Before I close if I may now turn to comment on
another aspect. A proposal was,made this morning-or two
days ago in the first place-that the Secretariat legal experts
should undertake a comparison of the proposed new
Rhodesian Declaration of Rights with the texts of relevant
United Nations instruments. No doubt consultations will
take place in the usual manner about this proposal and
about the exact terms in which any requests to the
Secretariat might be formulated. Of course, we shall all
need to seek instructions from our Governments. Meanwhile I have no wish to suggest any unnecessary addition
to, or complication of, what would in any event be a
formidable task for the Secretariat. Indeed, I am inclined to
feel that if the Security Council were to decide to pursue
the proposal at all it would be putting a disproportionate
burden on the shoulders of the legal experts-disproportionate to the value we could extract from the resultant
study, thorough and painstaking though we know it would
be. But should a study be requested I must say now, as a
preliminary and personal view, that if it is to be really
meaningful it will have to include a comparison with the
provisions for the protection of human rights which are
embodied in the legal systems of Member States. Surely we
would need a comparison with what actually exists elsewhere-not just with an ideal situation? Only in this way
would the study help us to make an assessmentof the way
in which the protection of their rights to be enjoyed by the
people of Rhodesia would compare with that available
elsewhere, in law and in practice, among the membership of
the United Nations.

120. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

/@anslated from Russian): I had in mind not that question

but the question which I raised during my first statement
on the first day of the consideration of the question of
Rhodesia. I refer to the memoranda which according to
information which has appeared in the press, the Foreign
Secretary of the United Kingdom received from two leaders
Of politicd parties in Southern Rhodesia. At that time I
expressed the wish, and introduced a proposal
to that
effect, that the Security Council should be informed of the
contents of those memoranda.
121. I have still not received a reply. I should like to
reiterate that proposal and return once again to the
question: it would be very important to the Security
Council to be aware of the contents of those memoranda in
order that it should have an idea of the opinion which the
representatives of two Southern Rhodesian political parties
which are well known throughout the world have of ihc
Smith-Home agreement.
122. The reference to the fact that the British side is
unable to do this does not convince the Security Council. If
such documents exist, why does the British side consider it
possible to present to the Security Council, in both spoken
and written form, documents signed by Home and Smith,
and why should the memoranda presented to Home by the
representatives of Southern Rhodesian parties be concealed
from the Security Council and remain secret? Such an
approach to the consideration of such an important
problem in the Security Council cannot be regarded as
normal. For that reason, I, for my part, insist that the
British side should reflect once again on this problem and
not leave the Security Council in ignorance.
123. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): If the representative of the Soviet Union had listened to what I had to say,
I did in fact arswer the question and gave the reasonswhy
these memoranda cannot be made available. But I shall not
weary the Council by repeating what I said.

119. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with usual practice,
may I be permitted to read a short statement? Although
comment has already been made on it by the representative
of the United Kingdom, perhaps other representatives may
wish to say something now-or perhaps wait until after
consultation. But may I crave the Council’s indulgence to
read this statement:
“Members of the Council will recall that in the course
of his statement made earlier this morning the representative of Somalia proposed that the Declaration of Rights
contained in the United Kingdom White Paper on
Rhodesia be referred to the Legal Counsel of the United
Nations for examination and evaluation asto whether the
provisions of the Declaration of Rights are fair and
equitable and provide those safeguards necessary for
preserving human rights and fundamental freedoms on an
equal basis for all the inhabitants of the Territory,
regardless of race and colour, and whether those provisions compare favourably with the standards set in this
field by the United Nations. The representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic supported this application,”
Unless representatives wish to speak further on this
statement, may I suggest that an adjournment be taken to
allow for further consultation before another meeting some
time next week?
16

124. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): I should like to thank the
representative of the United Kingdom for the information
which he has imparted to the Council. I must confessthat I
am not happy with the information which he has given us. 1
would have felt that in an exercise of this dimension the
very least that the British Government could do would be
to let the people of Southern Rhodesia know the altewatives, so that they would know what to do. If they S&Y
“yes”, the White Paper clearly sets out the course they wilt
travel. But if they say “no”, then naturally the United
Kingdom should be in a position to let them know what the
Government would decide to do then.
125. I trust that the United Kingdom Government will, in
due course perhaps, ponder a little further on this point and
not proceed with what appears to my delegation to be
indecent haste, in trying to get this test of acceptability
launched without effecting and implementing the necessary
preparations for such an important exercise. One would
have thought that if a Government had decided to send a
commission of this importance to a Territory with such
crucial and delicate problems, it would have set a time.tabla
for its work.

of racism. It is within this context that my delegation hopes
that it wilI be possible for the Council formally to endorse
my request that the Office of Legal Affairs assessand
evaluate this bill so that we may know exactly the pitfalls
init.

126. We are told that the commission will leave shortly.
Weare not told how long the preparations will take, how
long the actual exercise will take. Now, around this table
there are several delegations that represent countries which
have had experience of African affairs. We have France, we
have Italy, we have Belgium, we have the United Kingdom.
We know that in their relations with African Territories
they have found it necessary, whenever embarking upon an
exercise involving constitutional progress, to proceed not
with indecent speed but with care and with deliberation, so
that the people of the Territories know exactly what is at
stake.

13 1. The PRESIDENT: There are no more names on the
list of speakers. Unless some other representative wishes to
speak at this stage, I propose to adjourn the meeting.
132. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): Mr. President, you did refer
to my proposal and you mentioned that the representative
of Syria had supported it. I am wondering whether, if there
is no serious objection to it, we could consider it
acceptable.

127. As I pointed out this morning, it would be wrong to
think that a commission composed entirely of expatriates,
without a knowledge of the language of the people of the
Territory, could be expected to perform, in a matter of
weeks,or maybe two months or three months at the most,
the task of trying to explain a paper to an illiterate
population of 5 million persons scattered over a large area,
predominantly rural, or to think that it would be able to
acquit its task properly without the aid of the recognized
political leaders of the Territory.

133. The PRESIDENT: Does any other member of the
Council wish to comment on that question at this stage?
134. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): Mr. President,
I thought you had suggested that there was going to be an
adjournment, that we were going to consult about this. I
shall have to get instructions from my Government on this
matter.

128. I would have thought that it would be possible for
the representative of the United Kingdom to let us know
exactly what part will be played by the African political
Ieaders of Southern Rhodesia, those who are currently
interned or prevented by law from contacting their own
people.

135. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): Naturally, we proceed by
consultations, and my delegation would have no objection
to that course of action on this particular proposal.
However, in view of the haste with which the United
Kingdom Government intends to dispatch this commission
to Rhodesia, I hope that the consultations will not be
unduly prolonged, nor that the Oftlce of Legal Affairs of
the United Nations will find itself unable to conduct such
an assessment before the test of acceptability is actually
under way.

129. The representative of the United Kingdom spoke
about my proposal of an examination of the declaration of
rights or bill of rights, whatever one calls it. Rather than
have 15 different assessments of the paper, I suggest that
the legal experts of the United Nations-in whom all of us
have the greatest confidence-should be asked to perform
this task on our behalf, so at least we will have an idea asto
how badly or how well the provisions of the bill of rights
compare to the standards which the United Kingdom has
been trying to enunciate and which, indeed, have found
expression in the Constitutions of many countries since the
acceptance of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

136. The PRESIDENT: In the circumstances, I would
propose to hold the usual consultations with representatives
without delay in order to ascertain their view. After the
usual consultations, it appears that there is no objection to
our holding the next meeting on Monday next,
6 December, at 3.30 p.m.

I30, But in this case, the position is unique, becausewe
are dealing now with a problem placed within a framework

l’he meeting roxe at 6.20 p.m.

17

1

HOW

TO OBTAlN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Sales Section,

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

Ler publications
des
deporitaires
du monde
Nations
Unier, Section

KAK llOJlYL(IITb

CONSEGUIR

MSfiAHMFl

OPTAHM3A4HW

PUBLICACIONES

IkiI[lIfi
IIallOXnTC
: Oprallnaaqw
SKellena.

OKbE#lHEHHblX

HAqHti

~IOXillO IiYlJIlTh
I3 1illlI;iillldS
WlraJllllaX
Ulpalllill
06 ll:l~allIlJlX
ll IlaUIPII
lillllilillOM
0+be~n11c111lli~s
IIal~llil,
Cwiwiti

DE LAS NACIONES

Las publicocioner
de las Naciones
Unidor
estdn
en todor
partes del mundo.
Conrulte
a su librero
Ventor,
Nuevo York o Ginebro.

Litho in United Nations, New York

UNIES

Nations
Unies
sent en vente
dons
ler librairier
et ler agencsr
entier.
loformer.vous
aupres
de votre librairie
ou adresrez-vour
8:
des ventes, New York ou Geneve.

~h~illiilJI
oj~ri~lllWll[ll~
bhl'~IIllCllIlldS
:Il'CIITl'TltaS
110 N'L'S pAilOllaS
Wlpa.
raramlc ml IIIIUI~IT~ 110 n~prcy
npo~axic
rlo,3,allnir,
IIbdIop
mn

COMO

throughout
New York

II
no

UNIDAS

en vento en libreriar
y cosos distriboidoros
o dirfjose
o: Nociones
Unidos,
Section

Price: $U.S. l.OO,(or equivalent in other currencies)

de

35214-October

1973-350
