A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/64
23 January 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 32
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/49/L.43)]
49/64.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of African Unity

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of 7 October 1994
on cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of African
Unity, 1/
Recalling the agreement of 15 November 1965 on cooperation between the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity as updated and signed on
9 October 1990 by the Secretaries-General of the two organizations,
Recalling also its resolutions on the enhancement of cooperation between
the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity, in particular
resolutions 43/12 of 25 October 1988, 43/27 of 18 November 1988, 44/17 of
1 November 1989, 45/13 of 7 November 1990, 46/20 of 26 November 1991, 47/148
of 18 December 1992 and 48/25 of 29 November 1993,
Recalling further that in its resolutions 46/20, 47/148 and 48/25 it,
inter alia, urged the Secretary-General and the relevant agencies of the
United Nations system to extend their support for the establishment of an
African economic community,
____________
1/

A/49/490.

95-76309
/...

A/RES/49/64
Page 2

Taking note of the resolutions, decisions and declarations adopted by
the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its sixtieth
ordinary session, held at Tunis from 6 to 11 June 1994, 2/ and by the Assembly
of Heads of State and Government of that organization at its thirtieth
ordinary session, held at Tunis from 13 to 15 June 1994, 3/
Considering the important statement made by the representative of the
current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of
the Organization of African Unity before the General Assembly on
3 October 1994, 4/
Mindful of the need for continued and closer cooperation between the
United Nations and its specialized agencies and the Organization of African
Unity, in particular in the political, economic, social, technical, cultural
and administrative fields,
Noting the establishment by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity in June 1993 of a mechanism
for the prevention, management and resolution of conflicts in Africa, 5/
Also noting the efforts of the Organization of African Unity, and the
support and assistance of the United Nations, to promote the peaceful
settlement of disputes and conflicts in Africa and the harmonious continuation
of the process of democratization,
Deeply concerned that, despite the policies of reform being implemented
by most African countries, their economic situation remains critical and
African recovery and development continue to be severely hindered by the
persistence of lower level commodity prices, the heavy debt burden and the
paucity of funding possibilities,
Aware of the efforts under way by the Organization of African Unity and
its member States in the area of economic integration and, in particular, of
the entry into force on 12 May 1994 of the Treaty establishing the African
Economic Community,
Deeply concerned also about the gravity of the situation of refugees and
displaced persons in Africa and the urgent need for increased international
assistance to help refugees and, subsequently, African countries of asylum,
Acknowledging the assistance already rendered by the international
community, particularly to refugees, displaced persons and African countries
of asylum,
____________
2/

A/49/313, annex I.

3/

Ibid., annex II.

4/
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session,
Plenary Meetings, 15th meeting, and corrigendum.
5/

See A/48/322, annex II, AHG/Decl.3 (XXIX) Rev.1.

/...

A/RES/49/64
Page 3

1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity and of his
efforts to strengthen that cooperation and to implement the relevant
resolutions;
2.
Notes with appreciation the continued and increasing participation
of the Organization of African Unity in the work of the United Nations and the
specialized agencies and its constructive contribution to that work;
3.
Calls upon the United Nations organs, in particular the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council, to continue to involve the
Organization of African Unity closely in all their activities concerning
Africa;
4.
Commends the establishment by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity in June 1993 of a mechanism
for the prevention, management and resolution of conflicts in Africa, and also
commends its good functioning;
5.
Commends the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity
for their ongoing cooperative activities in the resolution of conflicts in
Africa, and stresses the need to enhance and strengthen the existing pattern
of exchange of information and consultations, especially in the areas of
preventive diplomacy, peacemaking and peace-keeping operations;
6.
Calls upon the United Nations to coordinate its efforts and to
cooperate with the Organization of African Unity in the context of the pacific
settlement of disputes and the maintenance of international peace and security
in Africa, as provided for under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations;
7.
Urges the United Nations, within existing resources, and
encourages its Member States to help the Organization of African Unity to
strengthen its conflict resolution capacity, in particular in the areas of:
(a)

Establishment of an early warning system;

(b)

Conflict prevention and management and settlement of disputes;

(c)
Training of staff of the Organization of African Unity and African
peace-keepers;
(d)

Logistical support;

8.
Encourages Member States to consider ways and means of providing
financial assistance to the conflict resolution activities of the Organization
of African Unity;
9.
Notes with appreciation the assistance provided by the United
Nations and its agencies to African countries in the context of the
democratization process;
10.
Urges the United Nations to continue to support the Organization
of African Unity in its efforts to manage a peaceful democratic transition in
Africa;
/...

A/RES/49/64
Page 4

11.
Urges all Member States and regional and international
organizations, in particular those of the United Nations system, as well as
non-governmental organizations, to provide the necessary and appropriate
economic, financial and technical assistance to refugees and displaced
persons, as well as to African countries of asylum, taking into account recent
disquieting developments in this respect;
12.
Commends the continued efforts of the Organization of African
Unity to promote multilateral cooperation and economic integration among
African States, and requests United Nations agencies to continue to support
those efforts;
13.
Stresses that the economic, technical and development assistance
provided to Africa by the organizations of the United Nations system must
continue, and emphasizes the current need for those organizations to accord
priority to Africa in this field;
14.
Urges the Secretary-General, Member States, regional and
international organizations, in particular those of the United Nations system,
and non-governmental organizations to extend their support to the operation of
the African Economic Community and to assist in economic integration and
cooperation in Africa;
15.
Requests the Secretary-General to support the efforts of the
Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity with a view to holding
sectoral meetings on the priority areas of cooperation, and in particular to
support those meetings organized by the Economic and Social Council of the
African Economic Community;
16.
Requests the agencies of the United Nations system working in
Africa to include in their programmes at the national and regional levels the
activities which will enhance regional cooperation in their respective areas
and to facilitate the realization of the objectives of the Treaty establishing
the African Economic Community;
17.
Calls upon United Nations agencies to intensify the coordination
of their regional programmes in Africa in order to create interlinkages among
them and to ensure the harmonization of their programmes with those of the
African regional and subregional economic organizations;
18.
Emphasizes the urgency of the need to adopt appropriate measures
to ensure the effective implementation of the United Nations New Agenda for
the Development of Africa in the 1990s, 6/ in particular in the areas of
resource flows, debt relief and diversification of African economies;
19.
Recalls the report prepared by the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and transmitted by the Secretary-General on
the need for and feasibility of the establishment of a diversification fund
for Africa’s commodities; 7/
____________
6/

Resolution 46/151, annex, sect. II.

7/

A/48/335 and Add.1 and 2.

/...

A/RES/49/64
Page 5

20.
Calls upon the Secretary-General to work in close coordination and
cooperation with the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity,
in particular on the follow-up to and effective implementation of the New
Agenda;
21.
Recalls its resolution 48/214 of 23 December 1993, in paragraph 10
of which it invited the Secretary-General to reinforce the capabilities of the
Office of the Special Coordinator for Africa and Least Developed Countries of
the Department for Policy Coordination and Sustainable Development of the
Secretariat to follow up and promote the responses of the United Nations
system and the international community to the development concerns of Africa,
as expressed in the New Agenda;
22.
Endorses the agrement reached between the organizations of the
United Nations system and the Organization of African Unity on the convening
of a meeting between the secretariats of those organizations, to be held in
1995 at Addis Ababa, to review and evaluate the progress made in implementing
the proposals and recommendations agreed upon in September 1993 on cooperation
between them in 1994-1995 and to adopt new and effective joint action;
23.
Calls upon the relevant organs of the United Nations to ensure the
effective, fair and equitable representation of Africa at senior and policy
levels at their respective headquarters and in their regional field
operations;
24.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that the
United Nations information network continues to disseminate information so as
to increase public awareness of the social and economic problems, achievements
and needs of African States and of their regional and subregional
institutions;
25.
Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly at its fiftieth session on the implementation of the present
resolution and on the development of the cooperation between the Organization
of African Unity and the organizations of the United Nations system.
89th plenary meeting
15 December 1994
