UNITED NA THINS

T’HIRTY-F/FTN

YEAR

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2 192) . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

..

1

Adoption of the agenda . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I . . ,

1

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 25 January 1980 from the Charge d’affaires a-i. of the Permanent
Mission of Malawi to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/13764) . . . . , . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

s/w.2192

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Sl1pp1~n~11t.r of the QfJicic~/ Rrcorh &the Security Corrrwil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolrltions
u/d
Dwisio/u
of the Sccrrr*i~l Cor~~il. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

-

2192nd MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 30 January
Psesitlent:

Mr. Jacques LEPRETTE

(France).

PIXJSPIT~:The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional

etters com:o a United

I.
i

lublishecl in
1. The date
/hich inforrice with a
utiwts

Adoption

1980, at 4 p.m.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
Fret?&):
I wish also to inform the members of the Council that
I have received two letters, dated 30 January 1980,
from the representatives of Nigeria, Tunisia and
Zambia. The first of those letters reads as follows:

agenda (S/Agenda/2192)

“We, the undersigned, members of the Security
Council, have the honour to request that the Security
Council, pursuant to rule 39 of its provisional rules
of procedure, extend an invitation to Mr. Tirivafi J.
Kangai, representative of the Patriotic Front of
Zimbabwe, to participate in the Security Council’s
consideration of the item ‘Question concerning the
situation in Southern Rhodesia’ 1’ [S/13770].

of the agenda

2. Question concerning the situation in Southern
Rhodesia:
Letter dated 25 January 1980 from the ChargC
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Malawi to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/13764)

NIP

en applied
y operative

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 25 January 1980 from the Chargb
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Malawi
to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
1
the Security Council (S/13764)
1. The PR,ESIDENT
(hterprettrtim
from
Frc~rwh):
,I should like to inform the members of the Security
Council that I have received letters from the representatives
of Botswana,
Cuba, Egypt, Liberia,
Malawi, Mozambique,
Somalia, the United Republic
of Tanzania, and Viet Nam in which they request
‘to be invited to participate in the Council’s discussion
of the item on the agenda. In accordance with the
‘Usual practice I propose, with the consent of the Coun&il, to invite those representatives
to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, in conformity
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

3. If there is no objection, I shall take it that the
Council decides to accede to the request that it extend
an invitation to Mr. Tirivafi J. Kangai, pursuant to
rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure,

4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretrrtion
fiam
French):
The representative of the United Kingdom wishes to
speak, and I now call on him.
5. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom): My
delegation does not intend to raise an objection to the
proposal that the Patriotic Front be invited to address
the Security Council, but I feel obliged to draw to
the Council’s attention the fact that by the decision
it has just taken it has agreed to give a hearing to
only one group from among a number of parties that
are contesting the free and fair elections that we all
wish to see held in Rhodesia. I trust that if any of the
other parties were to ask for a hearing, the Council
would similarly grant their request.
6. The PRESIDENT
(interpretorion
jh~?
French):
Due note will be taken of the statement just made by
the United Kingdom representative.
7.

Mr. KHARLAMOV

(Union of Soviet Socialist
X/&r//z): I am rather
surprised at the statement we have just heard. Indeed,
in alI the relevant decisions adopted by the General
Assembly and the Security Council, the role of the
Patriotic Front and its representatives is very definitely
appraised and defined. A clear-cut definition has also

Republics)

(int~rpretcrtim

jh7

been given of the roIe of those who have just been
called the “other parties”. I think that the point made
by my neighbour, Mr. Parsons, constitutes the first
occasion on which we see that the representative of the
United Kingdom has begun to have doubts about the
decisions adopted earlier by the General Assembly
and the Security Council on the significance and role
of the Patriotic Front. I do not accept the second part
of the statement, I do not have with me the relevant
decisions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council, but if I did have them and if I were to read
them out, they would show that these “other parties”
whom the United Kingdom has in mind have nevel
had a good word said about them by the Assembly
or the Council.

i’
:

8. The PRESIDENT
(interpretcrtimr $vm Frc~~rch).
The statement just made by the representative of the
Soviet Union will appear in the record of this meeting.
9. The second letter from the representatives
Nigeria, Tunisia and Zambia reads as follows:
”

,

of

“We, the undersigned, members of the Security
Council, have the honour to request that the Security
Council, pursuant to rule 39 of its provisional rules
of procedure, extend an invitation Lo Mr. Johnstone
Makatini,
representative
of the African National
Congress of South Africa, to participate in the
Council’s
consideration
of the item ‘Question
concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia’ ”
[S/1377/].
IO. If there is no objection, I shall take it that the
Council decides to accede to the request that it extend
an invitation to Mr. Johnstone Makatini, pursuant to
rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.

11. The PRESIDENT
(i/rferpr’ctrriitIrr jw/u Frcnrhj:
The Council is meeting today at the request of the
African group in the United Nations. That request is
contained in the letter of 2.5 January 1980 from the
Chargi cl’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Malawi to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council.
12. The first speaker is Mr. Cecil Dennis, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Liberia, who wishes to make a
statement on behalf of the current Chairman of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU). I welcome him
and invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
13. Mr. DENNIS (Liberia): The events in Southern
Rhodesia concerning which the Security Council has
been convened today are viewed with the utmost
gravity by all the States of independent Africa. That is
why, as the representative of the current Chairman of
the Organization of African Unity and the President
of Liberia, Mr. William R. Tolbert, and in my own

capacity as Chairman of the Council of Ministers of
that organization,
I have come with others of my
colleagues to New York at this time, so that we may
lay bare before the Security Council and the whole
international community Africa’s deep concern at the
serious violations of the Lancaster House Agreement’
which have taken place and are still continuing in
Rhodesia. It is an irony that the very administering
Power, the United Kingdom,
which has primary
responsibility
for upholding
the Lancaster House
Agreement should itself be the violator of that sacred
accord.
14. Permit me therefore, while expressing gratitude
to the Council for consenting to convene this urgent
meeting at Africa’s request, to recall, also with gratitude, that the Security Council’s interest in the peaceful resolution of the Rhodesian problem has been
deep and sustained. Having grappled painstakingly
with the problem for more than 14 years, now that
victory is in sight, the Council cannot afford to he
silent when the internationally
accepted agreement
for the peaceful decolonization
of Zimbabwe is being
placed in serious jeopardy.
15. But more important than the natural desire which
the Council must entertain for the peaceful decolonization of Zimbabwe is the urgent attention that
events in that war-weary and troubled land cannot but
rightfully claim from it, for the violation or repudiation
of the Lancaster House Agreement would defeat the
achievement of self-determination
by the people of
Zimbabwe in the peaceful manner envisaged in the
Agreement. Worse yet, a breakdown of the Agreement would lead to the resumption of the war of
the ending, of which was a principal
liberation,
achievement of the Agreement.
If that tragic war,
which has already claimed more than 20,000 lives :tnd
caused untold damage to property, were to be resumed,
situations fraught with great dangers for international
peace would quickly develop, because Zimbabwe lies
within a charged and volatile region of the world ami
because the resumed war would be occurring at a time
when the international
community was experiencing
a dangerous period of heightened tension.
16. Paragraph 8 of annex D of the Lancaster House
Agreement that provides for the pre-independence
arrangements in the Territory states:
14. . . In the first place, the purpose of the prcindependence arrangements is to allow the parties to
put their case to the people under fair conditions.
The pre-independence
period should not be concerned with the remodelling
of the institutions
of
Government.
This will be a matter for the independence Government
elected by the people of
Rhodesia. The essential requirement
is that all
parties should be free to put their policies to the
people and should commit themselves to abide by
the people’s choice. The purpose of the interim
period should be a peaceful competition
fat
power.”

,

The purpose of the independence period, I repeat, as
clearly stated in the agreement, “should be a peaceful
competition for power”.
17. Last month when the Security Council met and
decided [resolution 460 (IY79)] to lift the mandatory
sanctions that had. been imposed by it against the
rebellious British colony, many delegations
were
naturally concerned at the situation prevailing in the
Territory as the electoral process was about to get
under way. It was clear to all-and
much stress was
placed on this in the debate [22/8/st meetirtgl-that
in
order for suitabIe conditions to exist in which a peaceful competition for power could take place, all South
African forces and mercenaries had to be withdrawn.
These same concerns were felt, more significantly,
far beyond the confines of this chamber. Indeed,
in the talks at Lancaster House in London, a stalemate
had earlier developed regarding the cease-fire arrangements on this very point; and it was only after firm
assurances had been given by the British authorities
that the intimidating operations of all troops, including
South African troops, would be stopped and that
those troops would be withdrawn that the leaders
of the Patriotic Front finally agreed to sign the ceasefire agreement.

The accord was signed on 21 December of last year, but
as we address the Council today, the South African
troops are still present in Zimbabwe, How can it be
expected that Africa will even tolerate such a d&berate and flagrant violation of the Agreement? It was
against the background
of assurances from the
Government of the United Kingdom-a
great country
which prides itself on integrity, honour and fair playthat OAU, the Security Council and international
opinion were persuaded to support the Agreement
reached at Lancaster House.
21. African leaders who visited London during the
negotiations, as well as others from their respective
capitals, did all they could to prevail upon the parties
to do everything in their power to bring the war in
Zimbabwe to a negotiated end. In their desire to see
the Lancaster House Agreement concluded, they did
not seek the betrayal of the noble cause for which
African freedom fighters had fought for so long and so
hard; rather, their actions were motivated by their
faith and trust in the sincerity and noble intentions
of all the parties to the negotiations, including the
British Government.
22. But now it has been revealed that the British
Governor, Lord Soames, has not been implementing
the Lancaster House Agreement in an even-handed
manner. More than that, there is proof positive that
he has most lamentably violated numerous provisions
of the Agreement.

18. I personally recall that on 4 December 1979,
when news reports reached President Tolbert of statements made by the British Foreign Secretary, Lord
Carrington, that the British Government intended to
proceed with the implementation
of the independence
plan for Zimbabwe with or without the participation
of the Patriotic Front, President Tolbert, together with
President Julius Nyerere of the United Republic of
Tanzania and President Alhaji Shehu Shagari of
Nigeria, who were at the time visiting Liberia, called
in the British Charge d’affaires resident in Monrovia
and collectively expressed to him their grave concern
at the trend which the talks had taken, and, among
other things not less important, they sought clarification of the revelation that South African troops were
present in Rhodesia,

23. It is not for any outsiders, most especially not
for the colonial administering
Power, whose impartiality should be unimpeachable, to seek to determine
how the Zimbabweans should conduct their politics.
Certainly the British Governor should not allow
himself to attempt to influence the electoral process in
Zimbabwe or to favour or give the appearance of
favouring one or another of the political groups in the
country over any of the others. Because such a biased
course of conduct is being pursued by the administering
Power in Zimbabwe at the present time, the Lancaster
House Agreement is in danger of collapsing.

19. With reference to Lord Carrington’s
reaction,
conveyed through me by the British Charge d’affaires
in Monrovia of 5 December, to the concerns expressed
bY the three Presidents, and with particular reference
to the question of the South African troops, I quote
the following from the note handed me by the British
Charge d’affaires:

24. It will be recalled that not least among the reasons
why the so-called elections in Zimbabwe some months
ago by which the illegal Ian Smith regime was replaced
by the equally illegal Smith-Muzorewa
regime were
never accepted by the international
community
was the fact that those elections took place in a climate
of intimidation
and while martial law and a state of
emergency obtained in the Territory. Just as such conditions were not conducive to the conduct of free and
fair elections then, they are not so now. The decision
of the British Government
to renew the state of
emergency for another six months and to maintain
martial law in the Territory is, in our opinion, a
serious violation of the spirit and intent ofthe Lancaster
House Agreement, and that decision should therefore
be rescinded.

“ . . . On the point about South African troops,
Lord Carrington’s reply is that there can be no question of intervention in Rhodesia by South African
units or by the forces of any other Government while
there is a British Governor in Rhodesia.”
20. Later, when the troops still remained in the Territory after Lord Soames had assumed residence, Lord
Carrington promised that the South African troops
would be withdrawn on the signing of the accord.
3

The question of the presence of South African
troops in Zimbabwe, which I mentioned
earlier, is one
in respect of which the actions and explanations
of
the British authorities
are most disturbing.
Complaints
that South African troops and mercenaries
are at
Present operating
aggressively
in Zimbabwe
have
been countered by statements
from the British that
there are not many such troops in the Territory
and
that the few that are there are present only for the
purpose of safeguarding
the Beit Bridge.
Such an
eXphnatiOn
is a clear admission
from the British
themselves that the Lancaster House Agreement has
been breached in spirit and intent. Our understanding
of the Agreement
does not allow for the presence of
South African troops in Rhodesia for any purpose
whatsoever. Moreover,
we have been informed that
South African troops are not only on the Rhodesian
side of the Beit Bridge, on the pretext of providing
security, but also in other parts of the country. South
Africa’s right to protect its interest in that portion of
Beit Bridge falling within its territory can be exercised
legitimately
only from South African territory and not
from Rhodesia. Whatever protection
might be needed
by Rhodesia
in regard to Beit Bridge cannot be
provided by South African troops.

25.

and ill-founded
theories of racial superiority propagated and enforced by the inhuman apartheid
system. That is what the liberation struggle in Zimbabwe is all about and no one, least of all the British,
who know better, should expect free Africa and
African nationalists
anywhere ever to compromise
on these matters. We Africans are not inferior to
any other human beings. Those who expect Africans
to abandon so basic a position-something’
they
themselves would never consider doing-for
material
advantage or for meaningless peace must know-and,
if they do not know, let them be told now-that such
an expectation smacks of the worst sort of racism.
29. But the statement that there are not many South
African troops and mercenaries in Zimbabwe is simply
not true. Our sources indicate that there is a massive
deployment of up to 6,000 South African soldiers and
policemen in various parts of Zimbabwe. In addition,
we are reliably informed that there are South African
troops on secondment
to the Rhodesian forces,
wearing Rhodesian uniforms and using Rhodesianpainted vehicles. Confirmed estimates indicate that
there are four infantry battalions plus squadrons of
armour with supporting artillery, headquarters and
support units. We have learned further that, in addition
to allowing the deployment of South African troops
and paramilitary
police in Zimbabwe, the British
Governor, Lord Soames, has integrated the former
private army of Bishop Muzorewa into the regular
Rhodesian army while disbanding and harassing the
forces of the Patriotic Front. A large number of
civilians, we understand, are also being molested,

26. In the last day or two the United Kingdom has
announced South AFrica’s readiness to withdraw its
troops from Zimbabwe
once alternative
security
arrangements
have been made for the bridge. The
whole question of security in Rhodesia is a matter for
the Governor, and South Africa, which is present in the
colony illegally,
cannot condition
the termination
of
its illegal presence on actions to be taken by the
Governor.

30. If the British or any others are seeking to deceive
the people of Zimbabwe by ‘efforts to cheat them in
the exercise of their right to self-determination,
those
efforts will fail. The issue in Zimbabwe, as in all
white-ruled southern Africa, is simple: racism must go;
majority rule and independence must be established.
There can be no other basis upon which peace and
justice can be brought to that troubled region of the
African continent. The Lancaster House Agreement
was welcomed and supported by Africa because it
signified that, as a consequence of the supreme struggle
and sacrifices of the African freedom fighters of
Zimbabwe, the establishment of a democratic multiracial society appeared to be accepted by those who
had been resisting it for so long. Because the Lancaster
House Agreement is very carefully balanced, and a
solution painstakingly
arrived at to a complex and
delicate problem, the international community, led by
the Security Council, must not allow it to fail. If that
happens, grave dangers for the peace of the world
will ensue,

27. Beyond points of detail of the kind just mentioned, important
though they are, we are greatly
amazed that the United
Kingdom,
given its great
familiarity
with the essential issues in Rhodesia and
particularly
with the problems
of racism that have
bedevilled the decolonization
of that Territory
for so
long, should be advancing arguments of the kind which
have come to our knowledge.
One can more easily
understand racist elements of the type which flourishes
in Pretoria boasting that a single contingent
of crack
troops of (~~x~Iv~c;c/ would be sufficient to keep the
African freedom fighters and all the people of Zimbabwe at bay and deter them from being a challenge
to minority white rule. Thus, to stress, as’the British
have done, that South African troops in Zimbabwe
are not many has the effect of inflaming
African
sensitivities rather than allaying them. The presence in
Zimbabwe of even a single South African soldier or
murdering
innocent
mercenary
harassing
and
Zimbabwean
citizens and otherwise meddling
in the
affairs of that country
is unacceptable,
and it is
offensive to all those who had placed their trust in the
Lancaster House Agreement and in the readiness of the
United Kingdom
to implement
it imPartiallY.

31. That is why we have come to the Security Council at this time urgently asking it to do everything
within its power to cause the British faithfully to
discharge their solemn duty and responsibility to the
whole international
community under the Lancaster
House Agreement.

28. The crux of the tragedy of Zimbabwe
and all ‘of
southern Africa is diabolical
racism and the outdated
4

32. We in OAU regard the just, speedy and, we
hope, peaceful decolonization of Zimbabwe as a matter
of principle too basic to be compromised. Therefore,
we call upon the British Government immediately to
take the following actions in order to ensure that all
Zimbabwean nationals freely participate in the forthcoming electoral process: first, to expel all South
African troops and all mercenaries forthwith from
Zimbabwe;
secondly,
to confine forthwith
the
Rhodesian security and auxiliary forces to their bases;
thirdly, to release all political prisoners; and fourthly,
to allow all Zimbabwean exiles to return home without
threat, intimidation
or arrest, in conformity with the
Lancaster House Agreement.

Rhodesian forces and maintaining
the presence of
South African forces in Zimbabwe, especially where
a clear threat of military intervention in Zimbabwe
has already been made by South Africa. The nations
of Africa,
in whole-heartedly
supporting
the
Lancaster House Agreement, have aIways insisted
on fair and equal treatment of all the parties involved
in the Zimbabwe problem. We are therefore concerned that any semblance of partiality or bias
favouring one faction in Zimbabwe or indications
that the Patriotic Front has been placed at an undue
disadvantage vi,+ir-vis other political factions could
seriously erode the base of Africa’s support for the
process of transition now under way in Zimbabwe
and results emerging therefrom. Because of these
concerns and apprehensions, I am taking this opportunity again to urge you to do all within your power
to ensure that agreements reached in London are
implemented
fairly and impartially
and that
assurances given are fulfilled during this delicate
period of transition which is being supervised by
your Government in order that the goodwill and
momentum for peace in Zimbabwe thus far generated
may not be lost.”

33. We also call on all countries, especially the
Western countries which have considerable influence
in southern Africa and which in recent days have
bravely raised a clarion call in defence of peace and
principle in Asia, to do no less in Zimbabwe.
34. Finally, I shall conclude my remarks by reading
a message that was sent on 14 January by Mr. William
R. Tolbert, the current Chairman of the Organization
of African Unity and President of Liberia, to the Prime
Minister of the United Kingdom, Margaret Thatcher.
That message and its repetition here are not prompted
by a feeling that the Lancaster House Agreement
cannot be saved; on the contrary, our faith in the
British sense of justice and fair play makes us expect
that the Agreement under the supervision of the
United Kingdom can still lead to a peaceful resolution
of the situation in Zimbabwe. President Tolbert’s
message to the British Prime Minister reads as follows:

35. Sir Anthony PARSONS
(United
Kingdom):
I reserve the right to intervene later in the debate to
reply to fresh allegations against my Government
contained in the statement of the Foreign Minister
of Liberia and any other allegations which may emerge
during the debate.
36. Today, I address myself to the letter sent to the
President of the Council on 25 January 1980 by the
Chairman of the African Group. That letter, which has
led to the calling of this meeting, refers to “the
deteriorating
situation in Southern Rhodesia”.
My
Government
does not recognize that there is a
deteriorating
situation in Rhodesia.
Anyone who
compares the situation in that country today withy the
situation of five weeks ago must conclude not only
that there has been no deterioration
but that, on the
contrary, the situation has improved to a degree that
is truly remarkable. Five weeks ago, Rhodesia was
racked by a full-scale civil war which had been raging
for over seven years, with appalling loss of life, misery
and destruction from the continual encounters between
the forces of the authorities
in Salisbury and the
forces of the Patriotic Front. Tens of thousands of
Rhodesian civilians were refugees in neighbouring
countries. The political and military leaders of the
Patriotic Front, too, were in exile. The regime in
Salisbury was recognized by no other Government.
Sanctions had been enforced against Rhodesia for
13 years. The country was virtually cut off from the
outside world.

“I am compelled to communicate with you once
again regarding the state of affairs in Zimbabwe
(Southern Rhodesia). You may recall that in my
earlier message to you I had expressed grave
concern about the continued presence of South
African forces in Zimbabwe. Since then the situation
in Zimbabwe has been further compounded and
beclouded by the disturbing and alarming reports
of the murder of a number of troops of the Patriotic
Front by the Rhodesian security forces. Whatever
the circumstances
surrounding
these unsettling
developments
in Zimbabwe,
they have aroused
serious concerns across the continent of Africa,
reverberations of which I am certain have reached
you. You will recall that the question of the role of
Rhodesian forces during the transitional period in
Zimbabwe and the presence of South African troops
in the Territory were key issues of contention which
caused a deadlock during negotiations on the ceasefire arrangements. That impasse was broken only
when firm assurances were given by your Government that Rhodesian forces would be confined to
bases and that South African troops would be withdrawn with the resumption of British control over
Zimbabwe. We are therefore greatly surprised and
distressed by the apparent contradiction
in the
actions of the British Governor in hastily deploying

37. But, after a mere five weeks, there have been
quite extraordinary
changes for the better. Last
weekend, Mr. Robert Mugabe returned to Rhodesia
and addressed a vast crowd of his supporters in
Salisbury. Mr. Nkomo had already been afforded a
5

places. The team of Commonwealth election observers
set up in accordance with the Agreement has now
arrived in Salisbury to begin its important task.

similar reception on his return to his country. The
nature of the statements made by the leaders of the
Patriotic
Front, by 3ishop Muzorewa and other
political leaders and the peaceful way in which their
huge crowds of supporters conducted themselves at
the political rallies can leave no one in any doubt that
all are committed to a full-scale election campaign.
There are, of course, continuing problems, mainly
problems of law and order. There have been serious
breaches of the Lancaster House Agreement,’
and
there are still risks and dangers ahead of us. I shall
return to these matters later in my statement. But it
is the positive achievements in the days since the
signing of the Agreement on which I first and foremost wish to concentrate.

42. In the specific context of electoral preparations,
all the political parties have been allocated equal free
time on Rhodesian radio and television for party
political broadcasts during the election campaign. All
the parties are, in addition, free to purchase time,
below a given ceiling, on radio and television at
normal rates for political broadcasts and announcements and to place advertisements
in the press.
Furthermore, the Governor has lifted prohibitions on
three newspapers which formerly were banned.
43. All this has been achieved in a few weeks in a
country which had been brought to chaotic dislocation
by IO years of civil war, in an atmosphere in which
it is inevitable that deep fears and suspicions continue
to exist on all sides. I put it to the Council that progress
has, in a word, been much more rapid and encouraging
than any of us could possibly have hoped.

38. Everywhere in Rhodesia there is mounting
evidence of a return to normal life after the ravages of
the long and bitter civil war. Major road links have
now been reopened with Mozambique via Umtali and
with Zambia via Chirundu. The rail’link with Zambia
is open, and work is going ahead to open other rail
and road links with Mozambique. Five national airlines
now operate scheduled air services into Rhodesia,
three of these from black Africa. Over 4,000 refugees
have so far returned from Botswana. Planning is at an
advanced stage for the reception of refugees returning
from Zambia and Mozambique.

44. Of course it has been impossible to resolve
instantly all the problems engendered by the years of
illegal independence and civil war. But my Government is deeply disappointed that the African delegations, whose Governments did so much to create the
circumstances in which agreement at Lancaster House
became possible, should have seen fit to insist on a
meeting of the Security Council at this stage in order
to criticize in strong terms the British Government’s
performance. I do not wish to prolong this debate any
further than is necessary. But, since the Chairman of
the African Group has made the allegations contained
in his letter to you, Mr. President, I have no alternative but to respond to them. I shall therefore go
through the list of what are described in the letter
as “gross vioIations of the Lancaster House Agreement” by my Government.

39. The overall human rights picture has improved
remarkably during the six weeks since the Governor’s
arrival in Salisbury. All.81 detainees held under order
of the previous regime and commonly referred to as
political prisoners have been released. The cases of
other detainees, including all those held under martial
law, are being reviewed and many are being released.
An amnesty has been granted for all acts in furtherance
of, or resistance to, the illegal declaration of independence. Martial law courts have been suspended,
Sentences of execution have been commuted.
40. Almost 22,000 men of the Patriotic Front forces
have presented themselves, as agreed, at the assembly
points. The combined efforts of Patriotic Front commanders, the monitoring force and the police enabled
large numbers of men of the Patriotic Front forces
who had not reached the assembly places before the
date for completion of the assembly period--4 January-to do so afterwards.

45. I start by rejecting the overall accusation most
firmly. I have already stated that there have been
serious breaches of the Agreement. But they have not
been committed by my Government. They have been
the subject of strong complaint to the Governor and to
the various relevant commissions established under
the Agreement. The complaints have come from all
parties to the Agreement and they have been fully and
properly investigated.

41, As problems arise, the Governor continues to
deal with them through the machinery established
in the Lancaster House Agreement-that
is, the Ceasefire Commission
and the Election Council, This
machinery is functioning effectively with the full
participation of representatives of the Patriotic Front,
Patriotic Front liaison officers have played a major
role in securing compliance with the cease-fire and in
dealing with related difficulties.
Co-operation
and
liaison continue between the Patriotic Front commanders at all levels, the police and the monitoring
force over the security of the Patriotic Front assembly

46. I have already emphasized that the machinery
set up under the Lancaster House Agreement for
dealing with breaches of the cease-fire and activities
that could adversely affect the holding of free and fair
elections is operating satisfactorily with the cooperation of all concerned. It is surely right that the
Cease-fire Commission
and the Electoral Council
should be helped and encouraged to deal with the
problems that arise. It is these bodies, functioning on
the ground in Rhodesia, which are best qualified to
weigh the various relevant complex factors, to sift
6

the evidence
action.

and propose

the appropriate

remedial

profoundly regret, that occurred at Lupane three
weeks ago. This was fully investigated by the Ceasefire Commission, on which-as I have already saidthe Patriotic Front is represented. This was the sole
rea]lY serious incident involving Patriotic Front forces
on their way to assembly points. The Cease-fire
Commission found that the killings resulted from a
breach of the cease-fire by forces of the Zimbabwe
People’s Revolutionary Army (ZIPRA). This judgement and the need for action to deal with the breach
were accepted by the ZIPRA representative on the
Cease-fire Commission. In all the circumstances it
is quite remarkable that the Patriotic Front forces-and
remember there were nearly 22,000 men-were able
to go to their assembly points without further major
difficulties and incidents. The implication that the
Governor in some sense intended the killings at
Lupane is frankly unacceptable-to put it mildly-and
deeply resented by my Government.

4’7. The first detailed point raised in the letter from
the African Group-and
I believe from our consultations that it was the most important
point to the
authors-was
the presence of a company of South
African troops at the Rhodesian end of Beit Bridge.
I should like to put this into perspective. That was a
small number of troops used to protect a vital lifeline. They were deployed in the immediate vicinity
of the bridge. There was no question of their intervening in the internal affairs of Rhodesia. It was
inconceivable
that this small detachment could in any
way have affected the course of the elections. Their
activities were, in any case, strictly monitored by the
monitoring
teams.
48. We have, however, been alive to the sensitivities
of African Governments
whose objections to the
presence of the South African company were based on
feelings and emotions which we understand. We always
made it clear that the Governor
would keep the
position of that force under review. As the Council
knows,
a joint statement by the South African and
British Governments
was released last weekend confirming the decision to withdraw the troops from the
Rhodesian side of the bridge as soon as satisfactory
substitute
arrangements
could be made by the
Rhodesian
security forces to safeguard the bridge.
I now inform the Council that the South African
detachment has been withdrawn today. This dispute,
then, is behind us.

51. I turn next to the question of the deployment
of the auxiliary forces. The auxiliaries are part of the
Rhodesian forces and were declared as such at
Lancaster House. As part of the Rhodesian forces
they are deployed, in accordance with the Lancaster
House Agreement, to help the police to contain
breaches of the cease-fire. They are monitored. There
have been various blanket allegations of intimidation
by the auxiliaries. These have been investigated and
have been found to be not proven. I would remind
the Council at this point that the report of the Pearce
Commission of 1972,2 which was widely accepted,
made clear how very difficult it is to assess charges of
this kind and to determine whether the degree of
intimidation
involved is inhibiting a free electoral
choice.

49. It should nevertheless be realized more widely
than it is that the British Government and the Governor
have a difficult task to allay the very different fears
and anxieties of all the parties involved. It is not only
the concerns of the Patriotic Front and the African
nations that must be met, but also, if the settlement
is to work, the concerns of the internal parties and the
white minority.
It must not be forgotten that it was
Bishop Muzorewa who gave up at Lancaster House the
office to which he had been appointed as a result Of
elections which, however imperfect,
reflected the
views of over 60 per cent of the population. It was the
white minority
that gave up its blocking powers in
Parliament
so that a constitution could be agreed on
that provided, at long last, for genuine majority rule.
Those were very major concessions. I know that my
words will not appeal to some delegations, but they
are true, and it is in this context that we should view
the original decision to allow the presence of a small
South African force at Beit Bridge.

52. The monitoring force has so far brought one
breach of the cease-fire agreement by the auxiliaries
to the Cease-fire Commission, together with two cases
of alleged intimidation, which are being pursued by the
police. Other specific complaints have been thoroughly
investigated and dealt with through the Election
Council, In many important ways, the auxiliaries’
activities are increasingly related to the re-establishmerit of civilian administration in the tribal trust lands
where they are engaged in attempts to promote the
inhabitants’ return to normal life. They are not there
to conduct any form of political campaign. I do not
deny that there may have been lapses, but I can assure
the Council that the activities of the auxiliaries are
being closely scrutinized and that, as and when incidents of indiscipline
and political partiality
are
reported, they are being thoroughly investigated and
the offenders disciplined. If any delegation wishes to
make allegations against the auxiliaries, let it SUPPort
them with detailed facts. As I say, we have already
heard enough blanket accusations that have turned out
to be of no substance.

50. The letter from the Chairman of the African
Group goes on to make a number of other allegations.
In its most intemperate passage, the letter accuses the
Governor of deploying Rhodesian forces “to kill and
harass Patriotic Front forces on their way to assembly points”,
I assume that this incredible allegation
refers to the most unhappy incident, which we

53. The third paragraph in the list of Criticisms Contained in the letter from the Chairman of the African
7

Group refers to the renewal of the state of emergency,
the maintenance of martial law, the continued detention of political prisoners and the return of refugees.
Let me take these in order.

forces which have refused to comply with the ceasefire agreement and with the order of their commanders
to assemble. There have been several cases of political
violence, and one parliamentary candidate has been
murdered. In these circumstances, it would be irresponsible for the Governor to take steps which might
increase the risks to which the peaceful and lawabiding majority of the people are exposed by a
lawless and violent minority.
Nevertheless,
the
situation has improved since the signing of the ceasefire agreement
and the Governor has proceeded
progressively to relax restrictive measures where it is
safe to do so.. Martial law courts are no longer functioning.
Many martial law detainees have been
released, This process of relaxation will continue to
the full extent justified by improvements
in the
security situation. What I have just said in no way
contradicts my opening remarks about the astonishing
improvement
in the overall situation since the resumption of legality. It would have been too much to
expect Rhodesia to return to perfect peace within a
few weeks of the end of a harsh and long drawn out
civil war.

54. On 18 January 1980, the Governor renewed the
present state of emergency for a further six months.
The existing laws, validated on his assumption of
authority-as
stipulated in the Lancaster
House
Agreement-would
have lapsed on 26 January unless
the Governor took action before then to renew them.
The Governor’s decision was taken in view of the
level of lawlessness and violence in the country as a
whole. This led inexorably to the conclusion that a
state of emergency does in fact still exist. I should add
that the regulations under emergency powers are not
uniformly restrictive.
55. Some of their provisions are essential in order to
facilitate the holding of next month’s elections: for
example, those which permit the authorities to take
over premises for use as polling stations. The emergency powers regulations have also been used recently
to permit the requisitioning
of premises as refugee
reception centres. The Governor has used the provision of the emergency powers regulations to facilitate
the transport of Patriotic Front forces from rendezvous points to assembly places by civilian buses.
These regulations do contain a number of provisions which are held by some observers to be objectionable, especially those relating to restriction and
detention without trial. But revocation orders had
been signed before the renewal of the present state
of emergency in respect of all remaining detainees
h’eld by Ministerial order under the emergency powers
regulations. By then al1 the 60-day detention orders
which were in force at the time of the Governor’s
arrival in Salisbury had lapsed. The Governor’s
administration
continues to apply itself to the task of
reducing ‘as far as possible unnecessary restrictions
imposed by the emergency powers regulations. The
Governor has revoked, and will go on revoking, such
restrictive regulations as are no longer justified by
circumstances.

57. As I have already stated, there are no political
prisoners’still
in detention in Rhodesia, The last one
was released on 17 January. It took rather longer to
procure the release of the 71 members of the Zimbabwe African National Union (ZANU) imljrisoned
in Mozambique
by Mr. Mugabe, but I am glad to say
that they are now free to return to their country.
58. We also reject the allegation that we have denied
“the fundamental
right of return to all Zimbabwean
refugees”. As I said at the beginning of my statement,
some 4,000 refugees have already returned from
Botswana, and arrangements are in hand for this flow
to continue. We hope to set a date very soon for the
return of refugees from Zambia and Mozambique.
We
do not deny that the repatriation of refugees has not
gone as smoothly as we would have hoped; there are
various reasons for that. First of all, it is in no one’s
interest to repatriate refugees faster than they can be
absorbed. We have been in close touch with the
Government of Botswana and with the United Nations
High Commissioner
for Refugees, who has agreed
to co-ordinate the repatriation exercise. There have
been difficulties.
To be frank, there have been
occasional
misunderstandings
which have resulted
in more refugees crossing the border than could be
immediately
absorbed in Rhodesia. Of course, there
have been practical problems. At one stage we had to
halt the flow because there was too little drinking
water at a reception centre. In some cases sites
already chosen for reception centres turned out to be
unsuitable. The difficulties on the Botswana border
have led to a diversion af resources and some delay
in getting the repatriation of refugees from Zambia
and Mozambique
off to a smooth start. It goes without
saying that the continued violations of the cease-fire,
particularly
in the eastern part of the country, will
make it very difficult to ensure the prompt repatriation

56. Next, the related question of the maintenance
of martial law. Paragraph 20 of annex D of the
Lancaster House Agreement which deals with the
pre-independence
arrangements states that “in the
event of an effective cease-fire, the necessity for
martial law will disappear”. The Governor is committed to lifting martial law as soon as the situation
permits this. He has been obliged to continue the
application
of martial law over a large area of
Rhodesia and to renew the emergency provisions in
response to the security situation as it is now, Every
day in Rhodesia at present there are incidents of
armed robbery, murder and the theft of cattle by
armed men on 3 scale which is well beyond what is
normal in a peaceful society. Contacts continue on a
disturbing
scale between the police and armed
individuals
or groups, in particular
those guerrilla
8

of refugees from Mozambique.
But we are committed
to doing everything we can to ensure that as many
VOters as possible will return by the election date.

large-scale, highly organized cross-border movement
by ZANLA. Three to four thousand crossed from
Mozambique in that period, in direct violation of the
House Agreement
that cross-border
Lancaster
movement
IllUSt
cease with effect from 21 December,
It has been confirmed by various ZANLA personnel
that a significant proportion of ZANLA forces were
instructed to remain outside the assembly places in
order to exert pressure on the population to vote for
ZANU. ZANLA arms caches have been discovered
in the tribal trust lands in the eastern provinces. There
have been several incidents involving the continued
laYhIs of mines by ZANLA forces. At public meetings
in the rural areas, there have been repeated statements
by ZANLA that if they do not win the elections, they
Wil
continue the war. There has been intimidation
in the tribal trust lands, by which I mean threats to
shoot people who do not vote for Mr, Mugabe’s
ZANU. This party has continued to try to disseminate
propaganda material containing open incitement to
violence.

59. I come now to the allegation that the British
Governor
has refused to accord equal treatment
to the Patriotic
Front forces and that officials and
supporters of the Patriotic Front are being harassed.
This is a vaguely worded accusation and it is r,ot the
first time the Governor has been accused of bias.
Indeed, he has quite frequently been accused of it by
the internal parties and by the white minority, including
the military commanders. I put it to the Council that
Lord Soames has taken on a quite extraordinarily
difficult task. It can be argued that the very fact that
he has been accused of bias on all sides is evidence
of his impartiality.
Here at the United Nations the
tendency is to concentrate on the rights and concerns
of the Patriotic Front, which have always been the
preoccupation
of the majority of delegations. But the
Governor
has to deal with the realities of life in
Rhodesia, the tensions and the fears and prejudices
of all parties who were equal signatories of the
Lancaster House Agreement.

63. I havk no dbubt that there will be those who will
seize on these last remarks of mine in order to claim
that the British are once again trying to discredit
Mr. Mugabe and his forces. That is not our motive,
but it is only right that the facts should be spoken
aloud, and it is only fair that both sides of the case
should be put. It must be remembered that the activities of ZANLA are of deep concern to all those who
are determined that free elections should take placeand that includes Mr. Nkomo’s party.

60. Certainly there have been breaches of the ceasefire. All parties have been found in breach of it on
occasions. What follows are facts. The overwhelming
majority
of breaches of the cease-fire since it came
into effect on 28 December 1979 involving shooting
or the threat of shooting have been attributed to the
Patriotic Front forces, and of those, 85 per cent have
involved the forces of the Zimbabwe African National
Liberation
Army (ZANLA).
For example, the Ceasefit-e Commission
met yesterday afternoon and considered 43 alleged breaches, Consideration of seven
was deferred so that further evidence could be
obtained. Of the remaining 36, the Commission agreed
that 27 did constitute breaches of the cease-fire and
attributed
them as follows: two to ZIPRA; two to
unidentified
armed men in the ZIPRA area of operations; 18 to ZANLA; four to unidentified armed men
in the ZANLA area of operations. One was considered
unattributable.

64. It is all too easy for the supporters of one side
or another to accuse us of bias, or to attempt in
effect to reinterpret the Lancaster House Agreement;
but I ask the Council to concentrate on the positive
achievements in the last few weeks. I say this to the
members of the Council and to all delegations, especially the very distinguished representatives of African
States here today. We the British have been set a
task which we are closer to achieving than any Of US
could ever have imagined. I urge my friends and
colleagues to say nothing here which will make the
problems in Rhodesia harder to solve, or t0 ilfitiate
action here which might imperil the Agreement Itself,
the last hope for a peaceful settlement in Rhodesia.
I put it to you that you must trust us even though
you may not approve of all the decisions we take.
you must trust us, that is to say, to remain faithful
to our commitment to do everything within our power
to ensure that conditions are right for elections which
are truly free and fair and which will lead to a peaceful
and prosperous independence for Zimbabwe. We, for
our part, reaffirm that commitment today.

61, Since the Cease-fire Commission started its work,
it has considered 121 allegations, although, of course,
this represents only a small proportion of the total
number of incidents reported. Of those 121 allegations,
the Commission
has agreed that 78 were breaches
and has attributed them as follows: security forces,
one breach; ZIPRA, eight breaches, with two more
breaches in the ZIPRA area of operations; ZANLA,
34 breaches, with 20 further breaches in the ZANLA
area. There have been five further breaches by People
armed with the type of weapons used by the Patriotic
Front forces and eight further unattributable breaches.
I must stress that the ZANLA representative has been
present at all of the Commission’s
meetings and has
accepted all its findings.

The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
fYO!n French):
The next speaker is Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, Minister for
Foreign
Affairs of the United Republic Of Tanzania.
I welcome him and invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his Stattment.

65.

62. During the period of assembly and disengagement
between iS December and 4 January, there was a
9

-c

sensitive provisions of the Agreement. With arrogance,
the Governor is embarked upon a dismantling of the
transitional
arrangements, imperilling
the cease-fire
and, by inviting South African troops and condoning
their presence, sanctioning external intervention in the
transitional and electoral process.

66. Mr. MKAPA
(United Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, I wish to express gratitude to you and
to the other members of the Security Council for
allowing my delegation to participate in this debate
‘on the situation in Southern Rhodesia.
67. The signing of the Lancaster House Agreement1
on Southern Rhodesia constituted a solemn undertaking by the British Government
to ensure true
majority rule through free and fair elections. It was
also a pledge to the international
community
by the
British Government
that it was ready to assume its
role as the administering
colonial Power over that
Territory,
which had defied its authority for many
years. The United Republic of Tanzania took that
commitment
very seriously and expected the British
Government and the transitional authority in Southern
Rhodesia to observe the letter and the spirit of the
Agreement. For we believed then, as we still believe
now, that whether the Lancaster House Agreement
could hold depended largely upon the scrupulous and
impartial compliance with it by the colonial Power.

73. Given those ominous developments, Africa was
left no choice but to come before the Security Council
to protest in the strongest possible terms against the
breach of the Lancaster House Agreement. Because
this body has been seized of the Rhodesian question
from the time of the 1965 rebellion, we feel that it
should consider the grave and far-reaching implications of the gross violations of the Agreement for
Zimbabwe’s
independence
and for peace in that
region.
74. I have heard the assurances of the representative
of the British Government that South African troops
have now been withdrawn from Rhodesia and his
opinion that this difficult point is now behind us.
I must say that, in my view, it is not behind us and
I shall therefore still refer to it, because as I said it
explains the character and thinking of the transitional
Administration
in Rhodesia, which must affect the
course of events during the ‘next four decisive weeks.

68. My Government
and those of other front-line
States worked diligently towards the realization of this
which we believed
would minimize
Agreement,
bloodshed and suffering in Zimbabwe. For the same
reason, Africa, the Commonwealth
of Nations and the
United Nations lent their support to the accord.

75. The troops of the aprpnrtheid rCgime have been in
Rhodesia at the sufferance-indeed,
at the invitationof the British Governor. That is contrary to the letter
of the Agreement and assurances given in London by
the British authorities. But most disturbing is the fact
that Governor Soames has spoken approvingly of and
hence sanctioned that presence. First, he told us that
they would not interfere with the electoral process;
but now we are told that those troops are withdrawing
from Rhodesia. How are we expected to believe
that? In London we were assured that they would leave
the minute the Governor arrived. Today we are being
assured that they have left. What will we be assured
two weeks from now?

69. The 15 weeks of negotiation were punctuated by
a series of crises. On several contentious issues the
Conference came to the brink of collapse. But with the
interest and counsel of several members of the Security
Council, of OAU, of the non-aligned countries and
of the United Nations, failure was averted and compromise provisions were agreed to by all the parties.
70. It has therefore been with great shock and dismay
that we have followed fundamental
breaches of the
Lancaster House Agreement on these very contentious
issues by the administering
Power since the
Governor was installed in the colony in mid-December.
We were astonished to see that the British authorities
that had chaired the negotiations leading to this delicate
and sensitive Agreement were the first to dishonour it.

76. Those troops constituted a big threat and were
intended to intimidate
Zimbabweans, especially the
supporters of the Patriotic Front. It must be clear that
their aim was to serve notice that the South Africans
would prepare a coup against a duly elected Zimbabwe
Government
and then set up a puppet rkgime in the
territory as a buffer.

71. They have set the Agreement off to a bad start,
because even before the conclusion of the Lancaster
House Conference, the British Government
precipitately sent a Governor to Salisbury; and, before the
ink on the Agreement was dry, Her Majesty’s Government took an illegal, unilateral action to lift sanctions
which had been collectively
imposed by the United
Nations. In spite of that bad omen, we remained
hopeful that that over-zealousness on the part of the
British authorities would be corrected.

77. The continued presence of South African and
other mercenary troops nearly broke up the Conference in London. It was only when the British
Government
gave an undertaking that their presence
would not be countenanced upon the Governor’s
assuming office, that it was possible to proceed to
other issues. Lest there be any doubt about this point,
I shall quote from the official record of the crucial
session where the issue was settled.

72. Unfortunately,
no such self-restraint
has been
evinced by the Governor and his Administration.
Rather, we have witnessed calculated and more bold
actions by him in breach of the most important and

78.
10

Mr. Mugabe

of the Patriotic

Front said:

84. I am glad that the representative of Her Majesty’s
Government
has confirmed this evening that those
forces have been deployed and are assisting in the
maintenance of law and order. That is contrary to the
provisions of the Lancaster House Agreement. In that
Agreement it is stipulated that the responsibility
for the
maintenance of law and order is that of the Rhodesian
police, and it was with extreme reluctance that this
concession was made by the Patriotic Front, because
even the police were an instrument
of the former
rebel rkgime. And so it is adding insult to injury now
to deploy the armed forces in addition to the poIice
for the purpose of maintaining law and order.

“As you know, we remain concerned about the
disposition of the forces, the grounding of the
Rhodesian Air Force and the presence of the South
African forces.”
79. Lord Carrington, the British Secretary of State
and Chairman of the Conference, replied:
“In relation to your concerns, I can assure you
again that there will be no external involvement in
Rhodesia under the British Governor. The position
has been made clear to all Governments concerned.
including South Africa.”

85. The attachment
to the cease-fire agreement
stipulates the provision of additional assembly @aces
should the number of men of the Patriotic
Front
forces assembled exceed the 16,000 envisaged by the
British Government. Some 22,000 men of the Patriotic
Front forces are now assembled. To date Governor
Soames has not given additional sites.

80. That was an unconditional
undertaking which
has been unilaterally and clandestinely abrogated.
8 1. The Governor was expected to head an impartial
interim administration,
but by his acts of commission
and omission, Governor Soames has spiritedly come
out in favour of the Smith-Muzorewa
group and
relentlessly against the Patriotic Front. Ironically, it
was the Patriotic Front, through armed struggle, that
made it possible for the Lancaster House negotiations
to take place and the Agreement to emerge. It was
the Patriotic Front, through immense sacrifice, that
enabled the British to resume authority in Rhodesia.
The achievements for which Governor Soames now
claims credit-and
which have been enumerated here
this evening-have
been brought about by Zimbabweans who have shed their blood under the banner
of the Patriotic Front. However, the fighters of the
Patriotic Front are now pejoratively referred to as the
‘ ‘ rebels’ ’ , while the Smith-Muzorewa
forces are
glorified as the “Government
forces” and the “security forces”, And it could not have escaped representatives this evening that the representative of Her
Majesty’s Government continues to refer to the forces
of the former rebel rkgime as the “security forces”;
I ask, then, which are the forces of insecurity?

86. Under the Lancaster House Agreement the forces
of the Patriotic Front and those of the former rebel
rCgime are given equal treatment by the Governor
and his Administration.
This equality of treatment is
written into the Agreement; it had to be in order to
destroy any notion in the minds of the international
community and, specifically, of the Governor that the
Rhodesian army would be the legal army during the
interim, It was an issue so vital that, again, it almost
caused the Conference to break up. But Govern01
Soames has elected to ignore it. Not only has he
deployed the Smith-Muzorewa
forces, he has also
employed
them to harass and intimidate
Patriotic
Front leaders and supporters. Those troops have
killed, in cold blood, Patriotic Front forces on their
way to assembly points in two incidents. The Coverno]
has attempted to justify those murders by claiming
that the Patriotic Front forces in those incidents
refused to surrender their arms. They had every right
to refuse to surrender those arms. Nowhere in the
Lancaster House Agreement is it provided that the
Patriotic Front is to surrender to the rebel army. In
“a statement on 11 December 1979, Lord Carrington,
the Chairman of the Lancaster House Conference,
affirmed the following:

82. Under the terms of the Lancaster House Agreement, Patriotic Front forces were to report to and be
confined at 16 designated assembly points, while the
forces of the former rebel rCgime of Smith and
Muzorewa were to be confined to 40 designated bases.
The Patriotic
Front forces have assembled; but
Governor Soames has, by his own repeated affirmations, permitted the forces of the former rebel r6gime
to remain at large. He and his Administration
refer
to them as “Government
forces”, casting an unacceptable aspersion upon the legitimacy of the Patriotic
Front forces.

64. . . There can be no question of surrender by
either side. All the forces which comply with the
Agreement, which accept the Governor’s authority
and comply with his directions will retain their arms
and equipment, will be treated honourably and will
be lawful.”

83. The deployment of the forces of the former rebel
rtgime is contrary to the letter of the Agreement
and constitutes a grave provocation of the assembled
Patriotic Front forces. The forces of the former rebel
r&me should be confined to the 40 designated bases.
That is what the Lancaster House Agreement
stipulates.

But Governor Soames, in using rebel forces to kill
freedom fighters, has nullified this understanding
of
his Secretary of State.
87. I am sure that it has not escaped the Council’s
notice that it has not been told this evening that the
Patriotic Front, which is equal, under the Governor,
11

the Rhodesian forces, has been asked to enforce
law and order anywhere. It has not. Repeatedly, the
Rhodesian forces have. That is the kind of equality
that is being enforced.

held. This travesty becomes even more offensive when
it is remembered that the Lancaster House Agreement
gave the British authorities the mandate to end martial
law. Instead, they have decided to renew it.

88. In addition to deploying the Smith-Muzorewa
troops, the British Governor has further deployed the
so-called auxiliaries, which are nothing but a band
of ill-trained, armed political thugs of Muzorewa and
Sithole. Under the Agreement they, too, were expected
to be confined to base. The representative of Her
Majesty’s Government has confirmed to the Council
this evening that they are in the tribal trust lands.
They are not confined to base; they are supposed to
be enforcing law and order-ill-trained,
armed political
thugs of one group. Those private armies have now
been a major factor in Governor Soames’ breach of the
cease-fire agreement. He has said: “They are doing a
lot of work that needs doing.” That work is to take
over positions vacated by the Patriotic Front forces
and to surround them. Once again the statement of
11 December 1979 by the Chairman of the Conference
has been violated with impunity. The assurance that
there would be no question of any Patriotic Front
forces being encircled is being rendered meaningless.
Instead of confining the Smith-Muzorewa forces and
Muzorewa’s auxiliaries to base as the Lancaster
House Agreement envisages, the Governor has used
them to terrorize Patriotic Front forces and the general
population.

91. My delegation could cite more violations and
instances of biased action on the part of the administering Power. But I believe that we have said enough
to underscore the persistent disposition of the colonial
Power to place the Smith-Muzorewa group at political
and military advantage relative to other groups and, in
particular, the Patriotic Front.

to

89. Furthermore, and in spite of what has been said
here this evening, we believe that the British Governor
has ignored the machinery established by the Lancaster
House Agreement, where it is provided that, if there
are breaches of the cease-fire, it will be for the commanders to deal with them through the machinery of
the Cease-fire Commission and with the assistance of
the Monitoring Force. As far as we know, to this day
the Governor has not invoked or spoken of this
machinery. There has not been one occasion on which
the Governor has said that he acted on the advice of
the Cease-fire Commission-or,
indeed, against its
advice.
90. Another grave breach of the Lancaster House
Agreement is the recent renewal of the state of emergency and martial law for another six months, Whereas the Agreement says the necessity of martial law
will disappear in the event of an effective cease-fire,
the Governor, in his wisdom, deemed it fit to extend
the emergency unnecessarily. We have been told that
the cease-fire is holding reasonably well. So we
wonder, if the machinery is working well, what is the
reason for renewing this state of emergency? It is
precisely because the interim Administration has not
respected the machinery established by the Agreement
that it has had to resort to martial law. And it is in
the midst of this martial law that the parties are
expected to campaign in the elections and to exercise
freedom of speech. That is an unusual setting, to say
the least, in which “free and fair elections” are to be

92. We deplore the barrage of calumny emanating
from Governor Soames’ office aimed at the Patriotic
Front as the violator of the Agreement and the ceasefire. How can we believe that the forces of the rebel
army have overnight turned into angels? How can we
believe that none of the more than 100,000 armed
white civilians has caused breaches of law and order?
Indeed, why is it that, in the violations allegedly
committed by the Patriotic Front forces, it is members of the Patriotic Front forces only that get killed?
Why is it?
93. We deplore the lies uttered from Governor
Soames’ office against the neighbouring
front-line
States to the effect that they have allowed the infiltration of freedom fighters since the Agreement was
signed. We commend the Patriotic Front for exercising
restraint and sticking to the Agreement
despite
Governor Soames’ provocations and vilifications of
them. The Patriotic Front is the injured party in all
this campaign of lies, but it has so far conducted
itself magnanimously and with great restraint. We pay
a tribute to the front-line States of Mozambique and
Zambia for resisting the vicious propaganda campaign
of Governor Soames and his collaborators. We salute
them for the immense sacrifices they have made in
material and human terms for the freedom of
Zimbabwe.
94. For our part, we have said that we shall accept
any Government that is elected through free and fair
elections. But those elections do have to be free and
fair. This is an unqualified condition which we attach
to our acceptance of the election results.
95. We and many other countries support the Patriotic Front, and we are proud of that support. It was
well that someone supported the Patriotic Front
through the years, otherwise Governor Soames would
not today be in Government House in Salisbury, and
the Security Council would be seized of the issue
of Southern Rhodesia in very different terms.
96. But our support for the Patriotic Front does
not disqualify us from an impartial observation of the
decolonization process. In addition, we are not the
decolonizing Power. Nor does our sympathy for the
Patriotic Front entitle the Administering
Authority
to change the provisions of the Lancaster House

Agreement. In spite of our sympathy for the Patriotic
Front, we are not asking the Governor to aid and abet
its election. Nor are we asking him to aid any other
party in the election. It is not his role to decide who
should win. His cardinal role is to see to it that free
and fair elections are held.

House. We came to the Council to support the lifting
of sanctions, since we were convinced that the rebel
rkgime had been destroyed and that peace and democracy would triumph.
103. Fourteen years ago, settlers rebelled against the
British Crown and took power, unilaterally proclaiming
independence.
Great Britain silently and passively
witnessed that serious violation of the rights of the
majority. For the people of Zimbabwe there was no
alternative but to organize resistance, a people’s war.
It was in that way that the patriots of Zimbabwe
achieved decisive victories in the armed struggle which
led to the signing of the Lancaster House Agreement.

97. It is obvious that if the colonial Power persists
in implementing the Lancaster House Agreement only
partially, free and fair elections cannot take place. The
situation is precarious. The South African presence,
invited and condoned by the colonial authority, is a
dangerous precedent of external intervention.
The
cease-fire is extremely fragile and will not hold, so
long as the monitoring force monitors only one group
of forces, namely, the Patriotic Front forces. The
deployment of the so-called auxiliaries is an endorsement of political thuggery.

104. The people of Zimbabwe have the historic merit
of having resisted oppression and intimidating
manceuvres. It is to their credit that they took up arms to
build peace, freedom and independence. Those were
the objectives of the struggle and the reason for the
support of Africa and the support of the entire internab
tional community
for their just struggle. For democ- racy, peace and independence are aspirations which
are dear to all peoples. Those common objectives of
mankind can be attained in Zimbabwe today through,
elections, but for that to happen, the elections must
be free and democratic.

98. These are genuine and legitimate concerns of
Africa, of my country and of the international community about which the Security Council has to take
action to save this last chance of a peaceful process
to Rhodesian independence, We call upon the Council
to safeguard the inalienable rights of the people of
Zimbabwe by taking appropriate action to ensure that
J3ritain enforces impartially the letter and the spirit of
the Lancaster House Agreement.
Otherwise, the
opportunity for peaceful transition in southern Africa
will be lost, with imponderable
and ghastly consequences.

105. We are meeting here at a time when there are.
serious threats to this process. The dangers that would
arise from a halt in the march towards peace are
particularly serious. It is the duty of the international
community
to prevent such an eventuality. In particular, that is the task of the Security Council.

99. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation jvrn French):
The next speaker is Mr. Jo& Oscar Monteiro, Minister
of State for the Presidency of the People’s Republic
of Mozambique, I bid him welcome and invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

106. Bearing; this in mind, what is the situation in
Zimbabwe? 60 conditions exist for the holding of
elections in complete freedom and without threats?
We would say, no. The administering
Power has not
implemented
with the required strictness and exactitude the Agreement that has been signed.

100. Mr. MONTEIRO
(Mozambique) (interpretation
from French): Mr, President, I should like to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of
this important United Nations body and to express to
YOU, and through you to the other members of the
Security Council, our thanks for giving us this opportunity to take part in the Council’s deliberations.

107. We are seriously concerned by developments
in the Rhodesian situation. Everything indicates that
since Lancaster House there has been a desire to
legalize the rebellion, to turn yesterday’s oppressors
and aggressors into law enforcement officers and, even
more serious, to turn freedom fighters into outlaws.
The Patriotic Front forces, which fought the rebels,
are themselves being portrayed as rebels and violators
of the Agreement. And the Smith-Muzorewa
forces,
which promoted the rebellion and supported it, which
killed defenceless people in Zimbabwe and in OUI
countries, have been given the task of supervising
the cease-fire.

101. About a month ago we had the honour to represent our country in this important
body [2181st
lneeli~g], which was meeting to discuss the problems
relating to the British colony of Southern Rhodesia.
Under consideration were the Agreement signed at
Lancaster House’ with the design of leading Zimbabwe to independence through free and democratic
elections. Within the terms of the Agreement, the
United Kingdom, carrying out its responsibilities
as
a colonial Power, was to guarantee the process of
decolonization. It appeared that peace would come to
our area in general, and to Zimbabwe in particular.
102. Aware of our special responsibility
peace, we attended the meetings

for

108. The forces of the apartheid regime, which have
internationally
been recognized as having sown terror
and death in southern Africa, have been called upon
to guarantee peace and security in Southern Rhodesia.
109. The mercenaries are free to move about the
Territory,
whereas the nationalist
forces are kect

in the search
at Lancaster
13

together at designated points. Taking advantage of that
situation, the so-called auxiliary forces of Muzorewa,
which were to be regrouped together with the
Rhodesian forces, have occupied zones that elements
of the Patriotic Front have abandoned. They are
harassing the population, and that has been confirmed.
The fact that those auxiliary forces have not been
confined to their posts, as specified in the Lancaster
House Agreement, has been confirmed here in the
course of this meeting. White civilians armed with all
kinds of weapons, including pistols, carbines and
machine-guns, circulate freely and create a dangerous
atmosphere filled with tension.
110. In the Agreement it was clearly established that
Zimbabwean political prisoners were to be released
and that refugees in neighbouring countries were t0
be free to return to their homes to take part in the
electoral process. But here again the administering
Power not only has not liberated all the political
prisoners, but it has raised obstacles to the return of
more than 250,000 refugees who are in Mozambique,
Zambia and Botswana. We are less than a month away
from the elections, yet the number of refugees who
have actually returned is infinitesimal. As far as my
country is concerned, I would add that the difficulties
stem from the fact that the local authorities in the
British colony of Southern Rhodesia have agreed to
only two entry points for about 150,000 refugees,
requiring some of them to travel hundreds of kilometres.
111. By extending martial law, the Governor of the
British colony of Southern Rhodesia is using an instrument of repression of the rebel rkgime that prevents
elections from being held in a climate of complete
freedom.
112. The Patriotic Front saw the return of its leaders
to their homeland delayed unjustifiably. They were
thus at a disadvantage in the electoral campaign. All
kinds of pretexts have been used to make the nationalists appear the violators of law and order. The Governor has allowed the rebel forces to see to the application of martial law, which has been extended for
six months. One wonders why six months,
113. The task of the British Government has been
and remains to guarantee a climate of freedom throughout the entire transitional period; that is Great Britain’s
mandate. The Governor’s role is not that of a colonial
governor. His task is decolonization by means of free
democratic elections. That was the understanding of
the Council in its resolution 460 (1979), which states
that the United Kingdom:
‘1 ..* as the administering Power is committed to
decolonizing Southern Rhodesia on the basis of
free and democratic elections, which will lead
Southern
Rhodesia to genuine independence
acceptable to the international
community
in
accordance with the objectives of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV)“.

114. In adopting resolution 460 (19791, the Security
Council wisely decided to keep the situation in
Southern Rhodesia under review until the Territory
attained full independence. That is why we are meeting
here today: because the situation does entail dangers
for the peace we wish to preserve.
ll5.
The fight for peace in southern Africa, and in
particular in Zimbabwe, means an Uncompromising
struggle for just and free elections.
116. We of the People’s Republic of Mozambique,
the neighbouring countries and the countries of the
region are particularly concerned. Only strict respect
for the Agreement that has been signed can guarantee
peace.
117. This is not a legalistic exercise regarding the
correctness of the elections; what is at issue is peace
itself, and that should prompt us to rise above passing
problems and electoral tactics and to concentrate our
attention on essentials.
118. The international community, then, has the full
responsibility.
We must be constantly vigilant. At
every step of the way we must see whether the conditions exist for the elections to take place in a climate
of freedom and confidence. It is necessary for the
Security Council to determine whether its decisions
have in fact been respected.
119. It is not by chance that in resolution 460 (1979),
the Council requires the administering Power to ensure
that no South African or other external forces, regular
or mercenary, will remain in or enter Southern Rhodesia. The presence of such troops is a flagrant violation by the British Government of the declarations
of the British Governor himself, of the Lancaster
House Agreement, and of decisions of the Council,
It is a threat to peace not only in Zimbabwe but in
southern Africa as a whole, It means-and
this is a
serious matter-that
the British Government accepts
South Africa’s role as policeman in the region.
120. Within the terms of the Agreement reached,
as my colleagues have already said, the forces of the
Patriotic Front and the Rhodesian forces have the
same status. We cannot agree to the British Government’s arbitrarily using the Rhodesian forces to maintain order. However, if order has been disrupted, we
believe that the forces of the Patriotic Front are in a
better position to restore it than the institutionalized
violators of legality, those who proclaimed the uailateral declaration of independence, the rebels against
the international community.
121. In Zimbabwe, it is the Patriotic Front that has
full moral and political authority. It is the Patriotic
Front that has always defended the fundamental
interests of the people of Zimbabwe and Africa and
the international community. It was even the Patriotic
Front that defended the British Crown against the

rebels who flouted it. It was the fight waged by the
Patriotic Front that made it possible for Great Britain
to assume its responsibility
as administering Power.

which YOU have presided over the deliberations of the
Security Council since the beginning of the current
month. Since you come from a country that is we]]
acquainted with problems of colonialism and are yourself well known for your commitment
to matters
appertaining to decolonizalion, my Group is pleased to
see YOU presiding over this debate concerning the
situation in Southern Rhodesia since the Lancaster
House Agreement’ was concluded last month, It is the
considered view of my Group that you wi]], as in the
past,
spare no effort in concluding this debate in a
very constructive and positive manner,

122, But what are we actually witnessing? It is not
the rebels, the outlaws, the real terrorists who have
caused so much death and suffering that have been
regrouped at assembly points; it is, rather, the patriots,
the freedom fighters and those who have fought rebellion that are being neutralized.
123. The African countries, the non-aligned movement and all peace-loving peoples have made it perfectly clear that they will recognize Zimbabwe as
independent
only when its people has expressed its
will in complete
freedom. That is a fundamental
condition.

131. Before continuing with my statement, I should
like to refer to one or two points raised by the representative of the United Kingdom. The first one is his
inference that there is, in fact, a tendency here at
Turtle Bay for the African Group to single out the
Patriotic Front for special favours, I make bold to
submit here and now that the case I am presenting
here on behalf of the African Group has nothing to do
with the Patriotic Front as a political organization in
Southern Rhodesia, but refers to the discerned violations of the Lancaster House Agreement.

124. The United Kingdom must guarantee that all
South African forces, including South African mercenaries, who have joined the Rhodesian army, will
withdraw from the Territory
immediately.
It must
guarantee that Rhodesian auxiliary forces will be
regrouped within the clear terms of the Lancaster
House Agreement. The forces of the Patriotic Front
must assume the responsibility
they have won in the
maintenance of law and order.

132. We have also been asked to quote specific
authority on which we might base the various accusations or allegations-or
complaints, if you like-that
we might make; and I suggest, in all humility, that in
fact such authority is clearly found in the quotations
made here by the Foreign Minister of the United
Republic of Tanzania who himself had occasion to
attend the deliberations at Lancaster House.

125. Martial law must be abrogated. The refugees
must be allowed to return without delay. All parties
must have the same facilities for reaching public
opinion at al] levels. It is only then that we can guarantee a climate of impartiality,
that would make possible
free elections and thereby peace.
I

133. In reference to the case that we should like to
make here, I do not know whether the representative
of the United Kingdom is aware of the fact that,
around 24 January 1980, 34 drivers, under instructions
of a very well-known Commonwealth Government,
were detailed to carry loads of refugees. But when they
got to about Plumtree at the border, they were arrested
and detained with their passengers aboard their buses.
As far as the African Group is aware, those drivers
were carrying out instructions issued under the
Lancaster House Agreement, which requires the
Government of the Republic of Bolswana, the Government of Zambia and the Government of Mozambique
to facilitate the return of all refugees belonging to
Southern Rhodesia. Now if it should be the intention
of the Council that we should provide evidence of what
I have submitted, my Group will be prepared to do so.

126. The People’s Republic of Mozambique and the
other front-line countries have made great sacrifices
to liberate Zimbabwe. Our President Samora Machel
stated: “It is the privilege, the honour and the right
of every people freely to choose its leaders and its
path of development”.
127. Our peoples have stood by the Patriotic Front
in its national liberation struggle. The United Nations
has stood by the Patriotic Front in its just struggle,
and that is indeed to the Organization’s
credit; and
today we are all standing together in the search for
peace-peace
meaning freedom and independence.
We believe that the Security Council must discharge
its responsibility
in the question of Rhodesia.
128.

!

A luta corztinua,

] 34. The request of the African Group for this meeting
is the result of an instruction issued by OAU following
a meeting of the Liberation Committee, held at Dar es
Salaam in the United Republic of Tanzania from
21 to 25 January. In this connection, I wish to recall
that the Liberation Committee reviewed the Current
situation in Southern Rhodesia subsequent to the
signing of the Lancaster House Agreement last month
by the Government of the United Kingdom, the then
Government headed by Bishop Abel Muzorewa and

129. The PRESIDENT
(inte,.l,/‘etrrtiorz~o/Iz
Fw~c’~):
The next speaker is the representative
of Malawi,
who wishes to make a statement as Chairman of the
African Group for January. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
130. Mr. MUWAMBA
(Malawi): Mr. President, on
behalf of the African Group, I should like to congratulate you on the able and dedicated manner in
15

British Governor in Southern Rhodesia to accord the
Patriotic Front forces equal treatment and the continued harassment of the officials and supporters of
the Patriotic Front; ninthly, permission for the deployment, particularly in rural areas, of auxiliaries of the
United African National Council, which are now
under the command of the Rhodesian forces and which
have been described as being deployed in those areas
for the purposes of electioneering;
tenthly, the tendency of the British Government to put great emphasis
on the importance of what it perceives as stability in
the region instead of on the implementation
of the letter
and spirit of the Lancaster House Agreement.

the Patriotic Front. That review was necessitated by
the apparent continued violations of that Agreement,
violations that seemed to be deliberate and possibly
calculated to influence the outcome of the forthcoming national elections in Southern Rhodesia.
135. I wish to recall that one of the most important
ingredients of the Lancaster House Agreement-at
least from the viewpoint of the African Group on
Whose behalf I speak-is the immediate creation by
the administering Power, with the co-operation of all
parties concerned, of a suitable political climate in
Southern Rhodesia that would facilitate the forthcoming national elections scheduled for next month.
Unfortunately, this does not seem to have happened,
and it is for this reason that the Security Council
has been asked, not only to review the internal situation there, but also to call upon the administering
Power, the Government of the United Kingdom, to
honour its side of the Agreement without any unilateral variations such as seem to be negating that
Agreement now.

138. That is the case which I have been detailed to
put to the Council. However, in putting that case
I wish to add that my Group has in its possession
information which describes Lord Soames as a “prisoner” of the Muzorewa-Smith
regime-hence
the
violations catalogued above.
139. My Group has information which reveals that
the Commonwealth
Observer
Force,
currently
deployed in Southern Rhodesia in keeping with the
injunction. of the Lancaster House Agreement, is for
myriad reasons finding it difficult to obtain adequate
information
on the activities of the South African
forces in that beleaguered country. However, the
African Group has received the following data based
on a conservative estimate of South African combat
force deployment in Southern Rhodesia: five infantry
battalions of about 3,500 men, which might include
one or two South African police battalions;
one
parachute battalion of about 600 men; two artillery
regiments of 1,000 men, six armoured squadrons of
7.50 men, and so on.

136. The African Group has been informed that since
the signing of the Lancaster House Agreement, a
series of continual violations not only has been committed, but also carefully catalogued, and it is these
that will constitute a formal complaint against the
British Government for consideration by the Council,
137. In this connection, reports filed by the frontline States, the secretariat of OAU and the Patriotic
Front reveal that some of the following violations
have been and continue to be made: first, the deployment by the British-appointed
Governor of Southern
Rhodesia of Rhodesian and auxiliary forces, which
are assisting the police in the maintenance of law
and order, but which have also been committing
wanton murder and harassing Patriotic Front sympathizers, along with systematic press and radio propaganda aimed at discrediting the Patriotic Front-one
of the parties which will take part in the forthcoming
elections; secondly, the unwarranted and uncalledfor systematic press and radio propaganda by South
Africa, again aimed at discrediting the Patriotic Front;
thirdly, the employment of deliberate delaying tactics
by the British Administration
in Southern Rhodesia
in refusing to facilitate the early return of all Rhodesian refugees to their country in accordance with
the Lancaster House Agreement; fourthly, the continued deployment in various parts of the country of
large numbers of South African troops and mercenaries, contrary to the assurance given earlier by the
British Government that it would expel all foreign
forces in Southern Rhodesia; fifthly, the decision by
the British Government to renew the state of emergency for another six months and to maintain martial
law in the Territory; sixthly, the apparent manoeuvres
by the British Government to ensure the continuance
in power of the Smith-Muzorewa
group in the Territory; seventhly, the continued detention of all political
prisoners; eighthly, t,he deliberate
refusal by the

140. The African Group has been advised by fairly
reliable sources that not only have South African
troops and .airmen been in Southern Rhodesia in large
numbers, but that they have also been actively engaged in operations in that country for at least two
years. In that respect we wish to recall that on 30 November 1979, the South African Prime Minister
admitted for the first time that South African security
forces were in fact in Southern Rhodesia. According
to him, those forces were there for two reasons:
first, to protect the rail routes through Southern Rhodesia; and secondly, to prevent South African nationalist guerrillas from infiltrating South Africa from the
south of Rhodesia.
141. In recent weeks, the British Government
has
gone on record as saying that the South African troops
were invited into Southern Rhodesia by Lord Soames
in order to provide protection for the Beit Bridge
across the Limpopo River. Clearly, this was and still
is a downright violation of the Lancaster House
Agreement, which did not envisage such an invitation.
AS far as we are concerned, there is nothing in the
Lancaster House Agreement which suggested that
Lord Soames as Governor of Southern Rhodesia had
16

the latitude
done.

to bend the rules unilaterally

as he has

142. The African Group has been led to believe that
either the South African units have been integrated
with the Rhodesian forces or they may still be operating
independently
and are now deployed throughout the
entire country. We have been advised that South
African units can be found in ttlc north, the northeast and around Salisbury, the capital of Southern
Rhodesia.
143. In this connection, we wish to recall that in the
ongoing negotiations on Namibia, the Government of
the Republic of South Africa has been known ,to
object very strongly to whatever it has perceived as
variations in whatever it and the “gang of five” here
at TurtIe Bay may have agreed upon. If this is its
attitude, why would South Africa accept an invitation
which was not sanctioned by the Lancaster House
Agreement? The Government of the United Kingdom
is already aware of South Africa’s relations with black
Africa and the international community, not only with
respect to Namibia but also as regards its domestic
policies concerning the status of the black majority of
its population. In these circumstances, the African
Group wishes to discover why South African security
forces were in the first instance invited for duty in a
country that has been bleeding for more than a decade.
144. The African Group has also been informed that
at Lancaster House, the United Kingdom declined
to requisition either Commonwealth or United Nations
security forces. If this assertion should be authentic,
what would be justification
of Lord Soames for
extending an invitation
to a country that quit the
Commonwealth
of Nations several years ago and that
remains suspended from the activities of this international body?
145. It is, the wish of my Group that I draw the
attention of the Council to the fact that, although the
Lancaster House Agreement makes provision for a
Cease-fire Commission, there nevertheless appears to
be nothing on record to suggest that Lord Soames
has had occasion to refer to that Commission any
violation that might have taken place since the implementation of that Agreement.
146. Finally, in bringing this case before the Council
for consider&ion,
the African Group hopes that the
Council will proceed to call on Her Majesty’s Government: first, to lift the state of emergency and facilitate
free and fair elections in Rhodesia; secondly, to comply with and implement
fully and impartially
the
Lancaster House Agreement; thirdly, to confine the
Rhodesian
security and auxiliary
forces to their
barracks; fourthly,
to remove all foreign troops,
including
mercenaries,
from Southern Rhodesia;
fifthiy, to release all political prisoners in Southern
Rhodesia, including those persons who are said to
be held by the Government of Southern Rhodesia and

who are nationals of the Republic of South Africa;
sixthly, in keeping with the Agreement, to permit all
Zimbabwean
exiles to return home without fear of
threats, intimidation
or arrest; seventhly, to facilitate
the participation
of every Zimbabwean national in the
forthcoming
national elections, scheduled for next
month.
147. In conclusion, I wish to place on record the
desire of the African Group to reserve its right to ask
for the authority to speak again if the occasion to do
so should arise.
148. The PRESIDENT
(irztrIp~etatiolzpo/72
French):
The next speaker is the representative
of Egypt.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
149. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID
(Egypt): Once again
the Security Council has been convened urgently, at
the request of the African Group, to discuss the situation in Southern Rhodesia. We had welcomed the
Lancaster House Agreement’
and hoped it would
constitute the corner-stone for a final and comprehensive solution to the problem of Southern Rhodesia
compatible
with the legitimate
rights of the peopIe
of Zimbabwe and consistent with the relevant resolutions of OAU and the United Nations.
150. However, we have witnessed with great concern
the latest developments in Zimbabwe. Certain violations of the Lancaster House Agreement have been
reported. Among these violations are: first, the continued presence in Southern Rhodesia of South African
troops; secondly, the deployment and use of Rhodesian forces, particularly
the Selous Scouts and the
auxiliaries, against the forces of the Patriotic Front;
thirdly, the unnecessary renewal of the state of emergency for another six months and the maintenance of
martial law in the Territory; fourthly, the continued
detention of political prisoners and the denial to all
Zimbabwean
refugees of their fundamental
right to
return; and fifthly, the unequal treatment accorded
the Patriotic Front forces, officials and supporters.
151. In this context I should like to state that Egypt
strongly condemns the collusion between the racist
r&gime of South Africa and some dissident radical
elements inside Southern Rhodesia with a view to
wrecking the Lancaster House Agreement. It is with
great concern that we witness the mischievous role
of South Africa in this respect. It is not surprising
that the racist rCgime in South Africa is pursuing such
a policy, as we are witnessing its arrogant and negative
attitude
in yet another part of Africa-namely,
Namibia.
152. Such developments
prompted the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of Egypt to issue in Cairo the following
statement on 26 January 1980:
“The Arab Republic of Egypt is following
great concern the developments
surrounding

with
the

1980

the Agreement itself and throw the region again into
another round of devastating war and human suffering.

“It is in this context, and pursuant to Egypt’s
constant consultation with the African liberation
that the Ambassador of Egypt to
movements,
Zambia has left for Salisbury to examine the situation on the spot. Furthermore, Egypt has informed
the United Kingdom Government of its concern
that the upcoming elections in Zimbabwe should be
conducted in an atmosphere of freedom, neutrality
and justice conducive to the scrupulous implementation of the Lancaster House Agreement, so
as to enable the people of Zimbabwe to choose
their genuine representatives.

157. In conclusion, Egypt will continue to shoulder
its historic responsibility
by extending its full support to the Patriotic Front and the front-line States,
which are playing a heroic role in the legitimate
struggle of the people of Zimbabwe.

transitional
period leading
elections in Zimbabwe.

to the February

158. The PRESIDENT
(inte~~retatio/z.~o,n
French):
The last speaker today is the representative of Botswana. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
159. Mr. TLOU (Botswana): Mr. President, I thank
you and your colleagues in the Security Council for
affording my delegation an opportunity to participate
in this important
debate on the British colony of
Southern Rhodesia, a country whose birth as the free
nation of Zimbabwe Botswana looks forward to with
high hopes.

“Egypt has also instructed its Ambassador in
Lusaka to pursue his contacts with the Patriotic
Front with a view to co-ordinating positions in order
that resolutions ensuring Zimbabwe’s independence
be adopted at the next meeting of the Council of
Ministers of OAU, thereby allowing Zimbabwe to
occupy its well-deserved status among the independent African nations.”

160. Botswana and France enjoy the most cordial
relations, and it is especially gratifying therefore that
you, Mr. President, a distinguished son of that great
country, are presiding over these deliberations. I wish
you well in steering this debate to a successful
conclusion.

153. True and democratic elections for the establishment of an independent Government in Zimbabwe
should be held under strictly objective and neutral
supervision by the administering Power.

161. On 21 December 1979-that
historic day on
which the Lancaster House Agreement’ was signedthis body which had met [2181st nzeeti/tg] primarily
for the purpose of lifting the mandatory sanctions
against the rebel colony of Southern Rhodesia also
pronounced itself unequivocally on what ought to be
done in that colony to,ensure a smooth transition to
genuine majority rule through free and fair elections.
A key paragraph in the resolution adopted by the Council [resolution
460 (1979)] on that day called for strict
adherence to the Agreement and for its full and faithful implementation
by the administering
Power and
all the parties concerned.

154. I should like to state here that we followed
with deep appreciation the efforts of the United Kingdom Government to achieve the Lancaster House
Agreement, although the negotiation was very difficult. Furthermore,
Egypt, more than any other
country, pays a particular tribute in regard to the
efforts deployed by all other parties, the front-line
States, and especially the Patriotic Front-which
has courageously come forward, showing a statesmanlike attitude, fighting with one hand and negotiating
with the other, without losing sight of the real rights
and needs of the people of Zimbabwe.
15.5. The valiant people of Zimbabwe have long
been subjected to an illegal occupation and it is because
of this that Egypt has been and is one of the strongest
supporters of the efforts of the national liberation
movements
in Africa, and first and foremost the
Patriotic Front, to put an end to that illegal occupation
and to reach a peaceful and honourable solution and
attain independence for the people of Zimbabwe.
Egypt hopes that the attainment by the people of
Zimbabwe of independence will enhance the chances
of stability in southern Africa and in our whole
continent.

162. During the debate in that Security Council
meeting, speaker after speaker expressed great satisfaction at the fact that, at last, the United Kingdom
had assumed its full responsibility over its colony of
Southern Rhodesia. There was general, if cautious,
optimism that finally all might be well in Zimbabwe.
No one expected that so soon after, this body would
be meeting again to perform a post-mortem on the
situation in Rhodesia in the light of very disturbing and
very serious developments there, for we had hoped
that good faith and fair play on the part of those concerned would ensure scrupulous adherence to the
provisions of the Lancaster House Agreement.

156. We are sure that the Government of the United
Kingdom will implement in good faith the spirit and
the letter of the Lancaster House Agreement and that
the process will take its due course of free and fair
elections. The stakes are great and any further deterioration in the situation in Zimbabwe will undermine

163. Two important meetings in Africa have preceded
this Council meeting: on 10 January 1980 the frontline States met at Beira, Mozambique, followed soon
thereafter by a meeting of the Liberation Committee
of OAU at Dar es Salaam. Both those meetings
18

expressed grave concern at actions by the administering Power that constituted a breach of certain provisions of the Lancaster House Agreement. It is this
concern, the concern to safeguard the Lancaster
House Agreement-the
sure way to peace in Zimbabwe-the
concern to see fair play and strict implementation of the Agreement that has caused Africa to
come to the Council both to highlight our areas of
concern and to seek a way forward so that together
we can achieve a smooth transition to genuine majority
rule in Zimbabwe.
164. For Botswana, as indeed for other States neighbouring on Rhodesia, the question of genuine majority
rule through free and fair elections is not an academic
one; it is a matter of serious concern. Our fortunes
are inextricably bound by history and geography with
those of Zimbabwe, Peace in Zimbabwe means peace
in Botswana and in the other front-line States; and
upheavals there spell doom and disaster for US all,
as the recent troubled history of that British colony
has shown.

desia as soon as the newly appointed Governor was in
place in Salisbury, we have a situation where, with
only about four weeks left before the elections, those
undesirable elements are still in Rhodesia, In fact the
Governor asserted, to our consternation,
that the
South African troops were remaining at his invitation
to guard essential routes such as Beit Bridge, This was
a clear violation by the administering
Power of the
Lancaster House Agreement. The violation was inexcusable and totally unnecessary, because the Governor
has under his command various forces within Rhodesia that he can deploy for such purposes, What
this action has done is to undermine the credibility
of the Governor in the eyes of many.
170. We take note of the belated announcement just
made by the British representative that the South
African contingent at Beit Bridge was withdrawn
today. But did it require an outcry from Africa to have
Britain rectify its violation of the Lancaster House
Agreement? This violation would not have occurred
in the first place had the British been faithful to the
Agreement. One hopes that, in deploying forces to
guard Beit Bridge, the colonial Administration
now
in Salisbury will remember that it also has the Patriotic
Front forces, not just the Rhodesian security forces,
at its disposal. We want a firm undertaking about when
the rest of the South African troops reported to be
elsewhere in the country, including mercenaries,
will be withdrawan. Time is not on our side; the elections are only four weeks away, so we urge the
administering
Power to act with haste on this matter.
In the war conditions which have prevailed in Rhodesia for so long, it is understandable that the imple.
mentation of the cease-fire could be difficult. Frorr
time to time, the Governor will be called upon tc
enforce law and order. No one can take issue with
that.

165. That is why over the years Botswana and the
other front-line States have spared no efforts to help
the people of Zimbabwe to achieve genuine majority
rule, thus contributing to peace and stability in our
region. It is for this reason, too, that we will always
express great displeasure at and disapproval of any
actions that threaten the chances for the peace that is
within our grasp in Zimbabwe.
166. Zimbabwe has been torn by several years of
war. An atmosphere of mistrust has inevitably developed among various sectors of the population, and
more especially between the oppressed and their
oppressor. It is important, therefore, that an atmosphere of confidence and trust be created to allow
for free political activity, which is an important prerequisite for free and fair elections. This is the task of
the administering Power, and yet the partial actions of
the Governor in Salisbury do not help in this regard.
Failure to create an atmosphere conducive to the
holding of free and fair elections, an atmosphere in
which the trust and confidence of the people of
Zimbabwe as a whole can be won, could result only
in charges and counter-charges that the elections were
not fair and free and so unacceptable to the international community.

171. What is at issue in the enforcement of law and
order and in dealing with breaches of the cease-fire
is th,: exclusive use of Rhodesian security forces,
including the so-called auxiliary forces. If the GOVernor is unable to keep the peace with the civilian
police force as provided for in the Agreement, then
we expect him, in accordance with the spirit and the
letter of the Agreement, to use all the forces that have
placed themselves under his command, and that
includes the Patriotic Front forces which are now
confined to base and watch with great amazement
as the Governor relies exclusively on the bloodthirsty
Rhodesian colonial forces. That does not accord with
the letter and the spirit of the Agreement, which
gives both forces equal status. The exclusive use of
one force at the expense of the other constitutes an
act of partiality that can only undermine the authority
of the British Government.

167. Scrupulous implementation
of the Lancaster
House Agreement is the best, nay the only way of
creating the desired atmosphere. Only in this way can
the administering Power win the trust and confidence
of the people of Zimbabwe as a whole.
I68. So far, one cannot say that the Agreement
has been implemented
as scrupulously as one had
expected. The following, among others, are the areas
of grave concern to us.

172. This matter calls for urgent rectification. The
Rhodesian forces, including the auxiliary forces which
now roam the countryside at will, should be confined
to base as agreed. Failure to do this expeditiously

169. Despite the undertaking given by the British
Government that all foreign troops would leave Rho19

control over the Rhodesian Civil Service, which is
known for its bias against the Patriotic Front.

can only tead to such incidents as the one in which the
Rhodesian forces killed in cold blood a number of
Patriotic Front soldiers who were on their way to an
assembly point. We condemn this.kind of action. Even
The N~M, York Titlles-a
newspaper which cannot
remotely be said to be partial to the Patriotic Front,
on 28 January 1980 had this to say about the Rhodesian
‘auxiliary forces:

178. Tt is not necessary for me to enumerate all the
areas of concern in the situation in Rhodesia. That has
been done amply and eloquently here by those who
have spoken before me. Suffice it to stress that in this
whole exercise, a spirit of fair play, impartiality
and
even-handedness
must prevail. A high degree of good
faith is called for, if we are to succeed. None of the
Rhodesian parties should legitimately feel that it is not
treated fairly-as,
indeed, the Patriotic Front has
reason to feel. We have heard charges by the Patriotic
Front that obstacles were placed in their way to delay
their return to Rhodesia in good time to catch up on
the election campaign that the internal parties had
long started. Only by sticking to the letter and the spirit
of the Agreement can such charges be avoided.

“A serious issue for the Patriotic Front is posed
by the Rhodesian auxiliaries, a Salisbury-trained
paramilitary force that numbers about 25,000. Under
the cease-fire accord, the auxiliaries, referred to
by Bishop Muzorewa’s opponents as the ‘Elishop’s
private army’, are supposed to remain within onehalf mile of their bases, a stipulation that is widely
ignored.”
173. The creation of an atmosphere of confidence
and mutual trust, an atmosphere conducive to the
holding of free and fair elections on which so much
depends, demands that all those forces be confined
to base immediately.

:

174. In order to enable as many Zimbabweans as
possible to participate in the forthcoming election, no
effort should be spared to enable the thousands upon
thousands of displaced persons now living in neighbouring countries to return. The colonial Administration should make arrangements for the speedy and
unimpeded return of those refugees. Unfortunately,
our recent experience in Botswana with the repatriation exercise has demonstrated
some unwillingness
on the pall of the Rhodesian authorities to expedite
the programme of repatriation, if not outright deliberate frustration of this exercise.

/

,j

i
:

i

:

:
/
“’

179. For our part we stand on our word that Botswana-as,
indeed, the other African States-will
abide by the verdict of the people of Zimbabwe in
fair and free elections. That is why we are anxious
to ensure that the forthcoming elections will indeed
be free and fair, so that their results will be acceptable
to the international
community. Thus the observations
we have made are intended to safeguard the Lancaster
House Agreement
as a way of ensuring peace in
Zimbabwe and in our region. The British Government,
the people of Zimbabwe and all of us here want to
see peace in Rhodesia. That is why we are critical
of any actions that can threaten that peace.
180. To the British Government, I should like to say
this: We-meaning
the African States-have
worked
together for a settlement in Rhodesia over a long
period of time, through the Anglo-American
proposals, the Meeting of Commonwealth
Heads of
Government
held at Lusaka from 1 to 7 August 1979
and, finally,
the Lancaster House phase. Durable
peace is now within our grasp, though the situation
is precarious.
Let no one destroy the chances for
real peace. We are not unmindful of the start that
has been made towards the implementation
of the
Lancaster House Agreement. We are glad especially
that the Patriotic
Front has commendably
fulfilled
its part of the Agreement, much to the astonishment
of the prophets of doom who had maliciously insinuated that the Patriotic Front did not want peace. We
congratulate the members of that Front on their mature
statesmanship
in this case, statesmanship that they
have consistently demonstrated through the long years
of war and the long months of negotiations.

175. As members have probably read in a statement
released on 24 January 1980 by the office of our President and circulated here, the Rhodesians arrested
our truck drivers-34
of them-and
embargoed the
trucks which the Government
of Botswana has
assigned for the repatriation
exercise. Only after
strong representations
to the British Government
were our people released with their trucks. I am glad
to inform the Council that repatriation has resumed
and we hope that, unless the Rhodesians resort to
their dilatory tactics again, about 22,000 persons in
all will have returned to Rhodesia by the time of the
elections.
176. I mention that incident not because we want to
make an issue of it at this point but, rather, as an
illustration
of the fact that reliance on the former
Rhodesian Administration,
if not properly checked by
the administering
Power, can lead to unfortunate and
fraudulent actions throughout this transitional period.

1x1. If we have dwelt at length on the areas of grave
concern, it is only because we want the exercise in
Rhodesia to succeed. We urge the Security Council
to arrive at a decision that will make this possible.
Botswana for its part will play its full role to help in
the scrupulous
implementation
of the Lancaster
House Agreement.
The British Government should

177. We see the attempts to slow down repatriation
as a deliberate strategy to deny the Patriotic Front
the votes they are likely to get from the returnees.
We call upon the British Administration
to exercise

.,

20
‘,

I

be called upon by the Council to implement
ment fairly and even-handedly .
The meeting

the Agree-

NOTES
I See Soltthetv
fererzce,
Loncmter

rose at 7.50 p.m.

Rhodesirt:
Horrsr,

Repot?
Lotrdott,

Seplertlhe~Decetrtbe~

1979,

Cmnd. 7802 (London, Her Majesty’s Stationery OFfice, 1980).
2 Rhodesia: repofl of’ Ihe Cotntnission
011 Rhodesian
opinion
under the Chctirmnnship
qf the Right Honoumhle
the Lord Pewre
(London, Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1972), Cmnd. 4964.

21

HOWTOOBTAlNUNlTEDNATfOA'SPUBLICATlONS
United
Nations
publicalioru
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva,

COMMEiNTSEPROCURER

may
be obtained
your bookatoro

LES

from

or

write

and distributors
Nations,
Sales

bcmkrtores

to:

United

PUBLICA~ONSDESNATIONSUNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies nont en vente dans les libreirics
et lee agences
d&ositaires
du mondo entier.
Informer.-vour
nuprti
de votre libraire ou adresaer-vous
$ : Nations
Unies, Section dos ventes, New York ou Gcnhve.

Hauufi
YCUKKO
Kynwb
B
mpa.
Haao~~re
cnpaetm
unm nnmnre
no anpecy : Oprann3aqen
mnanufi,
Halo-Ropn
WIH )Kemsa.

&f3AaKHR

Oprnnu3aqHH

3max

N nrewrcw3ax

Od%enKHenwhIx

namea
HaquR,

xnumuiom
Marrumlle
Cexqm
no nponame

COMO

CONSEGUIRPUBLICACIONESDELAS

80

acex

paRottax

uara06 ~3nanHftx
m
06’be~nHe~Hblx

KHH~WC~IX

NACIONES UNIDAS

ILns publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
est.&n en venta en libmrias
y caeas distribuidoraa
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones
Unidas, Seccidn de Vent&,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Netions,

New

York

00400

83-61462-December

1985-2,425
