United Nations

A/RES/67/100

General Assembly

Distr.: General
14 January 2013

Sixty-seventh session
Agenda item 165

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 14 December 2012
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/67/477)]

67/100. Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country, 1
Recalling Article 105 of the Charter of the United Nations, the Convention on
the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations, 2 the Agreement between the
United Nations and the United States of America regarding the Headquarters of the
United Nations 3 and the responsibilities of the host country,
Recalling also that, in accordance with paragraph 7 of General Assembly
resolution 2819 (XXVI) of 15 December 1971, the Committee should consider, and
advise the host country on, issues arising in connection with the implementation of
the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of America
regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations,
Recognizing that effective measures should continue to be taken by the
competent authorities of the host country, in particular to prevent any acts violating
the security of missions and the safety of their personnel,
Endorses the recommendations and conclusions of the Committee on
1.
Relations with the Host Country contained in paragraph 34 of its report;1
2.
Considers that the maintenance of appropriate conditions for the normal
work of the delegations and the missions accredited to the United Nations and the
observance of their privileges and immunities, which is an issue of great
importance, are in the interest of the United Nations and all Member States, requests
the host country to continue to solve, through negotiations, problems that might
arise and to take all measures necessary to prevent any interference with the

_______________
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 26 (A/67/26).
Resolution 22 A (I).
3
See resolution 169 (II).
2

12-48460

*1248460*

Please recycle

A/RES/67/100

functioning of missions, and urges the host country to continue to take appropriate
action, such as training of police, security, customs and border control officers, with
a view to maintaining respect for diplomatic privileges and immunities and if
violations occur to ensure that such cases are properly investigated and remedied, in
accordance with applicable law;
Notes the problems experienced by some Permanent Missions to the
3.
United Nations in connection with the implementation of the Parking Programme
for Diplomatic Vehicles, 4 and notes that the Committee shall remain seized of the
matter, with a view to continuing to maintain the proper implementation of the
Parking Programme in a manner that is fair, non-discriminatory, effective and
therefore consistent with international law;
Requests the host country to consider removing the remaining travel
4.
restrictions imposed by it on staff of certain missions and staff members of the
Secretariat of certain nationalities, and in this regard notes the long-standing
positions of affected States, of the Secretary-General and of the host country;
Notes the concerns expressed by some delegations concerning the denial
5.
and delay of entry visas to representatives of Member States;
6.
Also notes that the Committee anticipates that the host country will
continue to enhance its efforts to ensure the issuance of entry visas to
representatives of Member States in a timely manner, pursuant to article IV,
section 11, of the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of
America regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations3 to travel to New York
on United Nations business and that the Committee anticipates that the host country
will continue to enhance efforts, including visa issuance, to facilitate the
participation of representatives of Member States in other United Nations meetings,
as appropriate;
Further notes that a number of delegations have requested shortening the
7.
time frame applied by the host country for issuance of entry visas to representatives
of Member States since the time frame poses difficulties for the full-fledged
participation of Member States in United Nations meetings;
Notes with concern the difficulties that continue to be experienced by
8.
some Permanent Missions to the United Nations in obtaining suitable banking
services, and welcomes the continued efforts of the host country to facilitate the
opening of bank accounts for those Permanent Missions;
Expresses its appreciation for the efforts made by the host country, and
9.
hopes that the issues raised at the meetings of the Committee will continue to be
resolved in a spirit of cooperation and in accordance with international law;
10. Affirms the importance of the Committee being in a position to fulfil its
mandate and meet on short notice to deal with urgent and important matters
concerning the relations between the United Nations and the host country, and in
that connection requests the Secretariat and the Committee on Conferences to
accord priority to requests from the Committee on Relations with the Host Country
for conference-servicing facilities for meetings of that Committee that must be held
while the General Assembly and its Main Committees are meeting, without
prejudice to the requirements of those bodies and on an “as available” basis;

_______________
4

2

A/AC.154/355, annex.

A/RES/67/100

11. Requests the Secretary-General to remain actively engaged in all aspects
of the relations of the United Nations with the host country;
12. Requests the Committee to continue its work in conformity with General
Assembly resolution 2819 (XXVI);
13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-eighth session
the item entitled “Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country”.
56th plenary meeting
14 December 2012

3
