A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/94

Fifty-second session

[on the report of the Third Committee (A/52/637)]
52/94.

United Nations Development Fund for Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/133 of 16 December 1976, in which it established the Voluntary Fund for the
United Nations Decade for Women, and the Platform for Action of the Fourth World Conference on Women,1
which reaffirmed that the Fund had the mandate to increase options and opportunities for women's economic
and social development in developing countries,
Recalling also its resolution 39/125 of 14 December 1984, in which it decided to transform the
Voluntary Fund into the United Nations Development Fund for Women and to make the Fund a separate and
identifiable entity in autonomous association with the United Nations Development Programme,
Stressing the important contribution the Fund continues to make in providing technical assistance to
enable Governments and organizations of the United Nations system, as well as other intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations, to formulate and support policies and innovative activities that directly
benefit and empower women,
the innovative and experimental activities of the Fund directed towards strengthening both
governmental and non-governmental institutional capacities to ensure women access to development
cooperation resources and full participation at all levels in the development process,
Taking note of the importance of the work of the Consultative Committee on the United Nations
Development Fund for Women in policy and programme directions, in accordance with the mandate of the
Fund,

Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4-15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
98-76609

/...

A/RES/52/94
Page 2

1. Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report on the activities of the
United Nations Development Fund for Women;2
2. Emphasizes the important work of the Fund in women's empowerment and gender equality within
the framework of implementing the Platform for Action of the Fourth World Conference on Women, and,
in that context, notes the recently adopted strategy and business plan;
3. Reaffirms the catalytic role of the Fund in further developing and strengthening women's
empowerment by enhancing the integration of a gender perspective into all development programmes, in
accordance with its mandate;
4. Stresses the role of the Fund as a development fund in supporting activities related to women's
economic and social development in developing countries;
5. Notes the intention of the Fund further to focus its interventions in support of women's
empowerment and gender equality;
6. Encourages the Fund to continue to contribute to mainstreaming a gender perspective into all
development efforts of Governments, organizations of the United Nations system and civil society;
7. Also encourages the Fund to strengthen its work within the United Nations system at the national
level through the resident coordinator system, focusing on strategic interventions and building upon its
comparative advantages, in order to promote systemic change, in particular with regard to women's political
and economic empowerment;
8. Endorses the role of the Fund in strengthening women's economic capacity, encouraging women
to become key economic players in combating the feminization of poverty and strengthening women's
leadership and political empowerment so as to increase their participation in decision-making processes;
9. Recognizes the important role the Fund plays in promoting the realization of women's civil, cultural,
economic, political and social rights so as to facilitate their full participation in society;
10. Welcomes the operationalization of the Trust Fund in Support of Action to Eliminate Violence
against Women, and requests the United Nations Development Fund for Women to disseminate information
on best practices and strategic interventions funded under that initiative which should contribute to the
eradication of violence against women as an obstacle to development;
11. Encourages the United Nations Development Fund for Women, in order to fulfil its mandate, to
continue to mobilize resources for its activities in a comprehensive manner from all available sources,
including the private sector, and urges all Member States to contribute and to consider increasing their
contributions to the Fund;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the General Assembly at its fifty-third session a report
on the activities of the United Nations Development Fund for Women, to be submitted in accordance with
resolution 39/125.
70th plenary meeting
12 December 1997

2

A/52/300, annex.
