S/PV.9414

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9414th meeting

Friday, 8 September 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hoxha. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. França Danese
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mrs. Hackman
Mr. Ishikane
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Wood

Agenda
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-26383 (E)
*2326383*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9414

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Czechia, Estonia, Italy, Poland and
Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Miroslav
Jenča, Assistant Secretary-General for Europe, Central
Asia and the Americas, Departments of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations, to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Jenča.
Mr. Jenča: Russia’s full-scale invasion of
Ukraine — launched in violation of the Charter of the
United Nations and of international law — continues to
inflict large-scale suffering on the people of Ukraine,
as they face daily, intensifying attacks against civilians
and civilian infrastructure. Since February 2022, the
Office of the United Nations High-Commissioner for
Human Rights has verified 26,717 civilian casualties:
9,511 killed and 17,206 injured. At least 549 children
have been killed, and 1,166 other children have
been injured.
In a latest illustration of the suffering that Russia’s
invasion inflicts on civilians across the country, just
two days ago a daylight missile attack hit a crowded
market in Kostiantynivka, in the Donetsk region of
Ukraine, reportedly killing 16 people, including a
child, and injuring dozens of others. On the same day,
a Russian drone attack on the Danube port of Izmail,
in the Odesa region, reportedly killed one person and
damaged agricultural and port facilities, according to
local officials.
2/20

08/09/2023

The continuing, relentless attacks targeting
Ukraine’s grain infrastructure on the Black Sea and
Danube river ports, after Russia decided not to extend
the Black Sea Grain Initiative, risk having far-reaching
consequences for global food security. Attacks directed
against civilians and civilian infrastructure, including
objects necessary for food production and distribution,
are prohibited under international law.
We are now approaching the one-year anniversary
of the illegal attempt by the Russian Federation to annex
the Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson and Zaporizhzhya
regions of Ukraine through the organization of illegal
so-called “referendums” in those regions in late
September 2022. I wish to reiterate that the United
Nations remains fully committed to the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine
within its internationally recognized borders, extending
to its territorial waters.
That clear principled position of the United
Nations, underpinned by the United Nations Charter
and by international law, was unambiguously
reaffirmed on 12 October 2022, when the General
Assembly, with an overwhelming majority — 143
Member States having voted for and five against, with
35 abstaining — adopted Assembly resolution ES-11/4.
The resolution condemned the
“organization by the Russian Federation of illegal
so-called referendums in regions within the
internationally recognized borders of Ukraine and
the attempted illegal annexation of the Donetsk,
Kherson, Luhansk and Zaporizhzhia regions of
Ukraine” (General Assembly resolution ES-11/4,
paragraph 2)
and declared that those actions
“have no validity under international law and do
not form the basis for any alteration of the status of
these regions of Ukraine” (ibid., paragraph 3).
Similarly, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 68/262, adopted on 27 March 2014, Russia’s
attempted illegal annexation of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea and city of Sevastopol, Ukraine,
remains invalid and unrecognized by the international
community. As underlined by the Secretary-General,
any annexation of a State’s territory by another State
resulting from the threat or use of force is a violation
of the principles of the Charter and international law.
23-26383

08/09/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

In that regard, we are concerned about reports of the
Russian Federation holding so-called elections in areas
of Ukraine currently under Russia’s temporary military
control. Those so-called elections in the occupied
areas of Ukraine have no legal grounds. We also recall
that, as the occupying Power, the Russian Federation
is obligated under international humanitarian law
to respect, unless absolutely prevented, the laws of
Ukraine in force in the areas that it occupies.
We continue to condemn any actions that could
further escalate or deteriorate the situation. We remain
concerned about the humanitarian needs and the human
rights situation in, and the lack of access to, the areas of
Ukraine currently under the temporary military control
of the Russian Federation.
Last year, the Secretary-General warned that the
decision by Russia to go forward with its attempt to
illegally annex Ukrainian territory would further
jeopardize the prospects for peace. Regrettably, one
year later, amid continuing intense fighting and
unacceptable attacks against Ukrainian civilians and
civilian infrastructure, these latest illegal attempts
to organize new so-called electoral processes in the
occupied areas of Ukraine further undermine the
prospects for peace. As the Secretary-General has
repeatedly stated, now more than ever, we need just
and lasting peace in Ukraine, in line with the United
Nations Charter, international law and resolutions of
the General Assembly. The United Nations remains
ready to support all meaningful efforts to that end.
The President: I thank Mr. Jenča for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Albania.
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Jenča for his
briefing on the recent developments in Ukraine.
Let us go back in time for a second. At the start
of the full-scale invasion of Ukraine, the Kremlin
rushed to convince the world that Russia had no
plans for an occupation of Ukrainian territory, that
the sole purpose of the military intervention was the
country’s demilitarization — focused entirely on
military infrastructure — and, finally, that the civilian
population had nothing to fear. After 562 days of a
relentless war, we know that everything is false — a
big lie — and that the harsh reality has left the emperor
without clothes.

S/PV.9414

We now know that Russia’s aim was to deny
Ukraine its existence; when it failed, it focused on the
eastern part of Ukraine. The sad truth is that Russia has
never stopped bombarding urban and residential areas,
with shelling, missiles and drones flying into homes
and apartment buildings. Entire villages, towns and
cities have been reduced to smithereens. Around 50 per
cent of Ukraine’s power-generation infrastructure has
been destroyed. And now Russia is attacking ports and
grain silos, as we heard in recent days. Large swathes of
the eastern regions have been turned into mine fields.
Instead of achieving demilitarization — unwillingly
and in a totally adverse effect — Russia’s policy became,
as it were, the biggest sponsor in making Ukraine
much stronger, better armed and more equipped to
defend itself.
As to the protection of civilians, it could not even
qualify as a bad joke. Around 10,000 Ukrainians have
lost their lives. Millions have been displaced, within
and outside the country. And thousands of children have
been forcefully deported to Russia. As was mentioned,
just two days ago 17 people, including one child, were
killed by a missile in a public market in Donbas.
Give the total fiasco of the state of its initial plans,
the Kremlin went back to its playbook. First, it invaded
territory. Next, it forced Ukrainians to leave. And right
after it started the déjà vu charade of the legitimization of
the invasion. In September of last year, 143 States of the
General Assembly condemned the sham referendums
on the annexation of four Ukrainian regions, declaring
that they had no validity under international law. Now
Russia is planning to conduct illegal local elections in
those four regions of Ukraine.
We have some simple questions that call for
straightforward answers. Under which part of
international law has Russia attacked and occupied
parts of the territory of another country, its neighbour
Ukraine? Under which article of the Charter of the
United Nations has Russia annexed part of the territory
of the same country, Ukraine? How does the position
of a permanent member of the Security Council, which
is entrusted by the United Nations membership with
the noble duty of upholding the Charter and ensuring
peace and security, cope with the behaviour of a rogue
State that is breaking the law, killing civilians and
committing crimes?
The answers to those questions are crucial, as they
will determine not only what will happen in Ukraine

23-263833/20

S/PV.9414

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

but also in Europe and the world we live in. If we accept
that international law can be broken at will, if what we
have built for 78 years can be easily undone by anyone,
the world of tomorrow will not be under the rule of
law, but the law of the jungle. We do not want a world
where countries commit acts of bygone eras or acts that
should never be committed. No one wants to live in a
neighbourhood with a bully that assaults your home,
harms your family and steals your belongings.
The legislation and the institutions of the Russian
Federation have no legal effect, validity or business
within the international recognized borders of Ukraine
Donetsk, Luhansk Kherson, Zaporizhzhya and Crimea
are part of the Ukraine, and Russia’s illegal actions
will not be able to change it. All persons involved
in the organization of the so-called elections are
committing illegal actions and, one day, they will be
held accountable. Russia may hope that, with time,
its fait accompli policy will end up being accepted in
silence by a fatigued international community. They
are wrong. Its illegal actions are null and void, and its
territory grab will not be accepted.
The war in Ukraine is a defining moment and cannot
become the new normal. It must be ended because its
end means ending imperial ambitions. We know now
that the war in Ukraine is not confined to only Ukraine.
It already has had global implications for energy, food
supplies, multilateralism and international institutions,
including the Council, which is becoming more and
more ineffective. We reiterate our call on Russia to stop
the war, engage in dialogue to find a solution through
negotiations, not by force, return to the grain deal and
stop using food security as a weapon. The sooner the
Kremlin accepts that this war is a dangerous dead end,
the better it will be for all — for Ukraine and its people,
for the Europe and its security, for the developing world
and for the millions in need, as well as for Russians and
their future.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Jenča for his briefing.
Albania, with the support of the United States,
called for this meeting today because of the Russian
Federation’s continued and flagrant violation of the
Charter of the United Nations through its assault on
4/20

08/09/2023

the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine and
violence against the Ukrainian people. On 31 August,
Russia began holding sham elections in the areas
of Ukraine that it occupies, coinciding with annual
regional elections being held throughout Russia. The
Kremlin hopes that the sham elections will demonstrate
its control over the occupied territories, but they are
nothing more than a propaganda stunt. That is not a
new tactic. The so-called elections in Russian occupied
territories of Ukraine are taking place nearly one
year after the Kremlin staged sham referendums and
purported to annex Ukraine’s Kherson, Zaporizhzhya,
Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts, and more than nine years
after Russia’s purported efforts to annex Crimea.
The Kremlin uses the sham referendums and
elections to try to lend a semblance of legitimacy to
its attempts to unlawfully annex the sovereign territory
of its neighbours. The Kremlin is rushing to fabricate
electoral successes to hide its military losses in Ukraine
from the Russian people. The Kremlin knows full well
that its elections in Ukraine are a complete fraud. But
some within the Russian Government are concerned
about the perceived legitimacy and voter turnout for
the elections in the occupied areas. The outcome will of
course be predetermined and manipulated. In fact, from
media reports, we understand that Russian authorities
already have established field polling stations, where
Russia’s armed forces began conducting early voting
as of 31August in front-line areas, and elsewhere, to
manipulate and maximize the vote count. Essentially,
Russia’s armed soldiers are providing so-called security
to voters in an intimidating combination of bullets
and ballots.
The sham elections in no way represent a legitimate
expression of the will of the people of Ukraine, who
have consistently resisted and bravely fought Russia’s
efforts to change Ukraine’s borders by force for nearly
19 months. The Potemkin elections are an affront to
the principles enshrined in the Charter. The Ukrainian
people are fighting to expel Russia’s forces from their
territory. The vast majority of the world is united in
support of Ukraine and the Charter. Last year, 143
countries voted in the General Assembly to condemn
Russia’s purported annexation of Ukraine’s sovereign
territory (see A/ES-11/PV.14). The United States will
never recognize Russia’s claims to any of Ukraine’s
territory. We condemn Russia’s continued occupation
unequivocally, and we will continue to work with allies
23-26383

08/09/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

and partners to provide Ukraine with the military
equipment it needs to defend itself.
We urge all United Nations Member States to
refrain from actions that serve to lend credibility
to Russia’s sham elections on Ukraine’s sovereign
territory. We must all call out Russia’s egregious
violations of international law for what they are: a
stain on our collective history as an organ founded on
maintaining world peace and an assault on our rulesbased international order. The overwhelming majority
of the Security Council has said that international
conflicts must be resolved through dialogue and
diplomacy. We agree. And Ukraine’s democratically
elected President Zelenskyy has put forth a plan for a
just and lasting peace based on Charter principles. But
Russia has shown no interest in good faith dialogue to
end the war, but just the opposite. Russia continues to
wage its war of conquest, sending wave after wave of
bombs and missiles into Ukraine, wreaking death and
destruction on civilians and civilian infrastructure, with
members of Russia’s forces and other Russian officials
committing unconscionable war crimes, crimes against
humanity and other atrocities and abuses. Ukraine’s
fight is not only a fight for its own survival, but a fight
in defence of the rules-based international order and
its foundational principles. That is why it is imperative
that we all stand unequivocally with Ukraine.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Jenča for his briefing.
Almost a year ago, in October 2022, the
overwhelming majority of the General Assembly
membership condemned Russia’s illegal holding of socalled referendums in regions within the internationally
recognized borders of Ukraine and the subsequent
attempt to illegally annex the Ukrainian regions of
Luhansk, Donetsk, Kherson and Zaporizhzhya. As a
demonstration of how Russia has isolated itself, 143
states at that time reaffirmed their commitment to
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and to
the Charter of the United Nations (see A/ES-11/PV.14).
Far from listening to the calls of the international
community, Russia has chosen to pursue its dash forward
violating the fundamental principles of the Charter,
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. Today it is pursuing its provocations
through the holding of staged elections, which are as
illegitimate as their predecessors, in the same illegally
occupied territories. But that strategy is fooling no

S/PV.9414

one. The so-called elections are a parody that has been
staged by Russia to give a semblance of legitimacy to
its attempts at illegal annexation. Those regions, like
Crimea, are an integral part of Ukraine. France will not
recognize the results of the sham elections, any more
than it has in the past, which in no way represent the
expression of the will of the Ukrainian people.
Our meeting today brings us back to the fundamental
question of respect for the Charter, international law
and the conditions necessary for peaceful coexistence
among sovereign States. The question concerns us all.
Allowing Russia to pursue its aggression and seize the
territories of a neighbouring country is tantamount to
condoning war, as well as paving the way for further
acts of aggression. In Europe as well as throughout the
world, no country will be able to consider itself safe
if we give free reign to Russia today. We cannot allow
force to prevail over law. That is why it is imperative that
every Member of the United Nations unconditionally
reject the sham elections and thereby defend the Charter
and its universal principles, which we have been called
upon to do by the Secretary-General through Mr. Jenča.
After more than 18 months of aggression, Russia
continues to disregard international law and relentlessly
and intentionally bomb cities and civilian infrastructure,
which constitute war crimes. The recent attack on the
Kostiantynivka market, which left at least 16 people
dead and 32 injured, further attests to that. While the
entire world is suffering from the repercussions of the
war, Russia is methodically targeting the infrastructure
needed to export Ukrainian agricultural products.
The Izmail port, which has become vital since Russia
suspended its participation in the Black Sea Grain
Initiative, has been targeted four times in five days this
week. Russia is doing everything it can to undermine
the efforts of Ukraine and the international community
to deliver food to the most vulnerable countries.
Russia alone is responsible for this war and its
consequences for the Ukrainian people, the Russian
people and the entire world. It can end it by withdrawing
its troops and allowing for a peaceful settlement,
under the Charter of the United Nations, respecting
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
The International Court of Justice ordered just that
on 16 March 2022. Until then, France will continue to
support Ukraine so long as is necessary to achieve that
goal. We will continue to support the efforts of Ukraine
to work towards fair and lasting peace.

23-263835/20

S/PV.9414

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
meeting, and Assistant Secretary-General Miroslav
Jenča for his briefing.
In just three weeks, it will be a year since draft
resolution S/2022/720, condemning the Russian
Federation’s attempted annexation of Ukrainian regions,
was vetoed. For my delegation, it is unacceptable that
an occupying Power was able to prevent, through a veto,
the adoption of a draft resolution that would require
that it withdraw its troops and respect the territorial
integrity of a State. Indeed, that was and is a grave
violation of the letter and spirit of the Charter of the
United Nations.
In any event, no veto can stop the force of the
General Assembly, of which Ecuador is a permanent
member. For that reason, I must reiterate General
Assembly resolution ES-11/4, entitled “Territorial
integrity of Ukraine: defending the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations”, which was adopted on
12 October last year during the eleventh emergency
special session of the General Assembly, which was
convened as a result of a decision taken by the Council,
as contained in resolution 2623 (2022), of 27 February
2022, which was adopted in line with the mechanism
known as “Uniting for Peace”.
That is why we reaffirm that the referendums
that took place last year in the Ukrainian territories
of Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson and Zaporizhzhya,
under foreign military occupation, pose a threat to the
sovereignty of Ukraine and lack any legal validity. In
that context, one year later, we continue to reject any
act that claims to administratively endorse that attempt
at neocolonial annexation.
Let me be very clear. My delegation is not
questioning the exercise of local elections that take
place in the Russian Federation, but it is questioning
the voting process organized by that country on
Ukrainian territories in the month of September. We
reiterate that Russia must immediately withdraw its
occupation troops.
Lastly, we stress the need for the Council to provide
the Secretary-General with better tools towards détente
and a peaceful solution, based on respect for the
sovereignty, unity, independence and territorial integrity
of Ukraine, within its internationally recognized
borders and extending to its territorial waters.
6/20

Mrs. Hackman (Ghana):
Secretary-General
Miroslav
informative briefing.

08/09/2023

I thank Assistant
Jenča
for
his

We are dismayed by the ongoing local elections
being conducted by the authorities of the Russian
Federation in four regions of Ukraine, namely,
Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson and Zaporizhzhya. The
purported elections constitute a violation of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine, within
its internationally recognized borders, and follow on
from the widely condemned attempt by the Russian
Federation in September 2022 to annex territories of
Ukraine through a referendum.
As a fundamental principle of international law and
the Charter of the United Nations, reaffirmed by the
General Assembly in its resolution ES-11/4, adopted
on 12 October 2022, no territorial acquisition resulting
from the threat or use of force shall be recognized
as legal. Consequently, the attempts by the Russian
Federation to exercise sovereign authority within the
borders of Ukraine, including the conduct of local
elections, are, in our view, illegal and void. It is only
the legal and constitutional framework of Ukraine that
can accord legitimacy for any such elections.
Besides the tenuous legal basis for holding
such elections, the prevailing security and political
conditions in the four regions cannot confirm that the
free and fair will of the people has been realized. The
purported elections only introduce another layer of
complexity to the conflict and complicate the chances
for an early settlement.
As we have often stated in the Council, Ghana
is firmly committed to the sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine and
cannot recognize any territory acquired through the
threat or use of force by any State. In this instance, we
strongly urge a reversal of all actions that assail the
sovereign authority of the Government of Ukraine and
emphasize that the power of might cannot be the rule
of law.
In the light of the continuing threat of harm posed
by the war to civilian life, as we heard from the briefing,
we underscore the international obligations incumbent
on the warring parties to protect civilians and further
urge restraint against the deliberate targeting and
destruction of civilian infrastructure. As repeatedly
asserted in the Council, attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure are illegal and unacceptable.
23-26383

08/09/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

It is increasingly evident that the war has brought
the parties no closer to the realization of their security
interests. Given the rapid deterioration of the security
and humanitarian conditions in Ukraine, we are of
the view that intensified diplomatic action must be
mobilized to help de-escalate tensions and secure the
cessation of hostilities. We once again urge the Russian
Federation’s immediate and unconditional withdrawal
of its troops from the internationally recognized
borders of Ukraine and urge collective action to lay the
ground for pacific and constructive dialogue between
the warring parties. There is no alternative to winning
the peace of Ukraine.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Jenča for his sobering briefing.
Two weeks ago, while commemorating Ukraine’s
independence, we again deplored Russia’s relentless and
ruthless aggression against Ukraine — a war of choice
by Russia that is illegal and in defiance of everything
the Organization stands for (see S/PV.9404). We again
had to condemn Russia’s actions, which blatantly
threaten and undermine its neighbour’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
We reiterate clearly that Russia’s war of aggression
against Ukraine is illegal, unjustified and unprovoked.
This is a war initiated by a permanent member of
the Security Council, which is entrusted with the
maintenance of international peace and security. That
permanent member of the Security Council continues to
cause death, destruction and immense human suffering.
Just two days ago, we witnessed yet another instance of
brutal Russian tactics aimed at terrorizing Ukraine’s
civilian population. This time, a missile attack on
a market in the Donetsk region killed 17 people and
injured dozens more.
Today, as we once again place the spotlight on these
issues, we also reaffirm Ukraine’s right to determine
its own future. We deplore Russia’s holding of sham
elections in the occupied territories of Donetsk,
Luhansk, Zaporizhzhya and Kherson. We stand
with Ukraine and its people in defending freedom
and independence.
The elections are illegitimate and illegal and will
not be recognized by the international community.
They undermine the Charter of the United Nations and
constitute a threat to the international system. We recall
that, last October, the overwhelming majority of United
Nations States Members in the General Assembly

S/PV.9414

condemned the illegal annexation of the four partiallyoccupied regions and reaffirmed the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine
within its internationally recognized borders (see
A/ES-11/PV.14). The elections further confirm that
Russia has no intention of engaging in meaningful
discussions towards a solution to the war, and neither
is it willing to return the territories it illegally invaded.
We stress yet again that any elections held by Russia
in the temporarily occupied territories are illegitimate.
Russia’s full-scale war of aggression has brought
incommensurable suffering and destruction to civilians.
We remain fully committed to ensuring that it be held
accountable for its acts, including its practice of forcible
deporting Ukrainian children, which amounts to a war
crime, as concluded by the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine.
Women and girls continue to face extremely high
risks of gender-based violence. There are credible,
consistent and widespread reports of grave human
rights violations, including torture and conflict-related
sexual violence. Malta condemns those barbaric and
illegal acts and urges Russia to immediately cease
those actions. Regardless of the context, international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
must be upheld.
Russia’s actions have far-reaching consequences
that go beyond the war in Ukraine. Its politicization
of humanitarian aid, including through its unilateral
withdrawal from the Black Sea Grain Initiative, has had
a tremendous negative impact on the most vulnerable
communities around the world. It has also created
uncertainty in global markets, increasing prices, and
has exacerbated the dire situation of food-importing
countries. The initiative also ensured access to grain
for the World Food Programme. Such weaponization of
food is simply unconscionable. It is crucial to restore
the Black Sea Grain Initiative as soon as possible.
Russia did not stop at withdrawing from that
initiative. Soon after, it proceeded to carry out attacks
against Ukraine’s grain storage facilities and port
infrastructure, including in the Danube. Targeting
civilian infrastructure is a violation of international
humanitarian law, and we strongly condemn it.
In conclusion, we emphasize that the international
community has repeatedly expressed its desire to reach
a just and lasting peace in Ukraine, in line with the
Charter of the United Nations. Any initiative in that

23-263837/20

S/PV.9414

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

regard must be based on full respect for Ukraine’s
independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders.
We once again urge Russia to end its aggression and to
immediately and completely withdraw all its forces and
military equipment from the entire territory of Ukraine.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Jenča for
his briefing.
My colleagues who spoke before me have already
said it, but I believe it is important to repeat the truth:
almost a year ago, Russia held so-called referendums
in the occupied regions of Ukraine in contravention
of the relevant international standards and provisions
of Ukrainian law and despite urgent calls from the
international community to desist from doing so. As
the armed conflict raged on, Ukrainians in the occupied
regions were forced to vote in an environment that was
described by the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry on Ukraine as one of fear and coercion. Our
position was clear a year ago and remains just as clear
today: as the Assistant Secretary-General also just
reminded us, the annexation of Ukrainian territories
declared by Russia following those votes constitutes
a serious violation of international law. Switzerland
condemns such a violation and does not recognize
the integration of the Ukrainian territories into the
Russian Federation. Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson and
Zaporizhzhya, as well as Crimea, are part of Ukraine.
As we meet today, actions are under way to try to
further cement those illegal acts and legitimize military
control. Switzerland rejects the decision of Russia’s
Central Election Commission to hold local elections
in the occupied territories. In the meantime, those socalled elections have begun in the occupied Ukrainian
regions without any valid legal basis. Switzerland will
not recognize the results of the illegal elections, which
are taking place in a context that prevents any free and
fair voting.
Respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States, in particular through the prohibition of the
use of force and the acquisition of territory by force,
are fundamental principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations. By adopting a resolution on the
territorial integrity of Ukraine in October by a very
large majority (General Assembly resolution ES-11/4),
the General Assembly, as many others have mentioned,
defended those principles, which form the basis of our
8/20

08/09/2023

multilateral order and of relations among the States
Members of the United Nations. If those principles are
not respected, it is the population that suffers most.
That was the case two days ago, when a devastating
mid-afternoon attack on a market in Kostiantynivka
killed and injured dozens of people. In the south of
the country, schools and homes, as well as port and
grain infrastructure, have been damaged as a result of
Russian strikes.
Switzerland therefore urgently reiterates the legal
imperative to protect the civilian population in armed
conflicts. The Independent International Commission
of Inquiry on Ukraine has documented reports of
serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights, including in occupied zones. To
date, the Commission has visited Ukraine more than 10
times and has provided detailed reports, the most recent
of which was issued last week. Many of the violations
found may constitute war crimes. All perpetrators of
such crimes must be held accountable.
The parties to the conflict still have an obligation
to respect international humanitarian law and human
rights. In the territories under its control, Russia
is also obliged to respect its specific obligations as
an occupying Power. In particular, it must respect
Ukrainian legislation in force. Rapid and unimpeded
access for humanitarian aid must be guaranteed to all
civilians in need, including in the occupied zones.
Once again, we call on Russia to refrain from any
attempt to alter the internationally recognized borders
of Ukraine, to reverse the decisions taken to that end
and to finally withdraw its troops from all Ukrainian
territory. As my Ghanaian colleague put it:
(spoke in English)
“There is no alternative to winning the peace
of Ukraine”.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Jenča for his briefing.
We are assembled here today to discuss international
peace and security in line with the Charter of the United
Nations. That reminds us of what we are collectively
committed to uphold, especially when the Charter’s
principles are put to the test by actions that go against
the very foundations of our world.
Let us not mince words: Russia’s ongoing aggression
against Ukraine has not only violated the Charter but
23-26383

08/09/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

has also seriously undermined the peace and security
and stability that the United Nations aims to safeguard.
Russia’s actions have drawn condemnation not just
from Japan, but from the overwhelming majority of
Member States. We must acknowledge that the situation
threatens not only the affected regions, but also the
international order under which we all live.
In addition, Russia has been organizing what it calls
elections in the territories of Ukraine that it currently
occupies. It is vital to state unequivocally that such acts
following the illegal annexation of those territories
are totally unacceptable. We further emphasize that
attempts by Russia to establish a sense of normalcy
or legitimacy through those activities are doomed to
fail. As affirmed in General Assembly resolution ES11/4, adopted by an overwhelming majority of the
Member States, Russia’s attempted illegal annexation
of the Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson and Zaporizhzhya
regions into the territory of the Russian Federation by
force clearly breaches international law, including the
Charter. Those actions by Russia have no validity and
cannot form the basis for any alteration of the status of
those regions of Ukraine.
Lastly, the recent proposal by Russia to discuss a
so-called resolution of the crisis in the Security Council
next week presents a paradox. How can a permanent
member of the Council that is openly violating
international law advocate for resolving a crisis of
its own making? Russia can significantly contribute
to a resolution of the crisis by withdrawing its troops
and equipment from Ukraine immediately and
unconditionally, which can be started without waiting
for next week.
Japan remains steadfast in its commitment to
upholding the Charter, and to the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine. We continue to extend
our hand in partnership to those who share those
principles in order to realize a just and lasting peace in
Ukraine as soon as possible.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Miroslav
Jenča for his informative briefing, and I welcome
the participation of the representative of Ukraine at
this meeting.
In all situations discussed by the Security Council,
we must be guided by the Charter of the United Nations,
which calls for respect for the territorial integrity,
sovereignty and independence of all States. Those legal

S/PV.9414

principles protect all States, large and small, from the
most to the least powerful. They are central to peaceful,
cooperative and productive relations among States
and are essential for their security and stability. The
applicable rules of international humanitarian law with
regard to this week’s elections must also be respected.
Last year, an overwhelming majority of countries
supported General Assembly resolution ES-11/4. The
resolution states that the referendums held in parts of
Ukraine do not form the basis for any alteration of the
status of those regions. That clear conclusion of the
United Nations membership necessarily also applies to
the elections held this week on the premise of the results
of the referendums. Those elections further complicate
the efforts for a peaceful resolution of the conflict.
The Council has an essential role in prioritizing
the peaceful settlement of disputes and maintaining
international peace and security. De-escalation,
dialogue and diplomacy are more urgent than ever. The
United Arab Emirates has been consistent in expressing
the need to bring the conflict to an end and continues to
offer its support to all genuine efforts to achieve that.
The ongoing hostilities have not only brought
immeasurable suffering to Ukraine and its people, but
they also exacerbate an already difficult situation in
global food security and risk pushing people further
into poverty and undermining stability in countries far
from the war. The Black Sea Grain Initiative, which
was exemplary in showing what can be achieved
through diplomacy, helped alleviate some of the war’s
impact on global food security. We are encouraged by
the ongoing efforts of the United Nations, Türkiye and
others to revive it.
While diplomatic solutions to the conflict remain
elusive, we must do what we can to limit its impact. The
war’s toll is heavy, and it is heaviest on the civilians in
Ukraine. A just and sustainable peace, in line with the
Charter, is the only viable solution. The international
community must come together around a vision that
brings an end to that suffering and promotes peace and
stability in Ukraine and the wider region.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I join others in thanking Assistant Secretary-General
Jenča for his very informative briefing.
Let me first condemn another appalling Russian
missile attack earlier this week on a market in
Kostyantynivka, in eastern Ukraine. Intentionally

23-263839/20

S/PV.9414

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

directing attacks against civilians is a war crime, and
those responsible must be held to account.
Last year, in violation of the democratic will of
the Ukrainian people and of the Charter of the United
Nations, Russia attempted to illegally annex Donetsk,
Luhansk, Zaporizhzhya and Kherson. We saw Russian
soldiers round people up to cast ballots at gunpoint
for Russia’s so-called referendums. As my colleagues
have said, the General Assembly emphatically rejected
Russia’s actions. A total of 143 Member States
denounced Russia’s blatant violation of international
law. The Secretary-General condemned Russia’s
attempted annexations.
Now Russia is committing another violation of the
Charter by holding so-called elections within those four
oblasts and in illegally annexed Crimea. Russia claims
it is protecting the right to self-determination. But as my
Foreign Secretary has said, you cannot hold elections in
someone else’s country. Not only are Russia’s actions
illegal and illegitimate, but we have information that
the Kremlin has predetermined the results of the sham
elections across the sovereign territory of Ukraine
that Russia temporarily controls. That gross deception
will bring Russia no closer to justifying its war of
aggression, just as Russia, in a year, has come no closer
to expanding its control over the areas it has claimed in
its failing invasion.
We now have information that, this year, Russia
aimed to host approximately 100,000 Ukrainian
children from Russian-controlled territories to
participate in a summer camp programme aimed at
politically indoctrinating children to align with Russia.
Ukraine is fighting for its future as a State. The
only way that Russia’s war can come to an end is
through a just and sustained peace that fully respects
Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty. We call
on the international community to support Ukraine
until that peace is won.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Miroslav Jenča for his
insightful briefing on this issue. We also wish to
acknowledge the presence in the Chamber of the
representatives of Ukraine, Czechia, Italy, Poland and
Estonia, as well as His Excellency Mr. Olof Skoog,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.
10/20

08/09/2023

Despite the numerous appeals from different entities
around the world for a cessation of hostilities, including
by members of the Security Council, the status quo
persists. As we have been consistently stating in the
Chamber, it is important to recognize that the primary
issue is not merely addressing the symptoms and fallouts
of this armed conflict, as attempted since the Minsk
accords. More meaningfully, is it by addressing its
root causes, including the genuine security concerns of
the parties. In that connection, for meaningful progress,
Mozambique believes that it is crucial to immediately
cease hostilities; resume direct negotiations between
the main parties without preconditions and in good
faith; and adopt a constructive, inclusive and resultsoriented approach focusing on mutual benefit rather
than a zero-sum perspective.
As the Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, which
is responsible for overseeing the Council’s working
methods, Council members will agree with us that
serious consideration has to be given to how to optimally
utilize the Council’s limited resources, considering the
number of meetings dedicated to the subject. It is also
concerning that our programme of work has not been
adopted owing to the very same subject. That issue
requires constructive dialogue, driven by our collective
desire to find solutions.
As we enter the yearly high point of our multilateral
calendar, Mozambique calls for a committed position
for a political and negotiated solution to this conflict,
grounded in the ideals of the Charter of the United
Nations and our mutual responsibility for international
peace and security.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Jenča for
his briefing.
China’s position on the question of Ukraine has
been consistent and clear. We have always believed
that the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all
countries should be safeguarded, that the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations should
be respected, that the legitimate security concerns of
all parties should be taken seriously and that all efforts
conducive to the peaceful resolution of the crisis should
be supported.
At present, as the crisis in Ukraine drags on, tensions
on the ground remain high and the spillover effects are
spreading more rapidly. The Security Council should
23-26383

08/09/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

work with a greater sense of responsibility and urgency
to find ways to achieve a ceasefire and restore peace at
an early date. Priority should be given to making good
use of the mediation tools granted by the Charter to
promote the implementation of various peace initiatives
and to leverage the core role of the international
collective security mechanism.
The crisis in Ukraine has complex causes, and
there is no easy fix. It requires concerted efforts by
all parties. No matter how challenging it is, the door
of political settlement must not be closed, efforts to
promote a ceasefire and peace talks must not relent and
the process of diplomatic negotiations must not stall.
China stands ready to strengthen dialogue and
communication with all parties and will continue
to make constructive efforts to promote a political
settlement of the Ukrainian crisis.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We regret that the Albanian presidency
has followed in the disastrous footsteps of its
Western colleagues and has used rule 37 to invite the
representatives of five States — Czechia, Estonia, Italy,
Poland and Ukraine — together with the representative
of the European Union (EU), which makes six
delegations, even though it is obvious that there is no
added value in their statements, which all toe the same
general EU/NATO line. What is the point of making
today’s meeting an open debate if Albania intends to
hold one on 20 September anyway? This approach
devalues discussions in the Council.
When we saw the topic on which today’s meeting
was requested, we were pleasantly surprised by
the desire to commemorate the anniversary of the
referendums on the accession of the Donetsk People’s
Republic, the Luhansk People’s Republics and the
Zaporizhzhya and Kherson regions to Russia. Frankly,
we ourselves had been thinking that it might be worth
telling the Council about life in those new constituent
subjects of our country. However, it seems that, having
declared referendums as the topic of our meeting,
Albania and the United States have confused them with
the current elections to the regional parliament of our
new subjects, or rather they intended to use them as a
pretence for new attacks on our country, even though
Western countries who mentor others about so-called
genuine democratic values should be better informed
about various forms of the expression of popular will
than anyone. We know, however, that when Western

S/PV.9414

interests are at play, minor details such as referendums,
elections and the opinion of ordinary citizens in general
are not taken into account by our former Western
partners. That was the case in Kosovo, for example,
where instead of an expression of free will, there
was simply a declaration of independence adopted by
interim self-governing authorities, which had clearly
exceeded their remit. Back then, the same countries
that now criticize the Russian referendums argued that
Kosovo had the right to secede from the Serbian State
owing to the threat of a serious violation of the rights of
Kosovo Albanians, even though by that point nothing
had truly threatened them for a long time.
Unlike the situation with Kosovo, the rights and
the very lives of the people of Donbas, Kherson and
Zaporizhzhya were and continue to be under threat.
They are under threat from the actions of the same
criminal regime that, since 2014, has been shelling
peaceful neighbourhoods and cities in Donbas and that,
with the connivance of the United States and its allies,
has declared war on everything Russian and is actively
promoting neo-Nazi ideologies in Ukraine.
The only way to provide the residents of those
regions liberated from the Kyiv regime with protection
and certainty for their future is by establishing the clear
legal status of those territories as part of the Russian
Federation, just as, in 2014, the reunification of Crimea
with Russia was ensured even as Kyiv unequivocally
threatened that region with Ukrainization or reprisals.
From 23 to 27 September 2022, the long-awaited
expression of popular will took place, and its results
spoke for themselves. The overwhelming majority of
those who voted — 99 per cent in the Donetsk People’s
Republic, 98 per cent in the Luhansk People’s Republic,
93 per cent in Zaporizhzhya and 87 per cent in the
Kherson region — made a free and informed choice
in favour of our country. Despite the difficult security
situation and the provocations of the Kyiv regime, the
overwhelming majority of voters — from 76 per cent
in the Kherson region to 97 per cent in the Donetsk
People’s Republic — decided to go to the polls. The
referendums were held in full compliance with the
norms and principles of international law, no matter
how much our Western opponents may try to prove
otherwise. The decisions of those plebiscites reflect
the rights of peoples to self-determination, which,
according to the 1970 Declaration on Principles of
International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Cooperation among States in accordance with the

23-2638311/20

S/PV.9414

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Charter of the United Nations, may take the form of
the establishment of a sovereign and independent State,
the free association or integration with an independent
State. More than 100 international observers from
Germany, Italy, Latvia, Venezuela and other countries
who followed the process also recognized the results
as legitimate.
For the residents of those new regions, that was
not just a decision on legal status. They exercised their
inalienable right to speak their native language and
teach their children in that language and affirmed their
right to pay tribute to those who fought to liberate their
land from the Nazis on Victory Day, which is sacred
for our people, and not to those who collaborated with
them and committed horrific crimes.
The people of the Donetsk People’s Republic and
the Luhansk People’s Republic had been waiting for
that opportunity for eight years under incessant shelling
from the Kyiv regime, which since 2014, had set a course
for the physical extermination of undesirable residents
in the south-east of the country. Ukrainian authorities
openly declared Russian and Russian-speaking citizens
of Donbas non-human and specimens. In one of his
interviews, Volodymyr Zelenskyy suggested that they
get out of Ukraine and go to Russia. The residents of
the Donetsk People’s Republic, the Luhansk People’s
Republic, the Kherson region and Zaporizhzhya region
followed his cynical recommendation, returning to their
homeland and taking the lands on which their ancestors
had lived for centuries with them. The best testament to
the voluntary accession of those territories to Russia is
the active participation of their residents in the life of
the country and national processes, support for efforts
aimed at the economic and social revival of those
new Russian regions and restoring their indisputable
centuries-old Russian identity.
We recall the numerous prophecies about the
emergence of guerrilla movements in those territories
after they became part of Russia. The reality is that
the only ones unsuccessfully attempting to stir up
trouble are a handful of saboteur groups sent in from
Ukraine, which the same local residents helped to
identify and neutralize. That is a huge disappointment
for the Zelenskyy regime, which now has a chance to
find out how the people of Ukraine really feel about its
criminal policies.
Of course, the choice of former Ukrainian citizens
was also influenced by the achievements of Crimea after
12/20

08/09/2023

it was reunited with Russia. Over the past nine years,
life there has changed for the better. People live without
fear for their lives, the economy is developing and
infrastructure is being built. Throughout these years,
we have been genuinely investing in the well-being of
the region, just as we will continue contributing to the
development of Donbas and other territories that Kyiv
tried and continues to try to turn into ruins.
It is clear that other regions of Ukraine are closely
following the experiences of the Luhansk People’s
Republic, the Donetsk People’s Republic and the
Kherson and Zaporizhzhya regions. They have gotten
a good glimpse of the true face of the Kyiv regime over
the period. It is enough to mention the Human Rights
Watch report, which admitted that the Ukrainian Armed
Forces shelled certain areas of the Kharkiv region with
cluster munitions, leading to mass civilian casualties,
just as the Kyiv regime at one time fired on Bucha, near
Kyiv, and later tried to pass off civilian casualties of
the shelling as victims of Russian occupiers, laying out
the bodies on the streets of the village. It is no surprise
that, as our Russian troops approach the Kupyansk
district — the local administration admitted — nearly
a lot of its residents refuse to evacuate, preferring to
wait for our soldiers.
And in general, the majority of Ukrainians
understand full well that the threat to them comes not
from Russia’s actions, but from the criminal policies
of the Zelenskyy regime. In particular, currently that
is taking the form of the mass drafting of soldiers,
which has long been called “conscription to the grave”,
in Ukraine. It is a well-known fact that NATO is
waging a hybrid war in Ukraine with Russia to the last
Ukrainian, and now, after a failed counter-offensive,
they are already beginning to run out of Ukrainians.
Ukrainians no longer want to end up in a meat grinder,
and draft officers are trying to catch anyone they
can on the street. Information has emerged that the
European Union is ready to extradite men of military
age to Kyiv, thereby once again flouting its own
principles and values. Ukrainian men quickly realized
that, and a campaign is gaining momentum on social
networks to move refugees to Russia, where several
million Ukrainians have already found shelter. Further
comments are unnecessary.
New regions are actively integrating into our
country’s life. The Government has approved a
programme for the socioeconomic development of
these federal subjects, which includes comprehensive
23-26383

08/09/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

rebuilding of infrastructure, implementing tools to
execute federal programmes and national projects, as
well taking social support measures. We are planning
to relaunch key industries and businesses, rebuild
production facilities, create conditions for further
growth and, most important, improve the well-being of
citizens and protect their rights.
Russia will continue to consistently and
systematically address the problems that accumulated
in those regions when they were outside our country. In
2023, more than 700 kilometres of roads have already
been repaired and 177 educational institutions have
been restored. On 1 September more than 1,250 schools
began operating in the four new regions.
Liberated Mariupol, which still remembers the
brutal crimes of Ukrainian nationalists, is actively being
rebuilt and developed. The first of September saw the
grand opening of the Mariupol State University, named
after Kuindzhi, and the Pryazovskyi State Technical
University, as well as 25 schools and 26 kindergartens,
including a new modern school built from scratch for
1,100 students.
Of course, in order for those four regions to fully
integrate into the Russian legal and administrative
space, they need normal authorities that have the same
powers as in other subjects of the Russian Federation.
From today until 10 September, the single general voting
day across our country, elections of representatives to
regional parliaments and municipal bodies are taking
place across all polling stations, and the active political
stance of residents can already be seen based on the
results of early and extraterritorial voting.
However, the organizers and participants of the
electoral process have to deal with the most severe
conditions of endless shelling and provocations from
Ukraine. From 31 August to 4 September alone,
the Ukrainian Armed Forces fired at the Donetsk
metropolitan area over 120 times using 155-mm
Western-style shells, including cluster ammunitions.
As a result, 63 men and women sustained shrapnel
wounds and a 6-year-old girl died in the Kyiv region
of Donetsk. Of course, none of our Western colleagues
spoke about that today.
Despite threats to their lives, election commission
workers are being sent to villages and hamlets in areas
where fighting is taking place. In the Donetsk People’s
Republic, those field groups have travelled to the

S/PV.9414

most dangerous settlements — Horlivka, Volnovakha,
Yasynuvata and several areas of Donetsk and Makiivka.
Western countries and the Secretariat are well
aware of those place names, but they bashfully prefer
not to mention them. In our country, however, they
resonate with the pain of hundreds of civilians killed
and injured civilians, of civilians killed by Western
long-range weapons — in their own homes, in shops
and cafés, in public places — in other words, in civilian
facilities near which there are no military targets.
Responsibility for their deaths lies not only with the
Kyiv regime, but also with its Western sponsors, who
supply artillery systems and other heavy weapons to
Ukrainian nationalists. They are also making a tidy
profit from others’ misfortune and therefore are not
interested in a peaceful solution to the Ukrainian crisis.
We will address this topic again at the next Council
meeting on 12 September.
It is the inhumane crimes of the Kyiv regime, its
maniacal and hopeless desire to deprive the Russian
people of their Russian identity that became the main
reason that the residents of Donbas, the Luhansk region
and Zaporizhzhya are actively and consciously voting
for their future together with Russia. Kyiv lost them in
the same way it lost Crimea in the past, having drawn
no conclusions from its obvious mistakes. We see that it
is unable to draw such conclusions even now, bringing
its inglorious and inevitable end closer.
Some Western delegations and representatives of
the Secretariat risked mentioning yesterday’s strike
on Kostiantynivka, in the part of the Donetsk People’s
Republic controlled by the Ukrainian armed forces.
That is truly a horrific crime as a result of a rocket strike
on a busy city market, killing 16 people and injuring 32.
But we are convinced that they will soon forget
about and hush up that incident, having understood,
just as in the attack on Kramatorsk in April last year,
that they are covering up a horrific crime and terrible
provocation carried out by Ukraine. One does not
need to be a ballistics expert to see, from the available
video materials posted by users of social networks,
including Zelenskyy himself, that the missile arrived
from the north-west, where exclusively Ukrainian
positions are located. After realizing that, the Western
media that circulated the video even hastily began to
edit the reflection of the rocket on the roof of a parked
car, which shows the direction of arrival, but it was
already too late and the truth came out. This is another

23-2638313/20

S/PV.9414

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

horrific lie that Western media is using to cover up yet
another Ukrainian provocation, which was traditionally
clumsily organized before the visit of another highranking official, in this case Antony Blinken. We have
no doubt that this was carried out in order to provide
the dying regime with a new dose of financing and
weapons. This is the same pattern behind the vile
provocation in Bucha in April 2022, and there will
undoubtedly be further Goebbels-style performances
in future.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Miroslav Jenča for the update on
developments in Ukraine. I also welcome the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to this meeting.
Brazil has expressed its concern about the
organization of regional elections in Donetsk, Luhansk,
Kherson and Zaporizhzhya. Such actions raise tensions
and further undermine the prospects for ending the
conflict and finding lasting peace.
We remain convinced that the dynamics on the
battlefield will not bring a solution to this war, let alone
lasting peace and stability. That is why Brazil insists
on its call for the de-escalation of hostilities, as a first
step, and for the establishment of negotiations, either
directly or through the other peaceful means described
in Article 33 of the Charter of the United Nations.
Those means have provided fair, effective and lasting
solutions in several other international disputes. There
is no reason they should not be used in this conflict.
Only a political solution that takes into account
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and the legitimate security concerns
of all parties will bring lasting peace. Any solution
must also ensure full respect for the civil and political
rights of local populations, including ethnic and
linguistic minorities.
Last, but not least, I note that the substantial
and negative effects of this war continue to be felt
in many parts of the world, especially developing
countries. Economic growth is hampered, development
compromised and food security threatened. We are still
hopeful that a revised Black Sea Grain Initiative will
be possible and that diplomacy will be given a chance
once more.
Brazil’s message is clear — all actions that make
peace ever more elusive must stop. Negotiations must
be pursued, even if politically very difficult, and no
14/20

08/09/2023

one doubts that they will be complex and difficult. We
should channel our efforts towards approaches that
bring us closer to ending the conflict and the suffering
and loss it entails.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Miroslav Jenča for
his briefing.
In the current context of intensifying fighting along
various fronts of the war in Ukraine, the decision to
organize local and municipal elections in the Donetsk,
Luhansk, Zaporizhzhya and Kherson territories on
10 September 2023 is not likely to ease tensions, much
less boost prospects for an end to the war.
After 18 months of deadly fighting and destruction,
the efforts of the warring parties and the international
community must focus on de-escalation in order to put
an end to the suffering of the people on the ground and
to the war’s repercussions, the shockwaves of which are
affecting several countries around the world. My country
reaffirms its commitment to respect for the territorial
integrity of every State and underscores the importance
of the parties adhering to the General Assembly
resolution of 12 October 2022 (resolution ES-11/4).
We once again call on the parties to prioritize
dialogue and negotiations to end the war and achieve
peaceful coexistence. In that regard, it is imperative for
the warring parties to refrain from taking any position
or action likely to exacerbate tensions and fuel the
escalation of violence. My country stresses that the
Charter of the United Nations, which is the glue of our
very coexistence, must remain the guiding light for all
parties vis-à-vis the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of every member of the international community. We
will also continue to emphasize the urgent need for
unimpeded access to humanitarian aid for populations in
need, while at the same time encouraging all initiatives
aimed at bringing the parties to the negotiating table to
explore ways out of the conflict, which has lasted for
far too long.
The President: I shall now make a further statement
in my capacity as the representative of Albania.
I started my statement in my national capacity
earlier today by mentioning the discrepancy between
the Russian narrative and reality. We heard more of
the same today. The Russian delegation tried to draw
a parallel between what happened in the Republic of
Kosova and what is happening in parts of the territories
23-26383

08/09/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

in Ukraine. Nothing could be less accurate and farther
from the truth. Kosova cannot and will not be used as a
fig leaf or camouflage for Russia’s military aggression
against Ukraine and its attempts at annexation.
Everyone knows that Kosova became independent after
a bloody war and a long international peace process and
talks, which Russia was also part of.
The International Court of Justice was asked
whether the declaration of independence of the Republic
of Kosova was in line with the international law — and
it responded. I wish that Russia confirmed the Court’s
rulings in the very same way. There was one issued in
March 2022 ordering Russia to stop the war, which, we
hope, Russia will abide by. I have said it so many times,
and I will be brief in repeating it: it is important that
Kosova and Serbia do not fight. They meet, they talk
and are bound by a process of dialogue — not an easy
one, but a real and substantial one — to solve pending
issues and march towards their common future in peace
and cooperation.
As to the comments regarding rule 37, I want to
assure our Russian colleagues that the presidency
is committed to maintaining the orderly conduct of
business of the Council. The presidency, in full respect
of the provisional rules of procedure, presidential
note S/2017/507 and its past practices, and in prior
consultation with the members of the Council, has
accepted the request for non-members of the Council to
participate in this meeting.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I note the continued
occupation by Putin’s envoy of the permanent seat of
the Soviet Union. On Wednesday, his country added yet
another horrific crime to the endless list of atrocities
that one day will bring the representatives of Putin’s
regime, including those in this Chamber, to the docket
of an international tribunal. I thank those Security
Council members that have this week expressed
their condemnation of and condolences over Russia’s
terrorist attack on civilian facilities — a local market,
stores and a pharmacy — in the city of Kostiantynivka,
in the Donetsk region. At least 16 people were killed,
including a child, and 37 wounded as a result of that
attack. Needless to say, they were civilians — another
mass murder committed by Russians, as revenge for the
failures of their troops on the battlefield.

S/PV.9414

The Ukrainian forces continue to undermine the
Russian grip on the occupied territories and will persist
in doing so until all sovereign territories of my country
are liberated. Russia’s desperate attempt to legitimize
its illegal occupation of the Ukrainian territories by
organizing an outright farce of an election serve only
as proof that Russia realizes the inevitability of its
defeat. One could hardly qualify as anything other than
fake the elections to Russian puppet structures in the
temporarily occupied parts of Ukraine, in Donetsk,
Luhansk, Kherson, Zaporizhzhya, the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, that
are taking place from 8 to 10 September. As terrorists
force hostages to read a prepared text on camera,
Russia makes the civilian population that has stayed
in the occupied territories participate in a staged free
expression of their will.
It is crucial to remember that Russia has resorted to
a mockery of free will since the very beginning of its
aggression against Ukraine, in 2014. On 16 March 2014,
Russia held a so-called referendum in the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol that was
not authorized by Ukraine. The General Assembly
responded to that crime by adopting a resolution
on the territorial integrity of Ukraine (General
Assembly resolution 68/262). In that resolution, the
Assembly underscored that the referendum held in
the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of
Sevastopol on 16 March 2014, having no validity,
cannot form the basis for any alteration of the status of
the Autonomous Republic of Crimea or of the city of
Sevastopol. In September 2022, Russia conducted other
sham referendums in parts of the Donetsk, Luhansk,
Kherson and Zaporizhzhya regions. In response, on
12 October 2022, the General Assembly adopted, by
an absolute majority of 143 votes in favour to 5 votes
against, a resolution on the territorial integrity of
Ukraine and upholding the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations (resolution ES-11/4).
The General Assembly clearly declared that the
unlawful actions of the Russian Federation with regard
to the illegal so-called referendums held from 23 to
27 September 2022 in parts of the Donetsk, Kherson,
Luhansk and Zaporizhzhya regions of Ukraine that,
in part, are or have been under the temporary military
control of the Russian Federation, and the subsequent
attempted illegal annexation of these regions, have no
validity under international law and do not form the

23-2638315/20

S/PV.9414

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

basis for any alteration of the status of these regions
of Ukraine.
Let me recall that the demand by the General
Assembly has yet to be met by Russia, namely, the
demand that:
“the Russian Federation immediately and
unconditionally reverse its decisions of 21 February
and 29 September 2022 related to the status of
certain areas of the Donetsk, Kherson, Luhansk
and Zaporizhzhia regions of Ukraine, as they are a
violation of the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of Ukraine and inconsistent with the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, and immediately,
completely and unconditionally withdraw all of
its military forces from the territory of Ukraine
within its internationally recognized borders.”
(ibid., para. 5)
We firmly reject and strongly condemn the
illegal actions of the Russian occupation forces in the
temporarily occupied parts of the territories of the
Donetsk, Luhansk, Zaporizhzhya and Kherson regions,
the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city
of Sevastopol.
We do not, and we will never, recognize those
illegal actions and emphasize that their results will be
null and void and cannot produce legal effects under
international law. Likewise, any activity of illegally
created so-called administrations and local authorities
in the temporarily occupied areas of Ukraine will have
no legal effect and will not alter the internationally
recognized status of those areas as integral parts of the
sovereign territory of Ukraine.
We call on the international community to condemn
the use of the Russian election system on the territory of
another State. We also urge the international community
not to recognize the so-called results of those fake
elections, the legitimacy of so-called authorities and
officials appointed by the occupying Power under the
guise of local representatives, or the legitimacy of any
decisions made by the occupying Power on behalf of
those authorities.
All those who are involved in holding those fake
elections will bear responsibility. The competent
authorities of Ukraine are already taking measures to
track them down and bring them to justice. We are also
convinced that the international community should
respond to that deliberate violation of international law
16/20

08/09/2023

and the Charter of the United Nations by strengthening
pressure on the aggressor, in particular by imposing
tough new sanctions.
Let me reiterate that illegal voting in the occupied
territories of Ukraine poses an existential threat to the
United Nations and its Charter. All those illegal actions
are putting global peace and security at risk. If we do
not condemn the actions of the Russian Federation
today, then we condone similar blatant attacks on any
and all countries tomorrow. Protecting the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of all States Members of the
United Nations, regardless of their size and power, is
our collective duty and a core principle of the United
Nations Charter.
As I said on 12 October 2022, there were only four
countries that voted against the United Nations Charter,
while 143 firmly stood in its defence and in support of
Ukraine’s territorial integrity, within its internationally
recognized borders. Today in the Chamber, not a single
country in the Security Council has aligned itself with
yet another violation of the United Nations Charter by
the Russian Federation. Russia is alone and isolated.
I would like to express our gratitude, in particular
for the stated position on the planned so-called elections,
to the delegations of Albania, the United States, France,
Ecuador, Ghana, Malta, Switzerland, Japan, the United
Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom, Brazil and Gabon.
Enough is enough. Every day, if not every hour,
Russia proves that those actions are completely
incompatible with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter, let alone with the criteria of
membership in the United Nations and the Security
Council in particular.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Tammsaar (Estonia): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the three Baltic States — Latvia,
Lithuania and my own country, Estonia.
We also align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
briefing. I would also like to thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Miroslav Jenča for his valuable insights and
principled position.
The so-called elections held by Russia in the
illegally occupied territories of Ukraine are yet another
23-26383

08/09/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

grave violation of the Charter of the United Nations
and the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine. Let me remind the Council that,
last year, the General Assembly overwhelmingly
condemned Russia’s attempted illegal annexation of
Ukrainian regions.
Whether Russia likes it or not, the Donetsk,
Kherson, Luhansk and Zaporizhzhya regions, along
with Crimea and Sevastopol, are and will remain an
integral part of Ukraine. By organizing elections
on Ukrainian territory, Russia makes a shameless
mockery of its position as a permanent member of the
Security Council.
The Kremlin is following a playbook it has used
in other occupied territories. They threaten and
intimidate civilians to vote in sham elections in the
hope of legitimizing their occupation and suppressing
Ukrainian resistance. Those elections organized by the
occupying Power violate international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, including the
Geneva Conventions.
All the territories in which so-called elections are
being conducted have witnessed Russian war crimes.
Members must ask themselves how they would vote in
such elections if their family members had been held at
gunpoint and their homes occupied by Russian armed
forces or mercenaries with criminal track records,
while also witnessing new atrocities on a daily basis.
On Wednesday, at least 16 innocent civilians were
brutally killed and many more wounded by the Russian
shelling of a market in Kostiantynivka, a town in
Donetsk oblast, just 30 kilometres from the front line.
Russia aims to portray the so-called elections as
a triumph of democracy in occupied territories. In
reality, there is nothing more undemocratic. The strict
occupation regime is upheld by the Russian military
and Russian special services. Federal Security Service
officers placed in leadership positions organize the
occupied territories’ forced integration into Russia,
according to Moscow’s instructions.
The people in the Russian-occupied areas of Ukraine
are experiencing extrajudicial killings, large-scale
repression, deportation and severe regression.
Ukrainians are being forcibly Russified and stripped of
local resources — a Russian tactic that the Baltic States
know all too well. Credible reports, including by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
found evidence of widespread violations of the right to

S/PV.9414

freedom of opinion and to peaceful assembly and of
new sanctions for criticizing the Russian military.
In conclusion, Ukrainians living in the occupied
territories have staunchly continued to resist the
occupying forces or are looking for ways to leave.
I believe it is our obligation to support and speak up
for them. We will never recognize the holding of those
sham elections nor their results, and we will ensure
that those involved, including the Russian criminal
leadership, are held accountable.
We once again call upon Russia to immediately,
completely and unconditionally withdraw all of its
troops and military equipment from the entire territory
of Ukraine, within its internationally recognized
borders. That is indeed the fastest and only viable route
to lasting peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Czechia.
Mr. Kulhánek (Czechia): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of Slovakia and my
own country, Czechia.
We fully align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the European Union.
The end of this month will mark the sad anniversary
of the referendums orchestrated by the Russian
occupation authorities in the territories of Ukraine. The
international community, with only one conspicuous
exception, overwhelmingly rejects their legitimacy.
Those sham referendums were immediately followed
by Russia’s announcement of the annexation of the
Donetsk, Luhansk, Zaporizhzhya and Kherson regions.
This coming weekend, the Russian occupation
Administration will take yet another illegal step in a
similar vein. Under the guise of Russian municipal
elections, the occupation authorities plan to organize
so-called elections. They are actually already under
way. Their underlying objective is quite clear — to
lend an aura of legitimacy to the military occupation of
Ukraine’s sovereign territories.
The annexed parts of the four regions and Crimea
are an integral part of Ukraine and are illegally
occupied by the Russian invading forces. Such an act
of annexation cannot be justified by manipulated votes
conducted under the watchful eye and gun barrels of
Russian soldiers. Be it through holding a referendum
on accession or organizing the so-called elections in

23-2638317/20

S/PV.9414

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

occupied territories, the Russian Federation is once
again flagrantly trampling on the basic principles of
international law.
Both Czechia and Slovakia categorically condemn
the annexation and do not recognize its legitimacy.
The same applies to the staging of so-called elections
in the occupied territories of Ukraine, as they violate
international law.
We reiterate our full support for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders. We call on Russia once again to
immediately stop its aggression against Ukraine and
to withdraw its troops from the territory of Ukraine
within its internationally recognized borders.
We will continue to support Ukraine and its citizens
in their just defence against Russia’s aggression for as
long as it takes. We have no doubt that, notwithstanding
the illegal actions undertaken by Russia, Ukraine will
succeed in liberating its entire territory, as it did last
year in the Kherson region merely weeks after the
sham referendums.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Skoog.
Mr. Skoog: I have the honour to speak on behalf of
the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
candidate countries North Macedonia, Montenegro,
Albania, Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and
Bosnia and Herzegovina; and the European Free
Trade Association country Liechtenstein, member
of the European Economic Area; as well as Andorra,
Monaco and San Marino, all align themselves with
this statement.
I thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to
speak to the Security Council today. Like everyone
else, I also want to thank Mr. Miroslav Jenča for his
presentation. Let me say, too, that we pay tribute to the
United Nations country team in Ukraine, a contingent
of which visited New York this week, for its enormous
efforts on the ground to alleviate the plight of the
Ukrainian people.
Today I want to emphasize two points: first, that
Russia’s illegitimate so-called elections in territories
of Ukraine under temporarily military occupation hold
no value under international law and that they should
not and will not be recognized; and secondly, the dire
human rights situation in those territories.
18/20

08/09/2023

Russia has decided to go ahead with its so-called
elections in the territories of Ukraine that it has
temporarily militarily occupied. That is yet another
manifest violation of international law and a futile
attempt by Russia to legitimize its illegal military
control and attempted annexation of parts of Ukraine’s
Donetsk, Luhansk, Zaporizhzhya and Kherson regions
and the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city
of Sevastopol. Russia has no legitimate basis for any
such action on the territory of Ukraine. By wilfully
undermining the world order based on international law
and violating the fundamental rights of Ukraine to its
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, as
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, Russia
is putting global peace and security at risk, as many
speakers have recognized today.
A little less than a year ago, the General Assembly
overwhelmingly voted to condemn Russia’s illegal
annexation of Ukraine’s territories (see A/ES-11/
PV.14). With 143 votes in favour and only five against,
the General Assembly called upon States, international
organizations and United Nations agencies to not
recognize any alteration by Russia of the status of
those territories of Ukraine and demanded that Russia
completely and unconditionally withdraw all of its
military forces from Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders. Russia does not just block the
Council from meaningful action — it is also in defiance
of the General Assembly.
Russia, its political leadership and all those involved
in organizing the illegitimate so-called elections will
face consequences for those illegal actions.
The illegal so-called elections in Ukraine are
taking place amid Russia’s forced and illegal granting
of passports, including to children, and widespread and
systematic human rights violations in Ukraine’s occupied
territories. International monitoring mechanisms,
including the United Nations human rights monitoring
mission in Ukraine and the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine, have concluded
that Russia has committed a wide range of violations
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law in Ukraine. Those violations include
indiscriminate attacks, as well as intentional attacks
against civilians and civilian objects; widespread and
systematic summary executions, torture, ill-treatment
and unlawful confinement; rape and other forms of
sexual and gender-based violence; and forced transfer
and deportation, including of children.
23-26383

08/09/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

In the past months, Russia has once again escalated
its attacks on civilian objects, including on facilities for
the export of Ukrainian grain. Earlier this week, Russia
bombed a crowded market in the Donetsk region,
killing 16 people, including a child, and injuring
dozens of others. Intentional attacks against civilians
are war crimes. All commanders, perpetrators and
accomplices of those atrocities will be held to account.
The EU remains firmly committed to ensuring that
Russia is held fully accountable for its aggression
against Ukraine.
Furthermore, the report of the Secretary-General on
the situation of children in armed conflict (S/2023/363)
lists the Russian army and affiliated armed groups as
perpetrators of grave violations against children. Those
violations include the killing and maiming of Ukrainian
children, mostly by air strikes, and attacks on schools
and hospitals.
I express the EU’s full support for the work of the
United Nations to monitor and report on human rights
violations and abuses and to support efforts toward
accountability. In that regard, we welcome the recent
visit by the Special Rapporteur on torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
to Ukraine. We urge Russia to uphold international
human rights and humanitarian law. It must enable full,
safe and unhindered humanitarian access through the
front lines and stop willingly withholding aid from
people in need in Ukraine’s occupied territories.
We remain unwavering in our support for Ukraine
and its sovereignty and territorial integrity. Russia
must immediately, completely and unconditionally
withdraw all of its troops and military equipment from
the entire territory of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders. Ukraine is exercising its inherent
right to defend itself and to regain full control of its
territory. Crimea, Kherson, Zaporizhzhya Donetsk
and Luhansk are Ukraine. We call on all States and
international organizations to unequivocally reject the
illegal elections.
In a couple of days, world leaders will descend on
New York, where they will discuss and recommit to the
Sustainable Development Goals. As the rest of the world
renews those commitments to assist every country in
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, Russia’s
unlawful military assault on Ukraine is not only setting
back the ambitions of the Ukrainian population but is

S/PV.9414

also imperilling the fundamental goals of many people
in all corners of the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Massari (Italy): Italy fully aligns itself with the
statement just delivered by the observer of the European
Union and would like to add some considerations in its
national capacity.
Far from being an exercise of democracy and selfdetermination, the illegitimate so-called elections
organized by Russia in the temporarily occupied
territories of Ukraine are taking place amid widespread
and systematic human rights abuses and intimidation.
It is crystal clear that they represent only an attempt
to pretend to uphold democratic practice while
imposing with coercion and military force Russia’s
imperialistic plans.
Let me be clear: Italy will never recognize the
fabricated results of the illegitimate elections organized
by Russia in the temporarily occupied territories of
Ukraine, just as Italy did not and will never recognize
the illegal attempted annexation of all the Ukrainian
territories temporarily occupied by Russia. We call on all
States to do the same, as we see it not as a discretionary
choice for States but rather as our common obligation
under international law.
Italy condemns, in the strongest possible way,
Russia’s continuous brutal attacks targeting civilian
infrastructure and cities across Ukraine, as well as
Russia’s complete disregard for the call from the entire
membership to put an end to its full-scale, unprovoked
and illegal invasion of Ukraine. There must be no
impunity for those responsible for war crimes and
other atrocities. Russia will ultimately have to be held
accountable for the heavy damages caused by its war
of aggression.
While thanking the United Nations country team
for its extensive work on the ground and for having
shared its very important insights during its visit to
New York this past week, Italy fully supports all the
humanitarian actors who are working tirelessly to
ensure the protection of the population and that vital
assistance is within reach. Rapid, safe and unhindered
access to humanitarian assistance for those in need in
Ukraine must be guaranteed.
Italy is committed to the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine within its

23-2638319/20

S/PV.9414

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

internationally recognized borders. Support for Ukraine
will be one of the key priorities of our Group of Seven
presidency next year and we are determined to continue
doing so for as long as necessary, aiming to reach a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace. We will concentrate
on the reconstruction of Ukraine, including by hosting
the Ukraine Recovery Conference in Italy in 2025. We
will lay the foundations for a prosperous, independent
Ukraine within our common European family.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
Albania for convening today’s meeting and for giving
Poland the opportunity to actively participate in it.
I also thank Assistant Secretary-General Miroslav
Jenča for his very informative briefing on the current
situation in Ukraine.
We are meeting at an important moment. On one
the hand, Member States have come up with various
diplomatic initiatives aimed at finding a path to a
just peace in Ukraine. Poland belongs to that group.
Recently, together with the representatives of more than
40 countries, we took part in a summit hosted by Saudi
Arabia in Jeddah, during which we discussed the peace
formula proposed by President Zelenskyy. On the other
hand, contrary to that and other Member States’ efforts,
the aggressive party in the ongoing war, which is the
Russian Federation, strives to achieve the opposite. It is
creating an aggressive fait accompli situation, standing
in opposition to the Charter of the United Nations.
Russia’s acts are of a dual nature: political and
military. The political acts are the plans to hold sham
local elections as a follow-up to the sham referendums
held almost exactly 12 months ago in the temporarily
and partially controlled territories of Ukraine. The
Kremlin is undertaking those actions in spite the
fact that 143 Member States of our Organization
clearly voiced their indignation with Russia’s pseudodemocratic practices in General Assembly resolution
ES-11/4, entitled “Territorial integrity of Ukraine:
defending the principles of the Charter of the United

20/20

08/09/2023

Nations”, which has been referred to today several
times. That resolution specifically calls for
“all States, international organizations and United
Nations specialized agencies not to recognize any
alteration by the Russian Federation of the status
of any or all of the Donetsk, Kherson, Luhansk or
Zaporizhzhia regions of Ukraine, and to refrain
from any action or dealing that might be interpreted
as recognizing any such altered status” (General
Assembly resolution ES-11/4, paragraph 4).
As we can clearly see, today that plea remains as
timely and as wholly appropriate as it was one year
ago. Poland cannot and will not accept the violations
against Ukraine’s territorial integrity — or against
any other Member State. We believe such acts to be
explicitly illegal.
While trying to create new political faits accomplis
with a view to legitimizing its occupation in the eyes
of the international community, Russia continues its
brutal military aggression against civilians in many
Ukrainian towns and villages. One of the latest such
examples was its cruel attack earlier this week on a
crowded market in Kostyantynivka. The Kremlin also
continues to terrorize the global food supply through its
continuing attacks against Ukraine’s grain storage and
port facilities.
In the context of the approaching high-level week
of the seventy-eighth session of the General Assembly,
the behaviour by Russia that I have just described
constitutes a fundamental challenge for the entire
United Nations. While we strive to maintain and
restore international peace and security, we are forced
to deal with a country — a permanent member of the
Security Council — that continues to repeatedly break
the most fundamental principles of international law.
Its illegal actions have negative spillover effects for the
whole international community. Consequently, we must
defend the Charter, including the overarching principle
of territorial integrity being discussed today. That is
Poland’s main message of peace for the upcoming highlevel week.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

23-26383
