S/2016/599

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 July 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on his mission of good
offices in Cyprus
I. Introduction
1.
The present report on my mission of good offices in Cyprus covers
developments from 23 December 2015 to 30 June 2016. It focuses on the record of
activities carried out by my good offices mission under the leadership of my Special
Adviser, Espen Barth Eide, regarding the fully fledged negotiations between the
Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot leaders. In its resolution 2263 (2016), the
Security Council welcomed the progress of the leaders-led negotiations so far and
the ongoing efforts to reach a comprehensive and durable set tlement, and it
encouraged the sides to grasp the current opportunity with determination to secure a
comprehensive settlement.

II. Background
2.
In my previous report (S/2016/15), I noted that the sides had engaged in the
negotiations with a problem-solving approach and that their leaders had taken
positive steps toward translating their common vision of a united Cyprus into
concrete progress and strategic compromises on a number of key issues. At the same
time, I also recognized that further work remained.
3.
During the reporting period, the Greek Cypriot leader, Nicos Anastasiades, and
the Turkish Cypriot leader, Mustafa Akıncı, continued to pursue their efforts to
achieve a mutually acceptable and sustainable comprehensive settlement on the
basis of relevant Security Council resolutions as well as the Joint Declaration
adopted by the sides on 11 February 2014. Since May 2015, when the current round
of talks between the two leaders began, Mr. Anastasiades, a nd Mr. Akıncı have
systematically engaged in this leader-led process and have reiterated their resolve
and genuine desire to reach a solution to the Cyprus problem, underscoring on many
occasions the economic benefits and wider opportunities that a viable and
sustainable solution would bring to both communities.
4.
For the first time, I met Mr. Akıncı and Mr. Anastasiades together on
21 January 2016, on the margins of the annual meeting of the World Economic
Forum, in Davos, Switzerland. On that occasion, I held a very comprehensive
discussion with them on the state of play in the talks. I commended them for their
efforts and leadership. I recognized that significant progress had been made but also
16-11372 (E)

130716

*1611372*

S/2016/599

that a number of sensitive and difficult issues remained. I therefore encouraged
them to continue to work tirelessly towards finding a comprehensive solution to the
Cyprus issue as soon as possible, for the benefit of all Cypriots.

III. Status of the process
5.
Since my previous report, in January 2016, the two leaders have maintained a
steadfast commitment to the process. They have continued to engage in person in
extensive discussions on a wide range of issues across the chapters under
negotiation. During the reporting period, they met on average twice a mo nth,
holding a total of 14 meetings, while their negotiators met as many as three times
per week, for a total of more than 40 meetings over the past six months. More
importantly, the pace and regularity of the meetings have continued to be
accompanied by a serious and determined effort to move the process forward, even
if, at times, the issues on the table proved to be complex and challenging.
6.
As noted in my previous report, the sides have focused mostly on four of the
six chapters under negotiation, namely, governance and power-sharing, property,
economy and European Union matters. Through their sustained engagement, the
leaders have achieved further progress on a range of issues, particularly those
related to governance and power-sharing, including citizenship and property. They
also continued to conduct extensive negotiations on the economy chapter and
maintained their common vision to negotiate a settlement that would be in line with
European Union principles, translating this into various understandin gs and
convergences.
7.
In a joint statement issued on 15 May 2016 to mark the first anniversary of
their talks, the leaders expressed their satisfaction with the essential progress that
had been achieved during a year of intensive negotiations. They reit erated that,
although there were still difficulties and differences, they were determined to show
the necessary will and courage to overcome outstanding issues. Importantly, the
leaders underlined their commitment to intensify their efforts in the coming m onths
with the aim of reaching a comprehensive settlement agreement in 2016.
8.
Building on that statement, the leaders issued another statement on 8 June in
which they announced that they had agreed to intensify the negotiations and to start
meeting twice a week, beginning 17 June 2016, to work to resolve outstanding
issues in an agreed structured manner.
9.
During the first two meetings of the intensified phase, held on 17 and 23 June,
the leaders worked thoroughly on topics related to the governance an d powersharing chapter. In particular, building on the framework set out in the Joint
Declaration of 11 February 2014, as well as on work conducted by their negotiators
over the past months, they reached additional convergences on the list of federal
competences and further clarifications on issues related to treaty -making powers
and coordination and cooperation between the future federal Government and the
constituent States.
10. In the course of the reporting period, the leaders, their respective negotia tors
and teams of experts worked particularly intensively on the property chapter. Taking
into consideration the framework announced on 27 July 2015, in which the leaders
had agreed that the individual’s right to property would be respected and that there

2/8

16-11372

S/2016/599

would be different alternatives for the regulation of the exercise of that right, the
sides initially held the negotiations on property on the basis of their respective
position papers and materials. Following detailed, serious and, at times, difficult
discussions, they were able to formulate a joint paper on property. While
divergences remain and are recorded in the joint paper, it is important to note that
this is the first time in the talks that the sides negotiate this critical chapter on the
basis of a joint document. The sides have focused in particular on such issues as the
categories of affected properties, definitions, criteria, and the composition and
functioning of the Property Commission, which will be mandated to resolve
property claims. Notwithstanding the rich discussions and important understandings
reached on this chapter, further work will be needed in the crucial weeks ahead to
iron out the remaining divergences. On 8 June, the leaders included the issue of
property among those to be worked on during the forthcoming period of intensified
negotiations.
11. In the past, the sides had reiterated that the issue of security and guarantees
would be discussed at a later stage in the process, owing to its international
dimension. Nevertheless, during the first months of the current round of talks in
2015, the sides held initial discussions on internal aspects of security, namely,
policing arrangements for a united federal Cyprus. Some divergences on this topic
remain and, on 8 June, the leaders agreed to include it as one of the issues to be
addressed during their period of intensified negotiations.
12. In late January 2016, the leaders agreed to embark on four technical
workstreams in support of the negotiations: work to better prepare the future
Turkish Cypriot Constituent State for the implementation of the European Union
acquis upon entry into force of the settlement agreement, work with the
international financial institutions, drafting of the constitution and the federal laws
and planning for implementation. While work on the first two is progressing,
drafting of the constitution and planning for implementation have yet to begin in
earnest.
13. A significant feature of the current round of talks has been the recognition by
the leaders of the importance of having the principles and values upon which the
European Union is founded upheld and embedded in the comprehensive settlement,
whilst respecting its bizonal and bicommunal character.
14. During the reporting period, increasing technical support has been provided by
the European Union under the auspices of the United Nations. The Bicommunal Ad
Hoc Committee on European Union Preparation, which was set up during the
previous reporting period, continued to channel activities pertaining to the
implementation of the European Union acquis in the future Turkish Cypriot
constituent State.
15. On 4 February 2016, the two negotiators, Andreas Mavroyiannis and Özdil
Nami, carried out an unprecedented joint visit to the European Commission
headquarters in Brussels in order to request an intensification of the European
Union technical assistance provided within the framework of the activities carried
out by the Bicommunal Ad Hoc Committee. In a clear expression of support and
encouragement, the European Commission President, Jean-Claude Juncker, met the
negotiators jointly during their visit.

16-11372

3/8

S/2016/599

16. During the reporting period, 13 technical workshops on European Union
matters were held under the auspices of the United Nations. They were led by
visiting teams of experts from the European Commission, in coordination with the
Personal Representative of the President of the European Commission and his team,
who are based at the Office of the Special Adviser on Cyprus. The workshops were
agreed on and prepared jointly with the Bicommunal Ad Hoc Committee. They
covered a broad range of issues, including food safety and animal and plant health,
the introduction of the euro, the free movement of goods, public procurement, the
common agricultural policy, fundamental rights, data protection, banking
supervision, federal education and training systems, qualifications, the free
movement of workers, social policy and employment.
17. In recent months, expert groups have also proliferated in relation to the
economic aspects of the talks. The working group on economy has appointed a
number of sub-bodies, including expert groups on value added tax, revenue
allocation, central bank issues, the euro roll-out and deposit insurance. These groups
and subgroups have been meeting with increasing regularity in the past months. In
addition, regular discussions about the financing of a settlement have been held by
expert groups as well as at the leaders’ and negotiators’ levels.
18. During the reporting period, international financial institutio ns, including the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, engaged in an accelerated
programme of work in support of the two sides carried out under the auspices of the
United Nations. This engagement stemmed from the leaders’ request to my Special
Adviser to seek expert technical assistance with the aim of supporting the two
communities in finding sustainable solutions to economic issues in a post -settlement
Cyprus, as noted in my previous report. European Union bodies are also supporting
the process in this area, with regular coordination and support in relation to the
financial aspects of the European Union acquis and euro zone requirements
provided by European Commission and European Central Bank experts.
19. The work of the international financial institutions has been twofold: first, to
assist the two sides in how best to structure a post-settlement unified economy and
fiscal federal system and, second, to look into economic impacts and opportunities,
including the costing of a property settlement and financing options and tools. It
will be important for the sides to balance, with the assistance of the international
financial institutions, economic discipline with politically palatable provisions.
Several policy decisions in this area remain outstanding. In order to coordinate this
wide-ranging work, my Special Adviser and his team chair regular detailed
discussions via videoconference with the relevant institutions providing support to
the talks.
20. Following the establishment in 2015 of a legal expert group on the drafting of
federal laws for a post-settlement Cyprus, the sides agreed to set up additional
working groups on specific legal matters. These relate to the drafting of a federal
constitution, the functioning of the federal and constituent State judiciary and the
international treaty obligations of a united Cyprus. While this development is
positive, some working groups have not commenced their activities.
21. As a demonstration of their commitment to engage jointly with the public and
civil society, the leaders have made during the reporting period several joint public
appearances at events and social gatherings, including by addressing an event
organized by the Cyprus Academic Dialogue on 13 June. For the first time, the two

4/8

16-11372

S/2016/599

leaders also appeared jointly on stage at the annual meeting of the World Economic
Forum held in Davos, in January, outlining their vision for a united Cyprus.
22. Long-established technical committees, as well as those formed more recently
by the leaders, have continued to meet and to work on various initiatives. For
example, the Technical Committee on Education, established in November 2015,
organized a series of events, including an open day held on 2 June 2016 to mark the
International Children’s Day, which brought together more than 100 school children
from across the divide and was attended by the leaders. In addition, a bicommunal
concert of classical music performed by young musicians from both communities
was organized on 5 May under the auspices of the Committee on Culture. The
spouses of the leaders of both communities attended the event.
23. The Committee on Gender Equality, established by the leaders in May 2015,
met on various occasions and was involved in a series of events organized to raise
awareness of the importance of the involvement of women in the peace process, on
the basis of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). The Committee has also been
working to provide input on issues that would need to be borne in mind by the sides
from a gender perspective in the framework of the settlement.
24. My Special Adviser has continued frequent contacts with international partners
and relevant regional players, including the three guarantor powers, Greece, Turkey
and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. He held meetings
with various senior officials at the political level, both in Cyprus and on the
sidelines of a number of international events. Following his official visit to Turkey
in December 2015, he continued with official visits to Gree ce and to the United
Kingdom in January 2016, and to France in April 2016. In his discussions with
international interlocutors, my Special Adviser has consistently emphasized the
importance of sustained international support to the negotiations.
25. Acknowledging the positive momentum surrounding the negotiations, and in
support of the process, I have consistently kept the resolution of the Cyprus
question high on the agenda of the United Nations, as well as on the agenda of key
regional and international leaders. I have held discussions on the Cyprus question
with various Heads of State and senior officials, including from Turkey, Greece and
the United States of America.

IV. Observations
26. The talks between the Greek Cypriot leader and the Turkish Cypriot leader
have now been ongoing for more than a year. During that time, the leaders have
maintained their commitment to the process, as demonstrated by their personal
engagement and by the steady pace at which the negotiations have been proceeding
at all levels.
27. I welcome the leaders’ statement of 15 May 2016 in which they underlined
their commitment to intensify their efforts in the coming months with the aim of
reaching a comprehensive settlement agreement in 2016.
28. I am encouraged by the determination and political will that have been
displayed by the leaders, as well as the substantial efforts of their negotiators and
negotiating teams, in the course of the reporting period. The lead ers have repeatedly
shown that, while each negotiates in the interests of his own community, they are

16-11372

5/8

S/2016/599

also able to take into consideration the concerns of the other community in order to
reach a settlement that meets the best interests of all citizens of a future, united
Cyprus.
29. While the ability and willingness of the leaders to reach mutual understandings
have been a positive development, it has also proved difficult at times to translate
such understandings into more detailed provisions and convergen ces on specific
issues. I am therefore encouraged by the decision of the leaders to intensify their
ongoing direct negotiations, as well as to continue to provide detailed guidance to
their negotiators, in order to actively find solutions to long -standing divergences.
30. Among the challenges associated with the peace process are the necessary
preparations for the implementation of a settlement, particularly in areas such as
preparations for the extension of the euro currency to the future Turkish Cypriot
constituent State and, more broadly, for the implementation of the European Union
acquis. I welcome the important work carried out in the framework of the
Bicommunal Ad Hoc Committee on European Union Preparation and note the
crucial support provided in that respect by the European Commission. I urge the
sides to maintain their efforts to ensure that all necessary measures are taken in a
timely manner to make a smooth and successful transition possible following the
settlement agreement.
31. I note positively the commitment of the international financial institutions and
relevant European Union bodies to support the sides on economic aspects of the
talks. The close cooperation among the international financial institutions under the
auspices of my good offices has been commendable. Technical assistance and
support for the negotiations by the European Commission, the European Central
Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank will now need to be
utilized by the leaders and negotiating teams to design jointly an economically
sustainable agreement that maximizes an expected peace dividend. An important
and sensitive period lies ahead, as the institutions working in support of my team in
Cyprus complete diagnostic work on the current economic situation in both
communities, and conclusions and policy recommendations are formulated and
communicated to the two leaders and their teams.
32. Additionally, although both sides have increased their staffing in the many
expert groups on economic matters in the talks, progress remains somewhat slow. I
urge the two leaders to incorporate the advice and best practice guidance into their
discussions in order to better structure the post-settlement federal system. It is now
of critical importance to incorporate this work into the talks to ensure that policy
choices are made that will lead to an economically and fiscally viable post settlement Cyprus. My Special Adviser and his team continue to engage in a
substantial coordination effort to assist the sides in translating external economic
advice into viable and politically palatable settlement provisions.
33. I note the importance of the work that also needs to be conducted on legal
matters. I welcome the decision of the leaders to set up various expert working
groups to deal with specific legal issues. I strongly encourage the two sides to move
forward with these important expert-level discussions, in particular those on
constitution drafting, and reiterate that my Special Adviser and his team stand ready
to facilitate and support this work with expert advice.

6/8

16-11372

S/2016/599

34. Despite full recognition by the leaders that the work in such areas as economic
aspects of the talks and preparations for the implementation of a settlement,
including preparing the future Turkish Cypriot Constituent State for the
implementation of the European Union acquis upon entry into force of the
settlement agreement, is critical and necessary, I note that the sides have at times
allowed progress to be held up by procedural considerations. I urge them t o
overcome such hurdles in future to allow this important work to move forward
speedily and without unnecessary delays.
35. The agreement of the leaders to establish the Committee on Gender Equality in
May 2015 constituted a positive step towards increasin g the participation of women
and the inclusion of a gender perspective in the negotiations. I encourage both sides
to support the work of the Committee and to do their utmost to ensure that a gender
perspective is further mainstreamed and taken into greater consideration in the talks.
36. In line with the leaders’ stated aim to intensify efforts to reach a
comprehensive settlement in 2016, it is imperative not to delay efforts to prepare
both communities for the eventuality of a settlement. Therefore, given the growing
importance of informing the public about the process, I encourage the leaders to
strengthen their efforts to communicate jointly to the public through coordinated
messaging.
37. The settlement talks continue to take place against the backdrop of an ever
increasingly turbulent region, posing daunting challenges well beyond the region
itself, as shown by the growing terrorist threats and the refugee and migration crisis
in Europe. There has been wide recognition within the international communit y that
a solution to the Cyprus problem would also have a positive effect from a regional
perspective, both politically and economically. In this context, it is vital that the
guarantor powers, Greece, Turkey and the United Kingdom, remain committed to
supporting the ongoing efforts of the leaders to reach a comprehensive settlement as
soon as possible.
38. In the light of their agreement to begin discussions on issues related to
planning for the implementation of the settlement, including the possible cha llenges
and the necessary preparations that will be required in various areas of the
agreement, I urge the leaders to engage in earnest on all aspects of this important
workstream. It is also important that this work be conducted in coordination and
cooperation with the ongoing planning carried out by the United Nations.
39. My good offices mission has maintained close coordination with the United
Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP) as the latter pursued its
planning in relation to a settlement, as requested by the Security Council, most
recently in its resolution 2263 (2016). This planning will continue to be guided by
developments in the negotiations and the views of the sides on a possible role of the
United Nations in support of the implementation of the settlement.
40. The process continues to enjoy the steadfast support of the United Nations
through the two missions and through the work of entities, such as the United
Nations Development Programme, and that of the third member of the Committee
on Missing Persons. The unity of purpose of such support is demonstrated in
particular by the close synergy displayed in the work of my mission of good offices
and UNFICYP, which is also ensured through the role that the Special
Representative and Head of UNFICYP plays as my Deputy Special Adviser.

16-11372

7/8

S/2016/599

Furthermore, as stated in my previous report, the Office of the Special Adviser
counts on the administrative and logistical support of UNFICYP, which is key to the
smooth conduct of meetings between the sides, including those of the technical
committees, the work of eight of which UNFICYP currently facilitates.
41. The Office of the Special Adviser is a small mission. The sharp increase in
requirements resulting from the intensification of the talks, in partic ular the quasidaily meetings of the sides at the political or technical level since mid -2015, has put
considerable strain on its capacity. I therefore intend to strengthen it with additional
resources through the appropriate budgetary bodies.

V. Conclusions
42. Over the course of a year of talks, the current Greek Cypriot and Turkish
Cypriot leaders have made clear progress on a wide range of issues in the
negotiations. At the same time, undoubtedly, there is still much work that remains
ahead.
43. In particular, as they tackle key outstanding issues, I call on the leaders to do
their utmost to translate the significant mutual understandings they have reached in
the course of the year of negotiations into concrete convergences. To achieve this,
they will need to sustain their ongoing dedication and leadership, as well as a
structured approach that would allow them to conclude deliberations on the issues
that they have identified for the intensified phase.
44. The commitment expressed by the leaders in their statement of 15 May 2016
to intensifying efforts is a clear indication that, while the United Nations has no
timelines for the process, the sides recognize that there is a unique opportunity for
these negotiations to reach a positive conclusion. I strongly urge the leaders and
their teams to use the coming weeks and their ongoing intensified work to make
further progress as promptly as possible. This is all the more critical if they are to
grasp the opportunity to move closer to their stated ai m of reaching an agreement in
2016.
45. While the task at hand remains significant, the momentum and overall
circumstances surrounding the process are such that they present a real, yet fleeting
and fragile, historic opportunity for the sides to bring the process to a successful
outcome. I remain convinced that a mutually acceptable solution to this long standing issue can be found and that it is, today more than ever, within reach. This,
however, will require both sides to act with determination, to take timely and
courageous decisions and, most importantly, to look beyond the immediate present
as they work together to build a common future for the island, where all Cypriots
will be able to prosper in peace and mutual respect.
46. I would like to express my sincere thanks to Lisa Buttenheim, who concluded
her service as my Special Representative and Deputy Special Adviser in Cyprus on
10 June 2016. Ms. Buttenheim was replaced by Elizabeth Spehar, who arrived on
the island in June 2016 to assume her duties as my Special Representative and Head
of Mission, as well as Deputy Special Adviser.
47. In conclusion, I wish to thank my Special Adviser, Espen Barth Eide, and the
personnel serving in my good offices mission in Cyprus for the dedication and
commitment with which they have discharged the responsibilities entrusted to them
by the Security Council.

8/8

16-11372
