S/PV.8182

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8182nd meeting

Wednesday, 14 February 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Umarov
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Clay
Ms. Tachco

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau and
the activities of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (S/2018/110)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-04195 (E)
*1804195*

S/PV.8182

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and the activities
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (S/2018/110)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Guinea-Bissau
and Togo to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in the meeting: Mr. Modibo Touré,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau, and His Excellency Mr. Mauro
Vieira, Permanent Representative of Brazil to the
United Nations, in his capacity as Chair of the GuineaBissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Mr. Touré is joining the meeting via videoteleconference from Bissau.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/110, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau.
I now give the floor to Mr. Touré.
Mr. Touré: I thank the Security Council for this
opportunity to introduce the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/110) on the situation in Guinea-Bissau
and the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS).
As the report already presents a detailed outline of
recent events in Guinea-Bissau, my intervention will
focus on updating the Council on political developments
since its issuance, while analysing present challenges
and making proposals for the way forward.
This briefing takes place against the backdrop of
a rapidly evolving political situation in Guinea-Bissau.
2/20

14/02/2018

Over the past several weeks, a series of key events have
occurred with important ramifications. At the country
level, President José Mário Vaz dismissed former
Prime Minister Umaro Sissoco Embaló and replaced
him with Mr. Artur Da Silva. The African Party for
the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde (PAIGC)
finally held its party congress despite attempts by
national authorities to block it, and re-elected Domingos
Simões Pereira as its leader.
At the regional level, on 4 February, the Authority
of Heads of State and Government of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
pursuant to its decision of 27 January, imposed targeted
sanctions on 19 individuals deemed to be obstructing
the implementation of the Conakry Agreement. Those
individuals and their family members are subject to
travel bans and assets freeze. They have also been
suspended from ECOWAS activities. The ECOWAS
Authority also requested the African Union (AU),
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries,
the European Union, the United Nations and other
partners to support and facilitate the enforcement of
the sanctions.
Since the imposition of the sanctions, the reaction
of national stakeholders has been mixed. Those upon
whom the sanctions were imposed have described
them as unsubstantiated and unjust, while those in
favour of the sanctions have characterized them
as a necessary measure to safeguard the country’s
democratic course. Meanwhile, national reactions
to the appointment of Mr. Artur Da Silva as the new
Prime Minister have been generally consistent. On
31 January, the PAIGC issued a statement denouncing
Mr. Da Silva’s appointment as not being in conformity
with the Conakry Agreement. Last week, the Party for
Social Renewal, the second largest party in Parliament,
and the group of 15 dissident parliamentarians of the
PAIGC also issued public statements stressing that they
would participate only in a Government formed under
a consensual Prime Minister, in strict compliance with
the Conakry Agreement. Thus far, the Prime Minister’s
efforts to consult with political parties represented in
the National Assembly on the formation of an inclusive
Government have not borne fruit.
Under my leadership, the group of five
regional and international partners, comprised of
representatives of the African Union, the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries, ECOWAS, the
European Union and the United Nations, has continued
18-04195

14/02/2018

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

to harmonize efforts and messaging at opportune
moments with the aim of creating a stable and enabling
environment for dialogue among political leaders. So
far this year, I have convened three meetings of the
group. My efforts, together with those of the partners,
have focused on engaging national authorities and
key political stakeholders in Guinea-Bissau to defuse
escalating tensions, encourage political dialogue in
order to ease the political gridlock, call for the protection
and respect for the human rights of Bissau-Guinean
citizens, and urge all aggrieved stakeholders to pursue
their grievances through legal and constitutional means.
Furthermore, under my direction, UNIOGBIS
continues to play a central role in supporting and
facilitating the regional mediation efforts of ECOWAS
by, inter alia, ensuring the participation of BissauGuinean stakeholders at the ECOWAS Summit in Abuja
in December 2017, providing substantive and logistical
support for the ECOWAS high-level delegations during
their missions to Bissau and regularly sensitizing
regional leaders to ongoing political developments
within the country, while encouraging them to
exert their influence on protagonists in order to
reach compromises.
The absence of a functioning and stable Government
for more than three years has limited the ability of
UNIOGBIS to effectively and sustainably implement
some of its mandated tasks. As recommended by the
strategic review mission headed by the Department of
Political Affairs in 2016 and endorsed by the Council
last year, I have streamlined the UNIOGBIS leadership
and structure to promote better integration and
complementarity with the United Nations country team
and other international partners, while boosting the
Mission’s political capacities, which has enabled me to
exercise my good offices more effectively at the national
level. Those changes have also assisted the broader
United Nations system in Guinea-Bissau in delivering
more focused and integrated peacebuilding support to
national authorities and civil society, including women
and youth.
In this regard, the support provided by the
Peacebuilding Fund has been critical. Going forward,
UNIOGBIS will need to focus its energies on supporting
national leaders in their efforts to appoint an acceptable
Prime Minister, establish an inclusive Government,
organize and conduct timely elections, and implement
the priority reforms outlined in the Conakry Agreement
and the ECOWAS road map.

S/PV. 8182

Until the completion of the electoral cycle in 2019,
Guinea-Bissau remains more than ever a country that
requires a dedicated United Nations presence to prevent
a further deterioration in the political and security
situation at the national level and avoid any negative
consequences in the subregion. In this context, my good
offices, political facilitation, advocacy and mediation
roles, alongside my efforts aimed at promoting respect
for human rights and the rule of law and at carrying
out integrated peacebuilding support, will continue to
be critical.
As the Secretary-General has indicated in his report,
it is vital that the United Nations remain engaged in
peacebuilding efforts in the country while supporting
ECOWAS involvement in resolving the political crisis
for at least one more year. The Secretary-General has
expressed his intention to authorize an assessment of
the current mission at the end of that period and to
present options to the Security Council for a possible
reconfiguration of United Nations presence in the
country. It is my hope that the Council will give
favourable consideration to this recommendation.
The African Union Peace and Security Council
(AUPSC), through its communiqué of 13 February,
has fully endorsed the measures taken by ECOWAS
on 4 February, including the application of sanctions
against political obstructionists. It has also requested
the African Union Commission to coordinate with
the ECOWAS Commission to ensure the effective
implementation of these measures. Moreover, it has
requested that the Security Council endorse the AUPSC
communiqué that endorsed the ECOWAS decision. At
this critical juncture, it would be important for the
Security Council to continue to reaffirm the centrality
of the Conakry Agreement and reiterate its full support
for ECOWAS in its mediation efforts and for the
measures that it has taken against political stakeholders
deemed to be obstructing the resolution of the political
crisis. I would further seek the Council’s support in
underscoring the importance of urgently organizing and
holding legislative elections within the constitutionally
mandated timeline.
Lastly, throughout the past year, the presence of the
ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB) has
consistently acted as a stabilizing factor in the country.
I would therefore call on members of the Council and
international donors to support the continued presence
of ECOMIB through to the holding of a presidential
election in 2019, including by advocating for the renewal

18-041953/20

S/PV.8182

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

of its mandate and the provision of the financial support
needed to maintain its deployment.
I would like to express my gratitude to the
Council for its continued interest in promoting peace
and stability in Guinea-Bissau. I would also like to
commend ECOWAS and its current Chair, President
Faure Gnassingbé of Togo, and the ECOWAS Mediator
for Guinea-Bissau, President Alpha Condé of Guinea,
for their tireless mediation efforts.
Finally, I would like to express appreciation to all
multilateral and bilateral partners, especially to the AU,
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and
the European Union for their commitment to promoting
peace and prosperity in Guinea-Bissau. After several
years of long-term investment in the stability of GuineaBissau, it is time to consolidate and reap the dividends
of our concerted efforts. It is vital that we accompany
this process to its completion.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Touré
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Vieira.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the invitation to address the Security
Council in my capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
Since my last briefing to the Security Council, on
24 August last year (see S/PV.8031), there have been
several important developments in the country. The
situation in Guinea-Bissau is rapidly evolving, and the
PBC is following it closely.
At the most recent Summit of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), held
in Abuja on 16 December, the Heads of State and
Government gave a 30-day deadline for political actors
of Guinea-Bissau to implement the Conakry Agreement.
The situation was discussed again by the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the African Union,
held in Addis Ababa on 27 January, in the context of its
thirtieth ordinary session.
After 15 months as Head of Government, Prime
Minister Umaro Sissoco Embaló tendered his
resignation to President José Mário Vaz, who accepted
it on 16 January. On 31 January, Artur Da Silva took
office as the new Prime Minister. The Minister of
Foreign Affairs of Togo, Robert Dussey, led two
ECOWAS missions to Bissau this year. On 1 February,
4/20

14/02/2018

the ECOWAS mission issued a final communiqué
stating that the nomination of a Prime Minister by
consensus, as determined by the Conakry Agreement,
had not taken place and that the ECOWAS Commission
would start applying sanctions against those who
create obstacles to a political solution. On 4 February,
ECOWAS issued a decision listing 19 names that will
be subject to sanctions, consisting of the exclusion
from the activities of the community, a travel ban, and
the freezing of assets of the sanctioned persons and
their families.
The Guinea-Bissau configuration is actively
engaged in following the situation in Guinea-Bissau and
in providing support for the country through different
initiatives. I am also in permanent contact with the
Brazilian Ambassador in Bissau, who maintains
excellent relations with national authorities, political
actors and United Nations representatives. I would
remind Council members that Brazil was one of the
first countries to recognize Guinea-Bissau in 1974. In
that same year we opened an embassy in Bissau.
In 2017, I organized a working breakfast with
the members of the PBC and four ambassador-level
meetings of the Guinea-Bissau configuration. We
issued three press statements last year on the situation
in the country. I also briefed the Security Council on
two occasions, on 14 February (see S/PV. 7883) and on
24 August.
Between 25 and 28 July 2017, I conducted my
first visit to Bissau in my capacity as Chair of the
Guinea-Bissau configuration. I met many political
actors, including President José Mário Vaz, then-Prime
Minister Sissoco, a number of ministers, members
of all parties in the Parliament, and representatives
of the United Nations. On my return, I stopped in
Lisbon, where I met with the Executive Secretary of
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries,
Ms. Maria do Carmo Silveira.
On 15 December 2017, the Peacebuilding Fund
(PBF) approved six new projects for Guinea-Bissau,
totalling $7 million, to be implemented between January
2018 and June 2019. These projects are designed to help
stabilize the country by providing support to the media
and the justice sector, as well as support for national
reconciliation efforts and the participation of young
people and women in peacebuilding and in politics. The
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the PBC discussed and
18-04195

14/02/2018

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

S/PV. 8182

supported these projects in a meeting held in November
last year.

depend on developments on the ground and will be
scheduled in consultation with local authorities.

The PBC will continue to support Guinea-Bissau
not only through the PBF, but also through consultations
with different partners, including the World Bank
and other international financial institutions. In this
context, I am planning a visit to Washington in the
coming weeks in order to talk to representatives of the
World Bank about possibilities for cooperation with
Guinea-Bissau.

I would like to recall that Brazil is currently the
Chair of the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP). As was done when I previously
briefed the Council, the CPLP has endorsed my remarks.

On Monday, 12 February, I convened a meeting
of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the PBC to
discuss the most recent developments in the country.
On that occasion, we heard a briefing from the UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs and Head of the
Department of Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman.
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Feltman for his presence there. It was a positive sign
of engagement and trust in the role of the PBC. It also
showed his commitment to contributing to a solution to
the current impasse in Guinea-Bissau.
During that meeting, the participants had the
opportunity to discuss the recent developments in the
country, including the decision of ECOWAS to impose
sanctions. They underlined the need for dialogue
and mentioned the role of the region, including the
importance of the implementation of the Conakry
Agreement. Member States also commended the
work of the PBF in Guinea-Bissau. Many participants
stressed the relevance of respecting the constitutional
framework in organizing elections. Member States
welcomed the non-involvement of the armed forces in
the political crisis. Many delegations mentioned the
positive presence of the ECOWAS Mission in GuineaBissau (ECOMIB). Delegations also supported the
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS),
which is expected to happen by the end of this month,
and underlined the importance of the good offices of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Modibo Touré.
Finally, I also would like to inform the Council that
it is my intention to visit Guinea-Bissau in the coming
months to consult with a broad range of stakeholders
on how the PBC can support peacebuilding efforts in
the country and help the political actors find a solution
to the current impasse. The exact date of the visit will

I would like to conclude my statement by
reaffirming that the PBC will continue to make every
effort to support Guinea-Bissau and I would like to
outline the following recommendations in that regard.
I reiterate the support of the configuration for the
Bissau six-point road map and the Conakry Agreement
as the framework for the resolution of the crisis. I call
upon the authorities of Guinea-Bissau and key political
actors to show leadership and determination by engaging
in actions that would lead to the implementation
of those agreements. I take note of the efforts of the
region to resolve the political impasse in the country. I
stress the importance of holding free and fair elections,
in accordance with the Constitution of GuineaBissau, and call upon the international community
to support that process. I underline the importance
of renewing the mandate of UNIOGBIS for another
year, as recommended by the Secretary-General. I also
recognize the effective, preventive and deterrent role of
ECOMIB. Finally, I would like to commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Modibo
Touré, for his efforts to help ensure an enabling political
environment in the country.
The President (spoke in Arabic):
Ambassador Vieira for his briefing.

I

thank

I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke
in French): I would like to begin my statement by
thanking the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Modibo Touré, for his insightful briefing
on the situation in Guinea-Bissau and the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau.
I will focus my statement on two main points:
the implementation of the Conakry Agreement by the
Guinea-Bissau signatories and the activities of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau.

18-041955/20

S/PV.8182

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

Guinea-Bissau is going through a new phase in the
serious and deep political and institutional crisis of
recent years. My country and West Africa are concerned
about this situation, which is characterized by a
political impasse and requires the Council to act with
greater firmness alongside the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) and the African
Union to bring the political actors of Guinea-Bissau to
honour their commitments. Indeed, despite the signing
on 14 October 2016 of the Conakry Agreement, which
was supposed to favour the appointment of a consensus
Prime Minister and the establishment of an inclusive
Government, the country is again without a Government
and confronted by a blockage of Parliament and a deep
lack of trust between the President of the Republic and
his party, the African Party for the Independence of
Guinea and Cape Verde.
The stalemate heightens raises concerns not only
of a detrimental delay in the electoral calendar, which
calls for the holding of legislative elections in May
2018 and presidential elections in 2019, but also of the
exacerbation of political tensions and the growth of
the criminal economy linked to drug trafficking. My
country welcomes the ongoing efforts of ECOWAS
to definitively resolve the crisis in Guinea-Bissau, in
strict compliance with the communal arrangements and
constitutional framework of the country. The current
deadlock in Guinea-Bissau is the culmination of a
prolonged deterioration of the political situation and the
manifest lack of will on the part of the political actors
to commit themselves to a consensual settlement of the
crisis, despite the appeals and efforts of ECOWAS.
Côte d’Ivoire calls on the parties to implement the
Conakry Agreement in good faith and without delay.
My delegation once again commends ECOWAS for its
leadership and the ongoing commitment of its leaders,
the Chairperson of the ECOWAS Authority, President
Faure Gnassingbé of Togo, and the ECOWAS Mediator
for Guinea-Bissau, President Alpha Condé of Guinea,
in the quest for a solution to the political impasse in
Guinea-Bissau. Côte d’Ivoire also commends the
ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau for its invaluable
contribution to stability in the country.
ECOWAS, after a lengthy process of futile
warnings, decided to adopt individual sanctions against
19 persons considered to be hostile to the process of
ending the crisis in Guinea-Bissau. The sanctions are
a strong signal of the resolve of ECOWAS to bring the
country out of a crisis that has persisted too long. Those
6/20

14/02/2018

measures — which specifically involve the suspension
of the participation in the activities of ECOWAS of all
persons concerned, a travel ban on travel, the denial of
visas to them and their families, and the freezing of their
financial assets — must be applied with utmost rigour.
The sanctions, I recall, are based on the Supplementary
Act of 17 February 2012, which imposes sanctions on
Member States that fail to honour their obligations
vis-à-vis ECOWAS, and article 45 of the Protocol
on Democracy and Good Governance. My country
congratulates ECOWAS on taking those courageous
measures, which will serve as a wake-up call to the
Guinea-Bissau political class, and looks forward to
their effective endorsement by the African Union.
Côte d’Ivoire invites the Council to fully support
ECOWAS in the interests of peace and national
cohesion in Guinea-Bissau. To that end, my country
calls on the Security Council to adopt by consensus
the draft resolution on the renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau, which also requires the endorsement of
those sanctions.
Furthermore, my delegation urges the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP), the European
Union and the United Nations to also support the
efforts of ECOWAS to effectively implement measures
that seek to ensure that the Conakry Agreement be
upheld. Institutional and political stability, peace and
security in Guinea-Bissau depend primarily on the
people of Guinea-Bissau themselves. To achieve that,
we call on them to take ownership of the Conakry
Agreement. Without the involvement of the parties
themselves, the prospects for finding a solution to the
crisis and for restoring lasting peace to Guinea-Bissau
will remain illusory.
With regard to the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, my
delegation welcomes the various initiatives to support
the political dialogue and the national reconciliation
process. Furthermore, we encourage ongoing
consultations in order to make progress on security
sector reform and to meet the needs of the peacebuilding
mechanism under way in Guinea-Bissau.
My delegation thanks the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau for his
efforts in mediation, promoting the rule of law and
building the capacity of the Guinea-Bissau institutions.
Côte d’Ivoire encourages its international partners, in
18-04195

14/02/2018

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

particular the United Nations, the African Union, the
European Union, the CPLP and ECOWAS, to cooperate
more closely with regard to their work on the ground
to ensure greater effectiveness. My country also
welcomes the strong involvement of Guinea-Bissau
women in the political process, and in particular their
role in facilitating dialogue between the parties.
With regard to the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau, I would like to inform the members of
the Council that Côte d’Ivoire will soon submit a draft
resolution for adoption on that issue. At the same time,
if it is acceptable to all members of the Council, a draft
press statement will also be submitted for adoption.
My country reiterates its appeal to all stakeholders
in the crisis in Guinea-Bissau to participate fully
in the efforts of the international community, in
particular of ECOWAS, to promote the comprehensive
implementation of the Conakry Agreement, which
guarantees a way out of the political impasse that the
country has long suffered.
I would like to finish by thanking Ambassador
Mauro Vieira of Brazil, Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, for
all the information that he has kindly provided to
the Council.
Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I wish
to thank Mr. Touré, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing and Ambassador
Vieira not only for his briefing but also for his
leadership of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
Recently, the Security Council has witnessed
significant success in West Africa in places that have
experienced years or even decades of violence and
tragedy. Such success includes the first democratic
transfer of power in Liberia in more than 70 years
and the continued consolidation of democracy in The
Gambia, as well as strong economic growth in countries
across the region.
However, there remain many serious and profound
challenges, such as the terrorist threat posed by Boko
Haram and the Islamic State in West Africa, elections
and reform challenges facing countries with upcoming
democratic transition, and humanitarian crises and
displacement, all of which merit the continued attention
of the Security Council. Given the urgency and

S/PV. 8182

magnitude of such problems, the United States believes
that a self-inflicted 30-month political impasse, such as
that in Guinea-Bissau, is unacceptable.
For too long we have gathered to hear updates
on fits and starts of political progress that eventually
fade to obstruction and obfuscation from the
country’s leadership. The United States is profoundly
disappointed by the decision of President Vaz to
ignore the Conakry Agreement by failing to appoint
a consensus Prime Minister and to create an inclusive
Government. President Vaz must take urgent steps
towards a unity Government that will pave the way for
peaceful legislative elections in May.
The people of Guinea-Bissau are understandably
frustrated at the failure of their Government to make
progress on the implementation of the Agreement.
They deserve better. Time is running out. We have
witnessed rising tension. Political gatherings in
Bissau have provoked clashes as the people of GuineaBissau publicly express their frustration at the skeletal
political process. Those clashes led to a crackdown by
the Guinea-Bissau leadership. The Government must
respect the people’s right to peaceful expression and
protect that right.
On 4 February, the Economic Community of West
African States took the ambitious step of sanctioning
19 spoilers of the Conakry Agreement, including
their family members. The United States applauds
such efforts to hold those in power accountable and to
compel them towards finally doing what is right for the
people of Guinea-Bissau. We also applaud the renewal
of the mandate of the ECOWAS Mission in GuineaBissau and encourage the Guinea-Bissau military to
continue its political non-interference, while playing its
constitutional role.
For years, the international community and the
United Nations have put resources into Guinea-Bissau
to do important things for the benefit of its people.
However, with a Government at an impasse, important
issues such as security sector reform and combating
transnational organized crime, narcotics and human
trafficking cannot be adequately addressed. That
is unacceptable.
As Ambassador Haley noted in the peacekeeping
context, the United Nations cannot operate effectively
in environments with uncooperative Governments.
That also applies to political missions such as the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-

18-041957/20

S/PV.8182

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

Bissau (UNIOGBIS). For UNIOGBIS to continue on
that path would not be the continuation of a partnership
with a willing Government but would simply enable
its obstruction. Elections must take place on time and
will require support. However, first, the Government
must first end the impasse to convince its partners that
international support will build on established political
progress and a willingness to overcome differences to
enable the Government to function again.
In conclusion, we once again draw attention to
the ordinary people of Guinea-Bissau who, for the
better part of their lives, have not known the stability
of sustainable democratic governance. The Security
Council must keep them in mind as we take steps to
put pressure on leaders to abandon their self-serving
wilfulness and to take action to better the lives of their
people. They should know that our patience has now
run out.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I wish to thank Mr. Modibo
Touré, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for his briefing on the latest developments in
Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS). I would also like to express appreciation
to Ambassador Mauro Vieira in his capacity as Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) for his remarks.
The continued political stand-off and institutional
paralysis in Guinea-Bissau remain a source of serious
concern. The consequent socioeconomic difficulties
over the past two years have impacted the people of
Guinea-Bissau and will eventually undermine the peace
and stability of the country. We appreciate the important
role of the PBC and welcome the approval of useful
projects to be financed under the Immediate Response
Facility of the Peacebuilding Fund to the amount of
$7.3 million. Such projects will certainly contribute
to easing the socioeconomic difficulties of women and
young people, as well as to promoting stability.
The centrality of the Conakry Agreement to
sustaining peace, security and development in GuineaBissau cannot be overemphasized. We reiterate our
call for all stakeholders in Guinea-Bissau to respect
and to comply with the Agreement in addressing their
differences and the challenges facing their country.
We urge them to create conditions for the holding of
legislative and presidential elections in 2018 and 2019,
respectively. All parties should also refrain from
8/20

14/02/2018

actions or statements that could escalate tensions and
incite violence. It is indeed vital that the security and
armed forces of Guinea-Bissau continue to uphold the
country’s Constitution and desist from interfering in
the political and institutional crisis.
Those who continue to obstruct the implementation
of the agreement must be given clear signals that
their actions will not be tolerated. In that regard, we
commend the role of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and the high-level
delegation it dispatched to Guinea-Bissau two weeks
ago. We support its decision on restoring democratic
governance and ensuring respect for the rule of law in
Guinea Bissau, as endorsed by the African Union (AU)
Peace and Security Council communiqué issued today.
The Council should reinforce the decision by ECOWAS
and the African Union and convey a clear and united
message to all the parties in this regard. We believe the
concerted efforts by ECOWAS, the African Union, the
United Nations and other relevant partners continues
to be indispensable to finding a durable solution to the
political crisis in Guinea-Bissau.
We express our support to UNIOGBIS for its
continued provision of necessary support to GuineaBissau, with the objective of resolving the current
political impasse and creating an environment for of
dialogue among all of the country’s actors. Accordingly,
we fully agree with the recommendation of the
Secretary General that the current UNIOGBIS mandate
be extended for another year, until 28 February 2019.
Finally, we echo the appeal of the AU Peace and
Security Council for financial support towards the
continuation of the mandate of the ECOWAS Mission in
Guinea-Bissau — whose mandate has been extended to
31 March — until the necessary training of the national
security forces of Guinea-Bissau is completed. I wish
to conclude by supporting the draft press statement
proposed by Côte d’Ivoire, and express our readiness to
work closely on the draft resolution that will renew the
UNIOGBIS mandate.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Mr. Modibo Touré, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, for
his clear and precise briefing, which reminds us of just
how critical this point is for Guinea-Bissau. I also thank
Ambassador Mauro Vieira for his efforts as Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
18-04195

14/02/2018

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

Commission and for his insistent appeal for support
to regional initiatives and for respect for the electoral
cycle in Guinea-Bissau.
France is concerned about the non-implementation
of the Conakry Agreement since October 2016. The
Agreement, which provides for the appointment of a
consensus Prime Minister, has remained a dead letter,
even though it provides a plan to resolve the conflict.
This political impasse has consequences on the ground.
There have been several clashes between the police
and opposition political parties. Respect for human
rights is also not assured in Guinea-Bissau. The latest
developments on the ground show that the authorities of
Guinea-Bissau no longer hesitate to limit the freedom
of assembly and the right to protest. The establishment
of a robust compliance framework with regard to
respect for public freedoms is an essential precondition
to the resolution of the crisis in Guinea-Bissau. We
therefore call upon the international community to be
particularly vigilant in that regard.
Due to the risk of a deterioration in the political
and security situation, it is high time for all parties to
honour their commitments to reach national consensus,
all the more so because the window of opportunity is
narrowing, as legislative elections are slated for this
spring. In that regard, it is particularly important to
ensure that the legislative and presidential time table
is adhered to.
I would like to emphasize three essential points
with regard to the renewal at the end of the month of the
madate of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS).
First, we must increase our support for regional
initiatives. In that regard, France welcomes the
ongoing efforts of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), especially the work of the
ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau and the recent
adoption of the sanctions list of people obstructing the
implementation of the Conakry Agreement. That is an
important step forward and a clear sign to the relevant
local actors. We are convinced that the solution to the
conflict will require consultation among local actors
and the international community. In that connection,
the group of five international partners based in
Guinea-Bissau, which comprises the African Union,
the European Union, the United Nations, ECOWAS
and the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries,

S/PV. 8182

provides a special coordination platform that ought to
be supported.
Secondly, it is crucial for the Security Council to
fully assume its role in resolving the current political
impasse in Guinea-Bissau. The Council should
increase pressure on local actors, particularly President
Vaz, and should direct the parties in Guinea-Bissau to
shoulder their responsibilities. Sanctions were adopted
in 2012 through resolution 2048 (2012), and additional
measures could be taken in conjunction with those
taken by ECOWAS.
Thirdly, it is essential to renew the mandate of
UNIOGBIS, which ends 28 February, and thereby signal
the commitment of the United Nations to continuing
to participate in the process of resolving the conflict.
We should also contemplate restructuring UNIOGBIS
following an assessment of the impact of its activities
on the ground.
It is time for the parties in Guinea-Bissau to move
from words to action. Their commitments must now
give way to concrete action.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this meeting and
thanks Mr. Modibo Touré, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau, for his briefing. We also thank Ambassador
Mauro Vieira for his commitment and leadership
as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
Peru is monitoring with concern the situation in
Guinea-Bissau. Despite efforts by the international
community and regional organizations to reach a
solution to the political crisis, little progress has been
made in the implementation of the Conakry Agreement,
concluded in October 2016. We would like to make
three main points.
First, Peru deems the successful holding of
2018 and 2019 elections to be crucial to achieving
sustainable peace. In that regard, we are concerned
about the nomination of a Prime Minister who does
not enjoy consensus among all parties, as called for
in the Conakry Agreement. That undermines the
credibility of the Government. Additionally, four of
the members of the National Electoral Commission,
including its President, could not be nominated for
the National Assembly, which has not convened since

18-041959/20

S/PV.8182

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

January 2016. Such conditions complicate the holding
of legislative elections slated for May. That is why
we believe it is necessary and urgent for all parties to
resume inclusive dialogue with a view to implementing
the commitments undertaken.
We welcome the efforts of the Economic Community
of West African States, which include imposing
sanctions on those who obstruct the implementation of
the Conakry Agreement, in line with regional rules and
regulations. We believe that it is important to increase
the participation of women and youth in the necessary
dialogue and subsequent elections. That is why we
highlight the efforts of the Women’s Facilitation Group,
which seeks to increase the participation of women in
the country’s political processes.
Secondly, we are concerned that, despite the
current relative stability, a stalled political process
could lead to renewed violence and rampant crime,
especially considering that the country is vulnerable
to threats such as terrorism, organized crime and
human trafficking. In that connection, we highlight
the launching of the Network of National Human
Rights Defenders. As the Secretary-General noted in
his report (S/2018/110), reform is needed in this area,
including strengthening the armed forces and the
professionalization of the police. Similarly, we call for
full respect for the fundamental right to freedom of
expression in Guinea-Bissau.
Thirdly, with regard to socioeconomic development,
we would like to highlight the fact that, although the
World Bank has reported economic growth of 5 per cent
over the past year, it should be borne in mind that such
growth is primarily attributed to the country’s main
exports being sold at a higher price on the international
market. Nonetheless, a country whose poverty rate is
approximately 70 per cent is socially and economically
vulnerable. That is why we believe that peacekeeping
and peacebuilding require greater investment in social
development, and in particular in Peacebuilding Fund
projects aimed at empowering women and young people,
promoting national reconciliation and strengthening the
judiciary. We underscore the importance of ensuring
the predictability and stability of the Fund’s financing.
We also believe that it is important that the activities
promoted by the Peacebuilding Fund be coordinated
with the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) and the United
Nations country team.
10/20

14/02/2018

In conclusion, we support the renewal of the
UNIOGBIS mandate for an additional year, in line with
the recommendation of the Secretary-General. We thank
the Economic Community of West African States, the
African Union, the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries, the European Union and other international
actors committed to assisting Guinea-Bissau for their
valuable efforts.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, on behalf of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea, let me thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for GuineaBissau and Head of Mission for the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNOGBIS), Mr. Modibo Touré, and his team for
the detailed and important briefing on the situation
in Guinea-Bissau. We also thank Mr. Mauro Vieira,
Permanent Representative of Brazil to the United
Nations, in his capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, for his
briefing, in which he underscored the configuration’s
commitment to the various initiatives in Guinea-Bissau.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea has followed
very closely and with great interest the developments in
the political and institutional crisis in Guinea-Bissau. It
has paid even closer attention since the country joined
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP) in 2014, and now that Equatorial Guinea chairs
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2048
(2012), concerning Guinea-Bissau.
In my capacity as Chair of the 2048 Committee, I
would like to voice our concern about the deadlock in
the peace process in Guinea-Bissau, which is hindering
the country’s national reform programme, thereby
threatening to undermine progress in the country since
constitutional order was restored in 2014.
Equatorial Guinea lauds the commitment and
considerable effort made, as well as the human and
financial resources made available by international
multilateral partners, in particular the GuineaBissau group of five, comprising the African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the CPLP, the European Union and the
United Nations. Undoubtedly, the synergy among
international actors with regard to the issue in
Guinea-Bissau attests to the desire and willingness
of the international community to find a peaceful and
18-04195

14/02/2018

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

consensus-based solution in the interests of GuineaBissau.
The Conakry Agreement must continue to be the
fundamental reference for national political actors. The
Agreement not only outlines the appointment of a Prime
Minister who is trusted by the President of the Republic,
but whose appointment is the result of consensus
among all national stakeholders. The Republic of
Equatorial Guinea has taken note of the rejection of
the appointment of Mr. Augusto Antonio Artur Da
Silva by ECOWAS and the main political actors in
Guinea-Bissau, in particular of the two main political
parties — the Partido Africano da Independência da
Guiné e Cabo Verde and the Partido para a Renovação
Social. Given the lack of consensus surrounding the
appointment of the Prime Minister, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea calls upon all political actors in the
Republic of Guinea-Bissau, including the President of
the Republic, as well as the leaders of the two main
political parties, to work together to form an inclusive
Government that would create the right conditions
ahead of upcoming legislative elections to be held later
this year, and presidential elections in 2019.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea supports
the electoral calendar as outlined in the country’s
Constitution. That is why the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea believes that an international support
mechanism for the electoral process should be put in
place for the purpose of updating the electoral rolls
and assisting the Independent National Electoral
Commission to effectively shoulder its responsibility,
and with all other preparations that would allow for
the holding of transparent, democratic elections whose
results would put a definitive end to the political maze
the country has had to navigate over the past few years.
The extension of the mandate of UNIOGBIS is
a key element in resolving the crisis. As announced,
ECOWAS has decided to extend the mandate of the
ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau until 31 March.
The actions of the United Nations must be part of that
undertaking. The Security Council’s vote, scheduled
for 27 February, must allow the Mission to be extended
for a year or more, until presidential elections are held
in 2019. The Republic of Equatorial Guinea believes
that international partners should continue to focus
primarily on mediation, good offices, dialogue and
direct negotiations as the only viable paths to breaking
the current political and institutional deadlock.

S/PV. 8182

The most recent report of the Secretary-General
on the situation in Guinea-Bissau and the activities
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (S/2018/110) concludes that
the population’s latent frustration with an uncertain
political environment could foster instability and
crime. Equatorial Guinea reiterates its gratitude to the
defence and security forces that have chosen to adopt
a neutral, republican position. Therefore, we urge all
political actors in Guinea-Bissau to put the interests
of the country and its people, love of State and their
responsibility above all other considerations so as to
create the right conditions for the holding of free, fair
and transparent elections.
Stability in the country must not be disassociated
from economic recovery. In that regard, we welcome
the support of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, through the Peacebuilding
Fund, in financing various multisectoral projects. The
Republic of Equatorial Guinea will take part in good
offices and negotiations. Equatorial Guinea, as a member
of the CPLP and Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012), concerning GuineaBissau, will support and take initiatives that it believes
are necessary to assist in efforts under way to find a
solution to the situation in the brotherly country of
Guinea-Bissau.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to begin by
thanking the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Modibo Touré, for his briefing. I commend
him and his team for the valuable work being undertaken
in support of the people of Guinea-Bissau. Let me also
extend my thanks to the Permanent Representative
of Brazil, Ambassador Mauro Vieira, in his capacity
as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
As Ambassador Vieira mentioned his country’s
long-standing relations with Guinea-Bissau, I thought
that I would take this opportunity to point out that
Sweden recognized Guinea-Bissau in 1974, and we
began supporting General Assembly resolution 2911
(XXVII), concerning its self-rule, in 1968. In the
1970s and 1980s, Guinea-Bissau was one of our largest
development partner countries. There is therefore a
deep and historic friendship between Sweden and
the people of Guinea-Bissau, and it is in that spirit of
friendship that we are engaging in support for GuineaBissau in meeting its current complex challenges.

18-0419511/20

S/PV.8182

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

Moreover, we welcome the opportunity to draw
upon the strategic advice of the Peacebuilding
Commission and its longer-term perspective, which are
essential for sustaining peace in Guinea-Bissau. The
activities financed by the Peacebuilding Fund to that
end are also important. An integrated approach from the
United Nations family in Guinea-Bissau can contribute
positively to overcoming peacebuilding challenges.
Accordingly, we welcome the efforts outlined in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/110).
We are concerned by the ongoing and increasingly
protracted political crisis in Guinea-Bissau. A lack
of progress in resolving the stalemate undermines
peacebuilding efforts and is holding the country’s social
and economic development hostage. Resolving the
crisis is therefore a prerequisite for the consolidation of
peace in the country. The six-point Bissau road map and
the Conakry Agreement remain the only legitimate way
forward, and must be implemented. The appointment
of a consensus Prime Minister, as stipulated in the
Agreement, is essential. National leaders must live up
to their commitments and meet their responsibilities.
We strongly commend the efforts of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to
mediate among the parties to find a solution to the
political crisis. ECOWAS is playing an essential role
on behalf of the region, and we welcome its continued
efforts to reach a consensual implementation of the
road map and Conakry Agreement. We welcome
the ECOWAS decision to impose sanctions on those
impeding the Agreement’s implementation. It is
important that the international community fully
support regional efforts in a concerted and coherent
manner. In that regard, we welcome the statement
issued yesterday by the African Union in support of
ECOWAS, including regarding sanctions.
Long-term peace and security in Guinea-Bissau will
be achieved only when the root causes of the conflict
are addressed. Constitutional reform, reconciliation
and political dialogue, strengthening the rule of law
through strong and inclusive institutions, and ensuring
equal access to economic opportunities are all critical
in that regard. It is also essential that all parts of society
have their voices heard. In particular, ensuring the full
and effective participation of women is crucial. We
agree with the Secretary-General that the promotion
of, and respect for, human rights is fundamental to
sustaining peace and ensuring long-term stability and
development in Guinea-Bissau. We echo the Secretary12/20

14/02/2018

General’s call on national authorities to respect human
rights and fundamental freedoms and to refrain from
any further acts that undermine the rule of law. Let
me also take a moment to welcome the military’s
neutrality and its posture of non-interference in the
political process.
Concerning the role of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS),
it has a crucial role to play in coordinating international
efforts to support Guinea-Bissau, not least of which is
supporting preparations for the holding of elections.
There is a need to immediately refocus the Office’s
resources where they can be used most effectively,
particularly with regard to resolving the political
deadlock and supporting the electoral process so that
it moves forward. We strongly support the Office’s
work to strengthen women’s participation as active
peacemakers in resolving the political crisis, including
by encouraging women’s mediation efforts. We
welcome in particular that the integration of gendersensitive perspectives into the work of UNIOGBIS and
the United Nations country team has been accorded
the highest priority by the United Nations in GuineaBissau. We look forward to hearing more about how
that process is being taken forward.
During the Peacebuilding Commission’s meeting
on Guinea-Bissau on Monday this week, all key
actors, including Guinea-Bissau, expressed the view
that the Secretary-General’s recommendation for a
one-year extension of the UNIOGBIS mandate should
be authorized. A one-year extension would allow for
longer-term planning and more effective support for
the implementation of the Conakry Agreement and the
holding of elections.
The political crisis in Guinea-Bissau has gone on
for far too long. It is now time to move forward with
the full implementation of the Conakry Agreement and
preparations for the holding of inclusive elections. The
international community, together with the region, must
stand ready to support the country on its path towards
long-term peace and development.
Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Touré and
Ambassador Vieira for their informative briefings.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau is concerning.
It is not the first country in the world to experience
a political impasse, but it is a country that continues
to emerge from the serious instability and violence
18-04195

14/02/2018

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

of its recent past. The political impasse has prevented
progress on reforms that are critical to addressing key
conflict risks in Guinea-Bissau. The situation is only
likely to become more volatile as we move towards
elections. We have already seen violent confrontations
between demonstrators and police, and witnessed
worrying efforts to curb political freedoms. Economic
growth is at risk, and a serious deterioration in stability
would be deeply damaging for development and human
rights. The illicit economy and transnational organized
crime risk becoming further entrenched, with global
implications. More broadly, instability in GuineaBissau would affect the wider region, which over the
past year has been, for the most part, the site of positive
political progress.
The United Kingdom welcomes the leadership
shown by the West African region, particularly through
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). It has shown persistence and patience. This
is a crisis that began in 2015. It brokered the Conakry
Agreement 15 months ago. It has agreed to countless
communiqués and published innumerable statements.
It has sent numerous high-level delegations to GuineaBissau, including three over the past six months alone.
But those most responsible for Guinea-Bissau’s crisis
have responded with stubborn refusal to give ground
and find compromise. Therefore, it is understandable
that the region’s patience has worn thin. ECOWAS has
now been driven to impose sanctions against individuals
deemed responsible for impeding the implementation
of the Conakry Agreement. The African Union Peace
and Security Council has endorsed that move. The
United Kingdom supports the ECOWAS decision,
and we urge the Security Council and the entire
international community to remain united in support of
ECOWAS efforts.
We also believe that it is important to recognize
the bold efforts of civil society in Guinea-Bissau to
resolve the crisis. In particular, the mediation efforts
launched by the Women’s Facilitation Group were an
encouraging initiative, and we welcome the support
given to them by the United Nations.
As set out in resolution 2343 (2017), political
support for efforts towards the implementation of the
Conakry Agreement should be a priority for the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau. The key next step remains the appointment of
a consensus Prime Minister so that preparations can
proceed for legislative elections in 2018, as per the

S/PV. 8182

country’s Constitution. As we open discussions on its
renewal, the United Kingdom will focus on ensuring
that the Mission’s mandate responds to today’s political
reality on the ground, that it is realistic and that it is
focused on the highest priority needs.
Guinea-Bissau’s people watched the country
emerge from a period of instability but then found their
hopes for democracy obstructed by a political knot that
their own leaders tied. Support from the region and the
international community to prevent the country from
backsliding further will not succeed until those who
tied the knot untangle it. We hope that good sense,
compromise and the commitment to Guinea-Bissau’s
future will prevail.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): First of all, I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Modibo Touré and Ambassador Mauro Vieira,
Permanent Representative of Brazil to the United
Nations, in his capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, for
their useful briefings.
Poland is following with growing concern the
current situation in Guinea-Bissau. We support the
efforts of the international community aimed at
peacefully resolving the political crisis in the country.
We therefore call on all political and civil society actors,
regardless of their personal differences and ambitions,
to engage in dialogue in a spirit of compromise. In that
context, we take note that the army is not interfering in
the political process.
The implementation of the 2016 road map and the
Conakry Agreement is crucial to maintaining peace
and stability in the country. We appeal to the GuineaBissau authorities to complete their implementation
and carry out the parliamentary elections scheduled for
May in a peaceful atmosphere that guarantees political
pluralism and impartiality. We think that women and
young people should be included in all decision-making
structures related to security sector reform, the national
reconciliation process and institution-building. In
this regard, we urge the Guinea-Bissau authorities to
ensure the protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, including the freedom of speech
and information.
Poland commends the important role of the
Peacebuilding Commission in Guinea-Bissau in
promoting good governance, political dialogue and
national reconciliation. We also welcome the significant

18-0419513/20

S/PV.8182

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

financial support of the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF)
under the PBF Immediate Response Facility. Since the
PBF began its activities, Poland has provided financial
support to the Fund.
Poland also supports the efforts of the Economic
Community of West African States Mission in GuineaBissau (ECOMIB) as it is an important factor in reaching
consensus solutions and cooperation. The decision of the
ECOWAS Heads of State and Government, published
on 4 February, imposing sanctions on those responsible
for non-implementation of the Conakry Agreement
is a step towards holding responsible those who are
impeding a peaceful, consensus solution to the crisis.
Due to the fragile security situation in the country, the
presence of ECOMIB is most important. In this regard,
we welcome the decision to extend ECOMIB’s mandate
until the end of March. Its role is essential, especially in
view of the upcoming legislative elections.
The mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
expires at the end of this month. The United Nations
should remain engaged in efforts towards peace in the
country and support ECOWAS efforts to resolve the
political crisis.
In conclusion, Poland encourages all the parties in
Guinea-Bissau to engage in dialogue. We also express
our full support for the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Modibo Touré. We look forward
to the upcoming UNIOGBIS mandate renewal.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We commend Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Modibo Touré
and Ambassador Mauro Vieira for their comprehensive
briefings on the situation in Guinea-Bissau, and extend
our full support for their commitment to facilitating a
political solution to the crisis.
Kazakhstan is deeply concerned by the protracted
political stalemate in the country. We join others in
calling on all stakeholders to engage in an inclusive
political dialogue and immediately implement the
Conakry Agreement and the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) road map to end
the deadlock and restore institutional viability. It is
therefore necessary to avoid differing interpretations of
the Agreement.
We commend the mediation efforts of ECOWAS,
under the leadership of Presidents Faure Gnassingbé of
Togo and Alpha Condé of Guinea, as well as by the
14/20

14/02/2018

other members of the group of international partner
organizations on Guinea-Bissau. We have taken
note of the decision of ECOWAS to impose targeted
sanctions on those obstructing the implementation
of the Conakry Agreement. We express hope that
this decision will contribute to finding a solution to
the crisis and strengthen democratic institutions and
capacity-building for State organs.
We welcome the extension until April of the mandate
of ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB),
which plays a crucial role in ensuring stability in
Guinea-Bissau, and urge international partners to
continue supporting ECOMIB. The importance of
peacebuilding, good offices and coordination efforts of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau cannot be underestimated. We therefore
support the Secretary-General’s recommendation to
renew the mission’s mandate for one more year. We also
agree with his proposal to assess the mission, should the
political impasse continue. We note the importance of
holding legislative and presidential elections according
to the constitutional time frame, and call on international
partners to provide the necessary technical, logistical
and financial support for the electoral process.
The current political crisis may further fuel
transnational organized crime, drug trafficking and
terrorist activities. Therefore, increased national
engagement and international support are critical
to enhancing and extending reforms in the security,
judicial and law enforcement sectors. In addition, the
most effective measures must be sought to ensure the
country’s stability and resilience by increasing support
for the education and health sectors, as well as the
existing development plans, including Terra Ranka and
the United Nations peacebuilding plan.
In conclusion, we welcome the active engagement
of the Women’s Facilitation Group, and impress upon
the national authorities the importance of ensuring
the participation of women and young people in the
political process at every stage and at all levels.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I would
like first of all to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Modibo Touré, and the
Permanent Representative of Brazil, Mr. Mauro Vieira,
who spoke in his capacity as Chair of the GuineaBissau country configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), for their briefings.
18-04195

14/02/2018

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

For years now, Guinea-Bissau has been marked by
a protracted political crisis. In a region characterized by
increasing attention to and respect for the rule of law,
human rights and democracy, Guinea-Bissau continues
to be out of step, as indicated once again in the latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/110). In the
light of this, the Kingdom of the Netherlands wishes to
underscore the following three points with regard to the
situation in Guinea-Bissau.
First, the Conakry Agreement of 2016 and the sixpoint road map should remain the basis for a political
solution in Guinea-Bissau, and its provisions should
honoured. Secondly, the diplomatic and political efforts
of the region through the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) deserve the steadfast
support of the United Nations, and particularly the
Security Council. Thirdly, the role of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS) in the country at this critical juncture,
with elections around the corner, is as important as ever.
It is therefore imperative that its mandate be extended.
First, with respect to the Conakry Agreement,
almost a year and half has passed since the Agreement
was concluded. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
reiterates the centrality of the Agreement in peacefully
resolving the current crisis, and urges the parties
to abide by its contents. It is clear that an important
roadblock with regard to its implementation is the
appointment of a consensus Prime Minister. The need
for this appointment has become increasingly urgent.
With parliamentary elections on the horizon, it is
imperative that these elections be held in a timely,
transparent and inclusive manner.
Secondly, with regard to support for ECOWAS,
while the past six months were mainly characterized by
the same intransigence as in previous reporting periods,
concerted action and increased pressure on the part of
the region, and ECOWAS in particular, could actually
lead, when given the necessary support, to tangible
progress in resolving the Bissau-Guinean crisis.
Yesterday’s decision of the African Union Peace and
Security Council to support the efforts of ECOWAS is
a case in point. The Secretary-General rightly observes
in his report that the continuing efforts of ECOWAS to
resolve the crisis are commendable.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands would like to
clearly point out that it supports and endorses ECOWAS
mediation efforts and its imposition of sanctions. We

S/PV. 8182

welcome the ECOWAS unified action and believe that
the presence of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau
is vital to the stability of Guinea-Bissau. ECOWAS has
shown before that, when united, it has the ability to
act as the region’s power broker, for example as it did
in The Gambia. Like it did then, the Council should
firmly support ECOWAS in taking up this role and
responsibility, as it should in the case of any other
regional organization in Africa that takes the lead in
maintaining peace and security in the region.
My third point is that ECOWAS cannot do this alone.
We commend the African Union and the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries for their collaboration
with the European Union and for the support they have
brought and the constructive role they play.
From the report of the Secretary General, it is
evident that UNIOGBIS plays a vital role in GuineaBissau. With legislative elections scheduled for 2018 and
presidential elections in 2019, the role of UNIOGBIS is
more crucial than ever. We therefore call for a renewal
of its mandate for no less than one year, in addition
to allowing for longer-term planning, including setting
more concrete priorities for the mission and making
adaptations to meet specific needs. UNIOGBIS’s
convening power in Bissau remains essential, as will
be its role in ensuring peaceful, free and democratic
elections in Guinea-Bissau, as well as a smooth postelection process. Renewing the mandate for less than
12 months would send the wrong signal.
In conclusion, sustained pressure to implement the
Conakry Agreement, the maximum possible support
to ECOWAS’s ongoing efforts and measures and
UNIOGBIS’s continued support to the political process
will be crucial factors in ending the deadlock in GuineaBissau, particularly in the light of the constitutionally
mandated elections.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/110) presented by
Mr. Modibo Touré, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS), and the briefing by Ambassador Mauro
Vieira of Brazil in his capacity as Chair of the GuineaBissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
There has been no significant progress or visible
improvement in the situation in Guinea-Bissau, where
the general instability seems almost impervious to

18-0419515/20

S/PV.8182

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

change, thereby jeopardizing the full implementation
of the Conakry Agreement, which is unquestionably
the fundamental framework for a peaceful solution
to the crisis and for achieving sustainable and lasting
peace there. In our view, the negative effects are likely
to exacerbate matters if the parties cannot definitively
condemn sectarian interests and contribute effectively
to the mediation efforts and good offices of the relevant
international, regional and subregional organizations.
Bolivia firmly repudiates any action that could
destabilize or jeopardize the ongoing dialogue and
reconciliation process that has been established with
the participation of all the parties concerned.
We urge that the agreements be definitively
consolidated in line with the inclusive national dialogue,
which would enable Government members, the political
parties represented in the National Assembly and every
sector of civil society to arrive at a consensus and
implement the agreements constructively through a
legitimate commitment to achieving a lasting political
and social solution whose sole aim is benefiting the
people of Guinea-Bissau, in strict respect for their
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
We acknowledge the active participation of
the African Union, the Economic Community of
West African States and its Mission in GuineaBissau, the European Union, the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries and UNIOGBIS,
through its Special Representative, and their ongoing
efforts to achieve a rapprochement between the
conflicting parties. We believe that UNIOGBIS’s work,
focused on initiatives aimed at creating opportunities
for dialogue and facilitating cooperation in the security
and political sectors with the goal of forming an
inclusive Government, must be reinforced. It will be
crucial to increase the Office’s capacity to use peaceful
means to deal with the crisis if it is to have more
effective and efficient results. We therefore support the
recommendation in the Secretary-General’s report that
the mission’s mandate be renewed for another year.
We also commend the work being done by the
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, appropriately chaired by Brazil, and
we emphasize the importance of strengthening
its coordination, information exchange and active
collaboration with the Security Council, in accordance
with the relevant General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions. We continue to encourage the
initiative of the Women’s Forum for Peace. The efforts
16/20

14/02/2018

of women in Guinea-Bissau to achieve a political
solution shows that a gender perspective and female
participation in mediation and dialogue at all levels
are essential.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate once
again that in a time of political, institutional and social
crisis, ensuring the welfare of the population and
especially its most vulnerable sectors should be the
overriding interest guiding Guinea-Bissau on a path to
permanent stability.
Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China would like to thank Special Representative Touré
and Ambassador Vieira, Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, for
their briefings. The situation in Guinea-Bissau has
been generally stable in recent months, but it will still
require all the parties to work together to meet each
other halfway if they are to resolve the political impasse
peacefully and as soon as possible.
China hopes that the parties in Guinea-Bissau
will consider the country’s interests, intensify their
dialogue and communication in order to bridge
differences quickly, implement the Conakry Agreement
as soon as possible, form an inclusive Government
and resume nation-building efforts. Meanwhile, the
international community should continue to follow
the situation in Guinea-Bissau. China will continue to
support the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau in exercising its good offices
and conducting mediation efforts under Mr. Touré’s
leadership, with the aim of coordinating international
support for Guinea-Bissau, promoting political
dialogue and advancing the country’s economic and
social development.
The international community should continue to
support regional and subregional organizations such
as the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States and the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries in their role as
mediators, while maintaining respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Guinea-Bissau
and supporting the countries of the region in settling
African issues through African means.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Mr. Modibo Touré, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing on the evolving political situation in GuineaBissau. We take note of the report of the Secretary18-04195

14/02/2018

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

General (S/2018/110) and the briefing by Mr. Mauro
Vieira, Permanent Representative of Brazil and
Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission. Russia supports the efforts
of the United Nations, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
to normalize the situation in Guinea-Bissau, which is
undergoing a prolonged political, social and economic
domestic crisis.
We are concerned about the lack of tangible
progress in implementing the Conakry Agreement. We
want to emphasize how crucial the Agreement is to
mitigating the political hostility and reducing GuineaBissau’s potential for conflict. We urge the country’s
executive and legislative representatives to focus on
forming an inclusive Government, introducing reforms,
especially in the security sector and the Constitution,
and increasing their joint efforts to prepare for
parliamentary and presidential elections. It will be
vital to strengthen the constitutional order and the rule
of law and resolve the accumulating socioeconomic
issues. We are pleased that the country’s political forces
continue to act with regard for the law and that the
military has remained neutral. We have taken note of
the ECOWAS communiqué of 4 February on imposing
targeted sanctions on 19 members of Guinea-Bissau’s
political elite.
Regarding the possibility of imposing similar
measures based on the provisions of Security Council
resolution 2048 (2012), we would like to point out that
the resolution’s main aim was restoring constitutional
order, which in practical terms was achieved several
years ago now. The result is that the resolution’s
sanctions measures are very outdated. In our opinion
its listing criteria have little to do with Guinea-Bissau’s
current political situation, and in any case would not be
usable against participants in the political process who
are acting within the law.
We are compelled to conclude that the opinions of
the Secretary-General’s report on the security sector
situation give the impression that things have been
left unsaid. It would have been more logical to discuss
how the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) is implementing
the provisions of its mandate with regard to building
Guinea-Bissau’s capacity to combat transnational crime
and drug trafficking, after describing the actual state of
affairs in those areas.

S/PV. 8182

In general, given the overall situation in GuineaBissau, we are willing to consider the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal to extend UNIOGBIS’s mandate.
However, we believe that the Special Representative
should focus not only on helping the people of
Guinea-Bissau emerge from their political deadlock
and preparing for the parliamentary elections in May
but also on effectively addressing the root causes
of the problems in Guinea-Bissau, which lie in its
Constitution’s structural contradictions. If the work of
constitutional reform is not completed by the start of the
next electoral cycle, the country risks encountering the
same problems with the new parliament and President.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Kuwait.
At the outset, I join other Council members in
thanking the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Modibo Touré, for his valuable briefing.
I would also like to express my appreciation to
Ambassador Mauro Vieira for his briefing as the chief
of Guinea-Bissau Configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission. We commend their efforts to support
security, stability and socioeconomic development in
Guinea-Bissau.
We have been following the recent political
developments there and regret the fact that none of
the provisions of the Conakry Agreement have been
implemented since signing it in October 2016. It is
unacceptable that there has so far been no appointment
of Prime Minister who enjoys consensus by the relevant
two parties, which is critical to implementing other
items of the Agreement.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau differs from other
cases before the Security Council in having no security
aspects. Unfortunately, however, the impasse has lasted
more than a year, and it is the people of Guinea-Bissau
who are suffering the consequences. In that regard,
we commend the steps that the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) has taken to
advance the political process, including measures for
the imposition of sanctions on those obstructing the
implementation of the Conakry Agreement, as well
as the decision to extend the mandate of its Mission
in Guinea-Bissau until the end of March. We want to
emphasize the relevance of the role of such regional
organizations in resolving regional issues.
The efforts of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)

18-0419517/20

S/PV.8182

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

deserve support, since it is dealing with a difficult
and complicated political situation. However, we hope
that it will be able to make progress during the coming
period with respect to conducting legislative elections
this year and presidential elections next.
The legislative and presidential elections, to be
held in 2018 and 2019 respectively, must take place
within the specific time frame. We therefore call on
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau, along with all stakeholders in GuineaBissau, such as the European Union, the African Union,
ECOWAS and the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries, to spare no efforts towards that end. We also
call on the Government of Guinea-Bissau to ensure
its citizens’ full participation in the elections, as well
as security and freedom of expression and assembly
for all.
The cooperation between UNIOGBIS and civilsociety organizations in promoting and developing
the role of women in Guinea-Bissau is very positive.
We hope that UNIOGBIS will make a greater effort
to guarantee the full participation of all components
of the society, especially women and young people, in
the next political process and will continue to promote
other aspects of its mandate until the current impasse
is resolved.
In conclusion, we reiterate the importance of the
Conakry Agreement as the basic reference for resolving
this political crisis in Guinea-Bissau, and the efforts
of ECOWAS and President Alpha Condé of Guinea
to advance the political process in order to maintain
the security and stability of Guinea-Bissau and the
region. We stand ready to cooperate with Côte d’Ivoire
in preparing a draft resolution for the extension of the
UNIOGBIS mandate, in response to a request by the
Secretary-General. We also support the issuance of a
Press Statement to clarify the unified position of the
Council regarding the situation in Guinea-Bissau.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Guinea-Bissau.
Mr. Delfim da Silva (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in
French): I thank you, Mr. President, for inviting my
delegation to the Security Council table and for giving
me the floor. I would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate your country, Kuwait, on its assumption of
18/20

14/02/2018

the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February. We wish you success in your work.
I would like to thank Mr. Modibó Touré, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for GuineaBissau, for his presentation today of the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2018/110). I would also like
to thank Ambassador Mauro Vieira of Brazil once
again for his constructive statement on behalf of
peacebuilding and constitutional and democratic order
in Guinea-Bissau. And I would like to express our
gratitude to all the Ambassadors of States members of
the Security Council for their attention to my country,
Guinea-Bissau.
The political crisis in Guinea-Bissau did not begin
with the signing of the Conakry Agreement in October
2016, but much earlier. The Conakry Agreement
represents a step in the right direction for resolving
the crisis by consensus. In the past 15 months, the two
main parties — the African Party for the Independence
of Guinea and Cape Verde (PAIGC) and the Party for
Social Renewal (PRS) — have repeatedly and publicly
expressed their disagreement on a crucial point of the
Agreement, which is having consensus on choosing a
candidate for the post of Prime Minister. If a consensus
was reached, the agreed candidate would then be
appointed by the President of the Republic, in line with
the Constitution. The PAIGC states that there was such
a consensus in Conakry. The PRS, for its part, affirms
that there was not.
Fifteen months later, the lack of consensus has
prevented the appointment of a Prime Minister, which
must be consensus-based. How can the President
appoint a consensus Prime Minister without, at the very
least, the prior agreement of the two largest political
parties? In short, the crisis over the consensus is really
what has paralysed the Conakry Agreement and is
prolonging the stalemate in the 15-month political crisis
in Guinea-Bissau. The question is how to overcome the
crisis concerning the consensus. Some believe that the
imposition of sanctions will be conducive to it. We are
not sure of that. Sanctions are unlikely to defuse a crisis
and can even be counterproductive. It is important to
bear in mind that while it is easy to adopt sanctions, it is
much more difficult to impose a consensus. In any case,
continuing to seek a solution to the crisis is clearly the
most important thing that we must do.
We need a compromise solution, a credible name,
a person whose academic, political and professional
18-04195

14/02/2018

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

background can bring about such a compromise.
We need someone who, without being the favourite
candidate of the PAIGC or the PRS, has a background
that would enable him to bring the parties together and
thereby reach a compromise. The recent appointment
to the post of Prime Minister of a PAIGC leader,
the engineer Artur Silva, a former Minister of four
Government departments — Fisheries, Defence,
Education and Foreign Affairs — suggests that he is
the right person to help bring about such a compromise.
Moreover, after his appointment, Silva was re-elected to
the higher bodies of the PAIGC, its Central Committee
and Political Bureau — at the party’s most recent
congress, which ended a few days ago, proving that he
has earned the political confidence of the party’s most
important bodies.
Prime Minister Silva has already held working
meetings in Bissau, which I would say are encouraging,
with all the parties to the Conakry Agreement — the
Ambassadors of Nigeria, Senegal, China, the Gambia
and the representative of the Economic Community of
West African States in Guinea-Bissau. Finally, through
the appointment of a senior PAIGC leader, justice
can be done to the party that won the last legislative
elections. But above all, there will be no losers, since
the PRS will be guaranteed strong representation in a
Government of inclusion. This is not a zero-sum game.
Under this principle of compromise, which allows a
certain degree of flexibility regarding the principle of
consensus, there will undoubtedly be a winner — my
country, Guinea-Bissau.
In conclusion, I reiterate our thanks to the members
and want to assure the Council that Guinea-Bissau will
continue to count on their support in these difficult
times for the sake of civil peace, political stability
and solidarity.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Togo.
Mr. Kpayedo (Togo) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity
to address the Council once again on the situation in
Guinea-Bissau, in my capacity as Coordinator of the
Ambassadors of the member countries of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) that are
accredited to the United Nations.
I also want to thank the Secretary-General of the
United Nations for his report on the situation in GuineaBissau (S/2018/110), presented today by Mr. Modibo

S/PV. 8182

Touré, his Special Representative, whom we welcome
here, along with his team, and whose briefing has
provided us with a thorough picture of the situation in
that country. Lastly, I would like to thank Mr. Mauro
Vieira for his commitment and efforts in his capacity
as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
Since it began, the crisis in Guinea-Bissau has
continued to be a source of great concern for the Heads
of State of West Africa, who are therefore sparing no
effort to arrive at a favourable and lasting outcome. This
issue has been on the agenda of every recent meeting
of our subregional organization’s Summit. In my last
statement to the Council in August (see S/PV.8031), I
discussed the trampling of the implementation of the
Conakry Agreement, which led to the possibility of
having recourse to the ECOWAS sanctions. Since then,
the impasse is still there, despite the proposal for a new
road map by President José Mário Vaz at the conclusion
of the fifty-second Ordinary Session of Authority of
Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS, held in
Abuja on 16 and 17 December 2017, and reaffirmed in
Addis Ababa at the ECOWAS Extraordinary Session
held on 27 January, on the margins of the 30th Ordinary
Session of the African Union Assembly.
In that regard, the President-in-Office of ECOWAS,
Mr. Faure Essozimna Gnassingbé, in consultation
with his peers, dispatched a mission of the ministerial
sanctions committee to Guinea-Bissau on 31 January
and 1 February 2018, led by Mr. Robert Dussey, Togo’s
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Cooperation and African
Integration. Its purpose was to assess the progress
made by the parties to the crisis in implementing the
Agreement and to report to the ECOWAS Heads of
State on the potential consequences if the stalemate
persisted. Following that report, the Heads of State and
Government of ECOWAS, in view of the fact that no
significant progress has been seen in the implementation
of the Conakry Agreement despite ongoing mediation
and calling on all of Guinea-Bissau’s political leaders to
show their sense of responsibility and respect for their
country’s Constitution through a frank and inclusive
dialogue, decided to activate the sanctions mechanisms
against individuals and organizations that are hindering
a settlement of the crisis, with the aim of promoting the
restoration of democratic governance and respect for
the rule of law in Guinea-Bissau.
As a result, 19 political figures have been subject
to sanctions since 4 February, in accordance with our

18-0419519/20

S/PV.8182

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

decision 01/2018, on individual sanctions designed to
promote the restoration of democratic governance and
respect for the rule of law in Guinea-Bissau. The list
is not exhaustive,and the monitoring committee for
the implementation of sanctions — composed of Togo,
Guinea and the ECOWAS Commission — therefore
reserves the right to revise it as the situation on
the ground changes. Here I should point out, as the
representative of Côte d’Ivoire noted earlier, that
these sanctions were established through ECOWAS’s
Supplementary Act of 17 February 2012 concerning
sanctions regimes against Member States that do
not honour their obligations to the Community, and
are based on article 45 of the ECOWAS Protocol on
Democracy and Good Governance. They include
suspended participation in Community activities, and
a travel ban and financial assets freeze for those listed
and their families, wherever they may be.

20/20

14/02/2018

The sanctions cannot be effectively implemented
without the assistance of the United Nations and
other multilateral and regional organizations. In that
regard, I would like to take this opportunity to call
for multifaceted support to ECOWAS in implementing
these measures, which we hope will help to create an
atmosphere conducive to the restoration of dialogue
among the people of Guinea-Bissau, with a view to
resolving this political and institutional impasse, which
has lasted too long.
In conclusion, I would once again like to invite
all the parties to the Guinea-Bissau crisis to show a
spirit of compromise, responsibility and openness to a
peaceful, negotiated and lasting solution to this dispute,
which hampers development efforts in the country and
therefore in the entire subregion, which is still dealing
with persistent security challenges.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

18-04195
