UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY COIJNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

1897”’

MEETING:

74 MARCH

1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

. .. .. . . . . .. .. . . ,, . . . .. .. . . . . ., , . .. , . .

1

. . . .. . . .. . . .. .. . .. , . .. . ,. . . . .. . .. . . .. . . .. . . .. .,

I

Request by the Libyan Arab Republic and Pakistan for consideration
of the
serious situation arising from recent developments in the occupied Arab
territories:
Letter dated 19 March 1976 from the Permanent Representatives of the
Libyan Arab Republic and Pakistan to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security
Council
(S/12017)
. . . .. . . . .. . . .. . . .. . . .

1

Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/18971
of the agenda

SIPV. 1897

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly S~~~~plet~r~ntsof the Oflic~ic~lR~c&ls
of llre .SP~*III.~I>~
Co~~;rc:il, The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given,
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutiom
md
Decisions
of rile Security Cound.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1897th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 24 March 1976, at 3.30 p.m.
Preuid~f~r: Mr. Thomas S. BOYA (Benin).
Present:
The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, icdly, Japan;Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l897)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2.

Request by the Libyan Arab Republic and Pakistan
for consideration of the serious situation arising
from recent developments in the occupied Arab
territories:
Letter dated 19 March 1976 from the Permanent
Representatives of the Libyan Arab Republic
and Pakistan to the United Nations addressed
to the President ofthe Security Council (S/12017)
The

meefiny

was

called

to order

ut 4.25

pm.

Adoption of the agenda
The ageada

IVUS adopted.

Requestby the Libyan Arab Republic and Pakistan

for consideration of the serious situation arising from
recent developments in the occupied Arab terri;ories:
Letter dated 19 March 1976 from the Permanent
lepresentatives of the Libyan Arab Repubik and
Pakistan to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/12017)

I. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from
French):
In accordance with decisions taken at preceding
meetings [/893rd,
1894th
and 1896rh
meetings],
I shall
now invite the representatives of Israel and the
Palestine Liberation Organization to t?ke their places
at the Council table and the representatives of Egypt,
lraq, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, the Syrian Arab Republic
and Yugoslavia to take places at the side of the Council
chamber on the understanding that, as is customary,
they will be invited to take a place at the Council
table when it is their turn to speak.

(Egypt),
Mr. Zahawie
(Iraq),
Mr.
Sharc~
(Jordan),
Mr. Baroody
(Saudi
Arabia),
Mr. Allqf
(Syriarn
Arab
Reprtblic)
and Mr. PetriC
(Yugoslaviu)
took the places
reserwdfor
them ut the side of the Council
chumber.

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from
French):
1 should also like to inform the Council that 1 have
just received letters from the representatives of Bangladesh, India and Tunisia in which they request to be
invited, in accordance with rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure, to participate without the right to
vote in the Council’s discussion.
At the iwitation
oJ’ the
President,
(Bangladesh),
Mr. Jzipal
(India)
und Mr.
sia) took places
(II the side of the Council

Mr.
Kaiser
Driss
(Tttnichamber.

3. Mr. VINCI (Italy): My delegation has listened
to all the statements made UP to now on the tension
and unrest that has recently arisen in the occupied
West Bank, and in the Holy City in uarticular. with the
attention and the concern- that- the*situation’deserves
and requires from all the members of the Council.
4. My delegation had, of course, previously studied
very carefully the contects of the letter contained in
document S/12017, which our colleagues, the representatives of Libya and of Pakistan addressed to you,
Mr. President, to request a meeting of the Couticil
to consider this situation.
5. The facts and the arguments put forward by the
main parties concerned have certainly helped us to
have a clearer understanding of the issue which the
Council is deliberating. However, instead of entering
into a detailed examination of the more recent events,
and in spite of all the sympathy and concern which
they arouse in each of us, we feel that we should
not lose sight of the deep-rooted causes of what is
occurring in Jerusalem and in the West Bank.
6. In this connexion, we cannot fail to note that if
turmoil and disturbances are taking place there it is
because of the perpetuation of the occupation by
Israeli authorities of Arab territories. My Government
deeply regrets that, after some promising moves, the
negotiating process is apparently again at a standstill
and with few prospects-in view; ifany at all, for the
implementation of pertinent resolutions of the Council,
in particular resolution 242 (1967), which provides the
basis for a just and lasting peace in the Middle East,

including. as we understand it, the withdrawal of
Israeli forces from all the occupied Arab territories.
It goes without saying that if the Israeli occupation
of Arab lands had cc Ised, incider: s of the kind we
are witnessing and which have caused concern in the
Council would not have taken place.
7. According to a great master of diplomacy, when
there is a general, unspoken understanding on an
international issue, it is even better to state it. Therefore, we feel it to be both relevant and consistent
with the item on the agenda to express at this stage
once again our belief that the basic framework of
the negotiating process as outlined in resolution 242
(IY67) remains valid and should be revived. In the
implementation of all parts of that resolution by all
the main parties concerned, the Israeli Government
should, ~UUI. a/k, relinquish occupation of all Arab
territories and, in particular, withdraw its forces from
occupied Jerusalem and the West Bank.
8. In this connexion, may I recall that my Government is fully committed at the same time to the recognition of the rights of the Palestinian people, and
I should like to refer to what I said on the subject on
previous occasions, namely at the 1876th and 1879th
meetings of the Council as well as at the 2393rd meeting
of the General Assembly,’ when I spoke on behalf of
the nine countries of the European Community.
9. Having said that, and, I believe, having clearly
acknowledged that in our mind the frustration and
protest expressed by the Arab inhabitants of Jerusalem
and the West Bank are not beyond anybody’s understanding, for the reasons I have just mentioned,
I would, however, like to indicate in some way at this
stage some grounds for hope.
10. First of all. I feel that there is an increasing
awareness that the situation in the area can, under the
influence of old and new conflicting forces and views,
get out of control, and consequently the prospect of
another war is not at all to be discounted, in spite of
the efforts and endeavours towards peace being made
by many. This awareness has produced some positive
effects.
II. In other words, given the precarious circumstances I have mentioned before and given the continuqus danger of further escalation of violence, a
notable amount of restraint and tact has been shown
by the opposing parties so that incidents occurring in
Jerusalem and the West Bank have not got out of
hand and have even been managed with considerable
caulion.
I?. This was shown on one side, as we understand
from the clarifications given by the representative of
Israel. by the executive as well as by the judiciary
power of his country, and on the other side, by the
restraint exercised by the Arab population in the territories concerned in making their position known lo

public opinion. The outbreak of excessive violence by
demonstrators has been prevented. thanks first of all
to the balance and sense of responsibility shown in
neneral bv the Arab oopulation. We cannot but feel
encouraged by this general sentiment that bloodshed
will not help. Uniustified acts of violence. especially
on the part’ of official authorities. never help. They
only make things more difficult for everybody.
13. One more ground for some comfort is provided
by the wise decision taken by the Israeli Government
to participate actively in this debate in the Security
Council. It is a decision I have advocated-as I recalled
in our first meeting-since I2 January. In our opinion.
this is consistent with statesmanship and political
wisdom and comes to terms with requirements of the
present hour. 1 believe that we can all welcome this
positive move, since, in spite of the heated arguments
used by both sides, nobody can deny that they are
sitting at the same table and talking to each other.
This offers an opportunity to the Council which should
not be lost, in order. first, to encourage this sign from
Israel of a lessening of intransigence and of some
willingness, apparently, to adjust to the new realities
as advocated by the Arabs, and secondly, in order to
bring about a constructive outcome of the present
deliberations. which. if 1 understood correctlv. also
accords with ;he wish expressed by the representative
of the Palestine Liberation Oraanization (PLO) at our
meeting yesterday. I believe that we should not refrain
from using our imagination in order to find out how we
can contribute to the resumption of the negotiating
process.
14. I would like now to recall the special sensitivitv
and the unceasing concern of Italy with regard to the
fate of the Holy City of Jerusalem. 1 certainlv do
not need, with you, -Mr. President and all my*colleagues around the table, to go through 20 centuries
of history to explain what has generated that sensitivity
and aroused that concern. The representatb:e of Italy.
I can assure the Council, will refrain from doing so
and will strongly resist what would seem to be an
irresistible temptation. Let me only mention that the
ancient path linking Jerusalem to Rome, along which
a glorious civilization fOllOWing the steps of St. Paul
once found its way, is still an open path for multitudes.
15. The green hills and golden walls of Jerusalem
arg dear, indeed, to the Roman in me and to the
European in me. The shrines of us Christians are there,
as well as those of the Moslems and the J:WS.
It
could not be more unfortunate that the Holy City of
Jerusalem, the sacred home of the three great
monotheistic religions. has become a centre of dispute.
As my present Prime Minister. Aldo Moro. stated in
the General Assembly on 21 June 1967. “Jerusalem
should be not a cause of division but a centre of
high spiritual value that can promote reconciliation”.’
16. We deeply regret the present course of events.
We feel that Jerusa!em should be given the high status

IO which it is entitled by reason of its universal
spiritual character. My Government has committed
itself on several occasions to the freedom of the Holy
Places of Jerusalem and to the opening of its gates
to everybody from everywhere.
17. Speaking in the Council in the course of the
debate which led to the adoption of resolution 298
(lY71), I personally had the opportunity to state
[/5821rd ~rn~/inp] that in the opinion of the Italian
Government the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civil Persons in Time of War, of
12 August lY4Y? is fully applicable to the occupied
Arab te-ritories, and of course to the occupied sections of the city of Jerusaiem. It is therefore the
responsibility of the Israeli Government to refrain
from all unilateral actions and measures inconsistent
with the provisions of international law governing
rights and obligations of an occupying Power.
18. In the past we have made our voice heard when
violations have occurred, and we shall do the same
thing every time it is necessary.
19. As 1 indicated in my statement of nearly five
years ago to which 1 have just referred. in the opinion
of my Government any violation of the aforementioned
Geneva Convention is, apart from the juridical aspect,
politically harmful and a source of additional tension
in the area. That would be all the more regrettable
at a time when frustration caused by lack of significant
developments prevails in the area. It is therefore
incumbent on all. in our view, to continue to exercise
the greatest possible restraint. Everything that 1 have
said on this point applies, of course, also to the settlements planted in the occupied Arab territories.
20. In conclusion, there is no doubt in our minds
that if Arab crowds are resorting now to street
demonstrations and rallies it is because they bitterly
resent the continuation of the Israeli occupation and
the lack of a concrete. positive outlook, and therefore
the prolongation si/te die of their position as a subjected people. Many of us who had to endure a
similar experience for a shorter time can understand
what they feel. We have no doubt that those Arab
students who are marching and parading in the
occupied territories are doing so for a good. honourable cause, since year after year what has been equally
prominent in their minds has been freedom. and for
too long. instead of having freedom, they have been
undergoing the ordeal of .occupation by a foreign
army.
‘-I. In the circumstances prevailing in the area. we
hope and trust that with the help of the responsible
lenders of all sides concerned. events ~111not escalate
furthci- a! a time when endeavours are being underfakcn--by the Secretary-General himself-for
the
resumption once again of efforts leading to a just and
durable peace. In our view. the first duty of the Council at thih stape. as I have stated before. is IO tend a

hand to these endeavours. And here I should like to
subscribe entirely to the words used by our colleague
from Pakistan at the end of his statement on 22 March:
“In the view of my dele,:ation it is the primary
task of the Security Council to encourage the prospects of peace, which notwithstanding the bitter and
emotional things we have heard today, are not nonexistent.” [1&0/r /neetLig, pura. 153.1
It is on that hopeful note that I too wish to conclude
my statement.
22. Mr. BOYD (Panama) (hkvpretarion
from
Spa/tFirst 1 should like on behalf of the delegation of
Panama to extend a cordial welcome to Ambassador
William Scranton, the new Permanent Representative
of the United States. We offer him our best wishes
for success in the important mission entrusted to him
by his Government.

is&:

23. We voted in favour of inviting the Palestine
Liberation Oraanization to participate in this debate
because we Gel that when international problems
affecting the Falestinians are being discussed it is
highly appropriate for their author&d representatives
to be present and to have their voice heard. We feel
that it is very helpful for this debate to have present
here both the representative of Israel and the representative of the PLO.
24. I turn now to the arguments put forward by the
delegations of Pakistan and Libya, which requested
this series of Council meetines to consider the events
that had recently taken place in Jerusalem and other
oarts of the West Bank of the Jordan. We sincerelv
believe that these situations marked by violence hr
recent days in the Middle East have their roots in the
error committed by several of the parties concerned in
the problems of that part of the world, parties that
have welcomed and found their interests served by the
prolongation of the SPURNS
quoin that area with regard
to the Arab territories occupied since the 1%7 war.
25. We believe that most aspects of the problems of
the Middle East and their possible solutions are
covered in a way acceptable to all the parties in
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (19731,
ahhougb certain new elements must now be added in
order to provide for the recognition of the lawful
political rights of the Palesti&
people. Those who
tly to maintain situations marked by the use of force
inevitably encourage new acts of violence.
26. Everyone is welt aware of the strong religious
feelings of most of the world’s faithful when reference
is made to the Holy Places in Jerusalem. the cradle
of the religions practised by Christians, Moslems and
Jews.
27. The decision made on 28 January by a judge in
Jerusalem that it did not constitute a case of public

disorder for Jews to pray in the immediate vicinity
of the Al-Aqsa Mosque led to a series of disturbances
in the main population centres in the occupied Arab
territories. Fortunately, as the representative of
Israel said in his statement, an appeal was submitted
on 9 February and

to the problem. We must adopt an elevated approach
for that purpose and must accept a religious pluralism
confirmed by history with sufficient guarantees for the
full etioyment of the respective rights of the three
religions.
33. This approach is not unrealistic; it is a goal that
we can all achieve if we demonstrate good faith.
Our conclusion is that Jerusalem requires a special
status, internationally guaranteed. The basic elements
of that status would include the following guarantees,
in our opinion. First, freedom of residence, freedom
of worship and respect for the preservation of and free
access to the Holy Places, as well as facilities to
maintain institutions, temples, homes and places
for those who are in charge of the administration of
those institutions. The authorities in charge should
give due protection to historical rights and to the
rights of the various communities involved to the
property they have acquired. The authorities of !he
city must help preserve and safeguard the historical
sites of the Holy City. Secondly, the authorities
should ensur: equal rights for the three religious communities and should guarantee to foster their spiritual,
cultural and social lives. Suitable opportunities must be
provided for economic progress so that there may be
more employment and better education for those
participating in these development plans.

“The Minister of Police, Shlomo Hillel, announced on 29 February that the police will abide
h) the Supreme Court decision and will arrest any
Jew attempting to pray on the Temple Mount. The
Minister for Keligious Affairs, Yitzhak Raphael,
stated on Israel Radio but three days ago that Jews
will not be allowed to pray on the Temple Mount.”
[Ibid.,

paw.

80.1

28. As members of the Council are aware, 94% of
Latin Americans are Christian, and more than 92%
are Catholic. Consequently, the people in our part of
the world take a keen interest in the events in the
Holy Land; and as spokesman of the Revolutionary
Government of Panama, I believe I have an obligation
to express the desire of the Holy See that Jerusalem
be given a special status, with international guarantees,
so ihat Catholic worshippers and, in general, members
of the three majo; religions of the world can find the
peace needed to realiie their aspirations concerning
the Holy Places.
29. The truth is that nothing has been done since the
adoption of the General Assembly resolution in 1947
whereby the status of a corpus separurum
was requested for Jerusalem and its environs, to be administered unier the authority of the Trusteeship Council [resolution
181 (fl)].

34. If we plan to make a serious effort to develop
that idea, we must agree that the special status of
Jerusalem must be clearly defined, in particular the
leaal formula concerning the territory to be affected,
which must, in the opinion of us Catholics, include at
the very least the Old City, Mount Moriah and the
Mount of Olives. Finally,.it must be specific with
regard to supervisory functions and guarantees to be
provided by the international community.

30. The Israeli authorities maintain unreservedly that
Jerusalem should be Jewish. The Arabs, for their
part, are equally intransigent in demanding sovereignty
over Jerusalem. We, as Catholics, humbly believe that
only by taking an historically realistic approach, only
by seeking fairly an ideal future for the Holy City,
can we find a satisfactory settlement and eliminate the
serious causes of conflict. To achieve that it is necessary to meet the demands and just claims of the
parties concerned.

35. We hope, with the faith of the Catholic belief,
that many of these ideas, which reflect the thinking
of millions of Latin Americans, will be taken duly
into account when the time comes to negotiate the
international status which must one day be given to
Jerusalem on a permanent basis.
36. The delegation of Panama, in its many statements
on the Middle
East, has always made a constructive
effort to p;.omote peace negotiations in that sorely

31. The Holy City must continue to be the heritage
of the three major monotheistic religions. a sacred
heritage of almost a billion and a hatfof their adherents

tried region of the world. We are sure that only on the
basis of a balanced
solution
to the problem
can we
find that peace which today appears elusive and which

throughout
the world. Jerusalem
is the site 0; temples
and of sacred relics for believers, and conditions there

must remain equal for all. As the home of the three
religious communities that live [here, Jerusalem is
the goal of thousands of pilgrims who visit it contantly and it mrst therefore be protected by all possible guarantees and have the greatest possible
security.

we all want to see established permanently in that
part of the world.
37. Penama repeats its belief that no stable international order can be based on the threat or the use of
force and declares once again that we must not recoanize the validi!y of the &cupation or acquisition of
territory by force. The withdrawal of Israeli forces from
territory occupied in the 1967 war and respect fol
the integrity and security of the territory of all the

32. In view of the presence and tenure in Jerusalem
of different groups. the logical and inteliigent thing
to do would be to find a peaceful, equitable solution
4

countries in the area, including Israel, must be linked
with respect for the legitimate rights of the Palesti;:ian
people. Only :Len may we have a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East.
38. We share the preoccupation of the tiecretaryGeneral that, as a result of so much bloodshed, pain
and suffering, at any moment there could be another
crisis in the Middle East involving neighbouring countries and endangering peace in that area and, indeed,
in the entire world. We cling to the hope that a way
will soon be found to reconvene the Geneva Peace
Conference.
39. After considering the problem as a whole, it is our
conclusion that an understanding can be negotiated,
one that will be practicable only on the basis of a
Palestinian State, including the Gaia Strip and the West
Bank of the Jordan, and that for. their part, the Arabs
must respect the right of Israel to live within secure
and recognized boundaries.
40. Panama, which as a result of negotiations for a
new Canal treaty hopes to eradicate the colonial-type
enclave which divides its country in two and which
is known throughout the world as the Panama Canal
Zone, shares the impatience of the Palestinians who
await the hour when they will recover effective sovereignty over their land. For that reason we stand
together with them, because we recognize that they
have certain inalienable rights which they can never
renounce.
41. The PRESIDENT (interpretcttiurl
from
French):
Before I call on the next speaker, I wish to inform
the Council that I have just received a letter from the
representative of Mauriiania containing a request to be
invited. in accordance with Article 31 of the Charter,
to participate without the right to vote in the Council’s
discussion. If I hear no objection, I propose to invite
’ him to participate, without the right to-vote, in conformity with the Council’s usual practice and rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation
(Mcuritunia)
took
side of the Coutwil

of the President,
the place
reserved
chamber.

Mr.

for

El Hassen
him at the

42. Mr. KANAZAWA (Japan): I should like to begin
by associating myself with tbe statement by you,
Mr. President, extending a warm welcome to the
new representative of the United States, Governor
William Scranton. My delegation is delighted to have
this distinguished representative of the United States
working with us, and we look forward to fruitful
co-operation with him and his delegation.
43. It is most regrettable to note that the situation
in a vital area of the Middle East is deteriorating.
and we are called upon to discuss recent developments
in the occupied Arab territories and Jerusalem. In the
view of my delegation this is all the more cause fol

concern, because the Government of Japan has for
years been apprehensive about the situation in
Jerusalem. In recent weeks the situation has become
still more disturbing and has resulted Iit casualties
and suffering, particularly among the Arab citizens.
44. The basic position of the Government of Japan
with regard to the occupied Arab territories and
Jerusalem is that Israel should withdraw from all
the territories occupied since 1967. The Government
of Japan therefore firmly opposes any attempt to annex
those territories and any change, physical or demographic, or other actions and policies intended to alter
their legal status. Further, the Government of Japan
reauests the Government of Israel to comply fully
wiih the Geneva Convention relative to the Pioiection
of Civilian Persons in Time or War’ in all the territories occupied since 1967.
45. As regards Jerusalem, the people of Japan, with
their own spiritual tradition, naturally have the highest
appreciation for the long history of Jerusalem. We feel
that the great historical and cultural heritage which it
has brought to the world should be protected for the
benefit of all mankind, without distinction as to race or
religion.
46. Since the question of Jerusalem is indeed unique,
my delegation attaches special importance to Israel’s
compliance with General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions which prohibit all unilateral
changes that would lead to the annexation by Israel
of a city which is venerated by Moslems, Christians
and Jews alike. The Holy Places of three great religions
are situated in Jerusalem, and there is grave danger
that any unilateral alteration-physical,
religious or
political-may
cause zonflicts among the parties
concerned.
47. The recent unrest caused by the 28 January
decision by an Israeli magistrate in Jerusalem that
Jews could not be prevented from praying in Al-Haram
Al-Sharif was most disquieting. We take note, however, of the policy that the Government of Israel has
fol!Dwed in banning Jewish prayer on the sacred hilltop,
as well as of its action in obtaining the decision of the
Supreme Court on 21 March which upheld that policy
and reserved the earlier decision of tbe magis:&e.
48. My delegation is greatly concerned iest tbe :ecent
incidents in Jerusalem and ii8 otber parts of ihe West
Bank should aggravate tbe situation and jeopardize
the prospects for the settlement that is so urgently
needed. We appeal to all the parties to refrain from
any action that would further heighten the tension.
49. The series of events of past weeks may he
repeated, and my delegation believes that there is no
remedy for those happenings except a prompt, just
and lasting peace settlement in the Middle East. It is
my delegation’s earnest hope that this will be achieved
so that the situation may not take a further turn
for the worse.

subsiantiate an invalid claim by presenting a fait
accompli. I do not wish to take the Council’s time by
enumerating at length the history of application of
this policy by Israel in occupied Arau territories.
Instead, I should like only to refer, as an example,
to paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution 3523 A
(XXX) on the report of the Special Committee to
Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Populntion of the Occupied Territories.
The resolution condemned in particular such Israeli
policies and practices, and, at the risk of repetition,
may I be allowed to restate them:

50. The PRESIDENT (ittterpretutiorl
from
French):
The next speaker is the representative of Bangladesh.
! invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
51. Mr. KAISEK (Bangladesh): Mr. President, with
respect I join the previous speakers in expressing
satisfaction at seeing you, a distinguished son of
Africa, presiding over these important meetings of
the Security Council. We are confident that under your
wise and astute guidance the Council’s deliberations
will be successful.

“(a) The annexation of parts of the occupied
territories;

52. We take this opportunity to welcome the uresence
of Ambassador Scranton, the representative of the
United States. We are sure that with his knowledge
and wisdom Mr. Scranton will bring still more meaning
and progress to the deliberations of this body.

“(b) The estabiishment of Israeli settlements
therein and the transfer of an alien population
thereto;

53. My delegation asked for an opportunity to participate in the debate of the Council to express its
grave concern about the serious situation arising from
the recent developments in occupied Arab territories.
In calling for an urgent meeting of the Security
Council on the subject, the representatives of the
Libyan Arab Republic and Pakistan referred to some
of these recent grave developments. On 28 January
a magistrate of an Israeli court in Jerusalem gave a
ruling permitting Jews to pray in the premises of the
Al-Aqsa Mosque, revered by Moslems all the world
over as one of their holiest shrines. The wide-spread
protests and demonstrations against this decision by
the Arab population in Jerusalem and in other major
cities of the West Bank reflect the gravity of the
situation and the determination of the people of the
occupied territories to resist any attempt to change the
status of Jerusalem and absorb it into Israel.

ho;ce)s The destruction

and demolition

of Arab

“(d) The confiscation and expropriation of Arab
property in the occupied territories and all other
transactions for the acquisition of land involving the
Israeli authorities, institutions or nationals on the
one hand, and the inhabitants or institutions of the
occupied territories on the other;
‘Ye) The evacuation, deporta:ion, expulsion,
displacement and transfer of Arab inhabitants of
the occupied territories, and the denial of their right
to return;
“cf) Mass arrests, administrative detention and
ill-treatment of the Arab population;

54. My country views this development with great
concern ant-’ seriousness. To the Moslems of the world
Jerusalem is one of the holiest of the holy cities.
Moslcn.s all over the world are therefore bound to
resist any attempt to undermine the spiritual values
of the city of Jerusalem and our Islamic heritage
there. On a number of occasions since the occupation
of Jerusakm by Israel in 1%7, the Moslem countries
have had to protest the desecration of the holy shrines
of Islam situated in the city. In our view the decision
of the Israeli court regarding praying by Jews in the
p~~&sees of the Al-Aqsa Mosque therefore cannot be
regarded as an isolated incident. The latest expression
of this concern on the part of the member States of
the Islamic Conference was conveyed to the SecrL .aryGeneral by the representative of Saudi Arabia on
12 March [SIIZOIZ].

“(g) The pillaging of archaeological and cultural
wpefiy;

The resolution also declared that these nolicies and
practices of Israel constituted grave viol&ions of the
Charter of the United Nations. in oarticular the arinciples of sovereignty and territorial integrity and ~the
principles and provisions of international law concerning occupation, as well as an impediment to the
establishment of a just and lasting peace.

55. In addition to the desecration of Islamic shrines
in Jerusalem, the Israeli Government seems to have
followed a persistent policy of changing the religious,
cultural, demographic and political status not only
of Jerusalem but of other parts of Arab territories
occupied by Israel. It is a policy of creating facts tc

56. The problem therefore is not only religious 01
social; it is essentially political in nature and arises
from the military occupation of Arab territories by
Israel. The recent incident in the occupied Arab territories once again reminds us. if any such reminder is
necessary, of the danger inherent in the present situa-

“(h) The interference with religious freedoms and
practices, as well as family rights and customs;
“(i)
The illegal exploitation of the natural wealth,
resources and population of the occupied territories.”

6

tion in the Middle East and the urgent need 10 find
a just and lasting peace in the area. We have always
maintained that the return of all occupied territories
and the restoration of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people are two essential elements for any
just settlement.

Israel has taken the trouble to tell us as much in his
statement. No, it must be the realization that not even
the staunchest supportcrof the Zionist entity can stand
up to defend the Zionists’ violations, their actions
and their policies in Jerusalem and the other Arab
territories under military occupation.

In the pas1 the Security Council and the General
Assembly have on a number of occasions considered
the actions of the Israeli occupation authority to
change the status and character of the occupied city
of Jerusalem to give effect lo its declared intention
of annexing it. In doing so, both the Council and the
Assembly not only condemned these acts but also
declared them totally invalid and called on the Israeli
authorities to desist from such measures to change the
status of Jerusalem and to rescind those already
taken. The recent action of the Israeli authority
constituted another violation of the decisions of both
Council and Assemblv. The decision of the Israeli
Supreme Court overruling the Magistrate’s Court
could at its very best be in the nature of very temporary
relief. But the status and future of Jerusalem and other
occupied territories cannot be left to the unilateral
decision of the occupation authority. It has therefore
becoi.tr imperative fur the Council to take prompt and
effective action to ensure implementation of its own
decisions and to prevent further deterioration of an
already explosive situation.

63. One should perhaps wonder what was, then, the
contribution made by the Israeli representative in this
debate. It boils down to this. Whatever Arabs or the
rest of the world may say on Israel’s policies in the
occupied territories, it is simply not true; it is but a
collection of damnable lies, malicious falsehoods and
repetitions of the tactic of the big lie. Neither Jerusalem
nor the world has witnessed such an enlightened,
humane, tolerant, just and benevolent administration
on earth as the Zionist entity--established
indeed by
force of arms, terror a.?d bloodshed in the Holy Land.
Anyone and everyone who dares to criticize or even
question any aspect or action of this divinely inspired
political movement is a purveyor of hate and discrimination, an anti-Semite, a racist and worse. They, on
the other hand, believe themselves to be, as the selfstyled spokesmen and representatives of the chosen
people, sacrosanct and infallible.

57.

58. In conclusion, my delegation would urge urgent
action by the Council in the hope of peace and justice
rather than inaction or stalemate.
which could breed
another holocaust.
59. The PRESIDENT (itlterpreturion
fruuz
FrrtlrhJ:
The next speaker is the representaiive of Iraq. I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
60. Mr. ZAHAWIE (Iraq): Mr. President, may I first
thank you and the other members of the Council for
allowing my delegation to participate in the present
debate.
61. At long last the Zionist representative has
deigned 10 make an appearance before this body, and
this appearance has been hailed in certain quarters
as a good omen for the prospects of peace in the
Middle East. One wonders what brought about this
change

of heart.

Why

the sudden

volre fore

from

the

lofty and unshakable determination not to appear in
this chamber while the unspeakable Palestine Liberation Organization was present? What brings the
Zionist knights in shining armour here to what they
consider to be a disreputable public convenience?
What brings them to this den of iniquity’?
62. Surely the Council has not changed s’nce it last
met in January to discuss the question of l+lrtine.
nor has the PLO been miraculously transformed into
something acceptable to Israel. The representative of

64. Then, loo, they claim that whatever happened
in the area is the outcome of Arab policies and aggressions against little, innocent, newly born, defenciless
Israel. They have repeated often enough in this
chamber and in other forums of the United Nations
that from the beginning, from 1948, it was the Arabs
who invaded this peace-loving little innocent State.
I shall not go into a $ong, detailed refutation. I shall
merely quote a high Israeli offk5al who should have
known, namely, David Ben Gurion. In his book
Rebirth
and Destiny
of Israel’
he says the following:
“Until the British left, no Jewish settlement,
however remote, wasentered or seized by the Arabs,
while the Haganal?‘-which
was then the mifitary
force of the Zionists, an underground army-“captured many Arab positions and liberated Tiberias
and Haifa, jafYa and &fad. So on the day of destiny,
I5 May 1948, that part of Palestine where the
Haganah could operate was almost clear of Arabs.”
“Clear of Arabs” -how
very reminiscent
is this usage
of words
of the term Judenrein
which
the Nods
employed
in their part of the world.
It was a fact
that heforr
a single Arab soldier
had set foot on
Palestinian territory there were 300,000 Arab refugees
already ejected by the Zionist policies of terror and
massacre.
65. The other big claim they make and repeat
endlessly-and i: has been repeated again during this
debate-is that in 19b7 again it was the Arabs who had
staged an unprovoked aggression against the State
of Israel. That was a ploy used by the representative
of Israel in the Security Council in 1967. and I should
like to remind members of what he said then. This

was Mr. Rafael. who was then the representative
the Zionist riglme here. He stated:

of

careful examination.
The allgeation was that the Arab
Governments,
and Jordan in-particular,
had refused 10
safeguard free access to the Holy Places. The truth of
the matter is that in response to an appeal made by
the United
Nations
Conciliation
Commission
for
Palc,tine.
the Arab Governments
of Egypt, Jordan,
Lebanon and Syria pledged themselves
to the following
declaration
on I5 November
1949:

“I have so far received
only first reports
about
the developments.
From these it is evident that in the
early hours of this molning
Egyptian
armoured
columns moved in an offensive
thrust against Israel’s
borders.
At the same time Egyptian
planes took off
from
airfields
in Sinai and struck
out towards
Israel. Egyptian
artillery
in the Gaza Strip shelled
the lsrael villages of Kissufim.
Nahal-Oz
and Ein
Hashelosha.
Netania and Kefar Yavetz
have also
been bombed.
Israel forces engaged the Egyptians
in the air and on land. and fighting
is still going
on.” [/3471/i rwetirrg, ywu. 3O.J

“The
Governments
of Egypt,
the Hashemite
Jordan Kingdom,
Lebanon and Syria undertake
to
guarantee
freedom
of access to the Holy Places,
religious buildings
and sites situated in the territory
placed under their authority
by the final settlement
of the Palestine
problem,
or, pending that settlcment, in the territory
at present occupied
by them
under armistice
agreements;
and. pursuant
to this
undertaking,
will guarantee
rights of entry and of
transit to ministers of religion, pilgrims and visitors
without distinction
as to nationality
or faith. subject
only to considerations
of national
security,
all the
above in conformity
with the sIu!i(s cl/ro prior to
14 May 1948.“s

66. How far that was from the truth. Would that it
were the truth, the situation
would have been different
today. There would have been no occupied territories
and no occupied
Jerusalem.
To this day the Zionist
representatives
insist
on continuing
this fallacy,
thinking that the world will accept such interpretations
as they want to have imposed on the world. But what
are the facts, again? We had the generals coming out
a year late?-nit
much later-and-admitting
the truth.
On 19 March
1972 Ha’are~z, an Israeli newspaper,
reported:

Israel, on the other hand, in a response to a similar
appeal made by the Conciliation
Commission,
replied
that it was of the opinion that

“Dr.
M. Peled said that the thesis that in June
1967 Israel faced the danger of annihilation
and that
the State of Israel was fighting for its physical survival is ‘a tale which wss born and elaborated
only
after the war’.
Dr. Peled, who was in the Army
General Stti during the 1%7 war, is now a professor
of history at the Shilo’zh Institute.
He further noted
that in May 1%7 there was no danger of annihilation to Israel: ‘The Egyptians
concentrated
80,000
soldiers, while we mobilized
against them hundreds
of thousands of men’.”
The General
Rabin himself,
who was the Chief
Stti
in 1%7, said in an in,Grview
published
in
Mu&e
what must be the tinal word:

“it would in the circumstances
be in the interest
of a constructive
and final settlement
if the mafter
of formulation
were dealt with after
more farreaching
consideration
of these problems
by the
General Assembly.“6
It is distinctly
clear that Israel itself chose not to make
any such commitments
regarding
the Holy Places as
those made by the Arabs.
69. There is one remark
in the statement
made by
!he representative
of Israel that seems to have escaped
the attention
of the members of the Council.
He said
that the Jews had refrained
from exercising
their
inherent right to pray on the Temple Mount. Now that
is quite remarkable.
While the representative
oi Israel
was protesting
that there were no Zionist encroachments upon the Moslem
sanctuary,
he nevertheless
took that occasion to stake a claim for a non-existing
right to the Islamic Holy Places.

of

Le

“I do not believe that Nasse,. wanted war. The two
divisrons
he sent into Sinai on 14 May would not
have been enough to unleash an offensive
against
Israel. He knew it, and we knew it.”
67. Other speakers have already dealt amply with the
different
ram&ations
of the item on the agenda.
I shall limit myself to the examination
of the statements
made by the representative
of this paragon of virtue
and veracity.
General Herzog, the ex-military
governor
of occupied Jerusalem.

70. NOW do the Zionists
in fact have a right to
stake such a claim? Interestingly
enough. the League of
Nations
had looked into this matter.
As long ago as
1930 an international
commission
was
established
under the chairmanship
of Eliel Lofgren.
a fornlcl
Swedish Minister for Foreian Affairs. The Commission
heard evidence from Arab; and Jews in Palestine and
submitted
its report in December
1930. On the issue
the Commission
reached these two conc!usions:

68. A number
of references
and claims have been
made concerning
access to the Wailing Wall in Jerusalem. References
to this were in fact made no fewer than
four times in the st:nement
made by the representative
of Israel: they appear in several places in the verbatim
record of the 18941h meeting.
I think this deserves

“(!)
The Western
Wall”-we
are not spcakinL:
now of Al-Haram
Al-Sharif--“wa\
an
exclubivrl\
Moslem rrtrcll property
and part of a Mosle~il h&

x

place, Al-Haram Al-Sharif area. The pavement in
front of the Wall and between it and the AIMagharbah quarter was also a Moslem tvccyfproperty
and formed part of a legally constituted religious
foundation.

“The Temple (of Solomon) must be constructed
on its original site. This could only be done by
demolishing Islam’s Dome of the Rock.”
The historian Israel Eldad, a former Irgun terrorist.
said:

“(2) The Jews have the right of access to the
Western Wall for devotions on the pavement, and
should be permitted, on specified occasions, to bring
specified articles pertaining to acts of Jewish
devotion.”

“We are at the stage where David was when he
liberated Jerusalem. From that time until the
reconstruction of the Temple by Solomon, only
one generation passed. So will it be with us. ‘And
what about that Moslem shrine? Answers Eldad:
‘Who knows? Perhaps there will be an earthquake.’ ”

That was the Commission’s conclusion, and that was
the report which was accepted by Britain and the
League of Nations. It was made legally binding as an
international document by an Order in Council. In
1931 it became law in Palestine. The report was
published, as I have mentioned, as the LGfgi.en Commission report in 193 1.

73. A great deal was said in the statement of the
Zionist representative to deny that there had been
Israelization of educational programmes and curricula
and to assert that this was a lie and that the reverse
was true.
74. In 1965 the Division of Higb:r Education Research of the United States Deph.‘tment of Health,
Education and Welfare commissioned at the Hebrew
University in Jerusalem a three-year uro.iect entitled
“Some problems of educating a nationit minority:
a study of Israeli education of Arabs”. This was
project No. CE-6-21-03. This report made a comparltive study of the curricula that were being applied
among Jewish schoolchildren
and among Arab
students, and it juxtaposed the secondary school
curricula, clearly betraying the educational structures
needed to maintain Israeli domination, on the one
hand, and a systematic attempt to undercut the
Palestinian Arab’s sense of his particular cultural
history as an Arab, as well as the history of his own
position as a Palestinian Arab, on the other.

71. Then General Herzog had the nerve to lecture
members of the Council here on their inability to
comprehend a situation whereby courts of law are
independent of the executive. This falls very strangely
indeed from the lips of the representative of a rkgime
that resorts to the policy of collective punishment.
Apparently the executive in his land is also independent of the judiciary, at least as far as Arabs are
concerned. We need merely refer to the reports
issuing from the occupied territories of suspects
punished even before they are indicted or prosecuted
-not only the suspects, but also their innocent relatives. They are chastised by having their houses
blown up and by being ejected from their domicile.
And yet-we hear the representative of Israel sitting
in this Council lecturing others when his regime denies
the rights cf a whole people to nationhood, even to
residence in its historical homeland.

75. Mr. Uri Davis, former Vice-Chairman of the
Israeli League for Civil and Human Rights, who is at
present working in London with War Resisters International, made a-study of this, and it was published in
the Journal of Palestine Studies, No. 9, autumn issue
1973. He came to the following conclusion:

72. There have also been exchanges on the question
of the reconstruction of the Temple. There were aliegations and denials and counter-allegations, and now
there are further statements that 1 should like to quote
here. On 23 July I%7 the London newspaper The
Sunday Times wrote:

“One can imagine the effect on the Palestinian
Arab mind straitjacketed to articulate its own particular identity in terms of 256 hours of Bible and
Jewish oral tradition and 30 hours of Koran. (It
is to be noted that there are, moreover, no provisions for the study of the New Testament.) This
procedun correlates to the &ab inferior. political
and economic position a position of CuItmal and
historical inferiority. It is predicated up 7 3enying
to the Arab,‘as far as possible, effective tools in
terms of which he could critically confront the
presentation of the Israeli Jew as the bearer of
modern enlightenment and progress in the area;
it attempts to present the Israeli Jew as having
a long-standing genealogy of historical and cultural
superiority stemming right out of the intro?uction
of the first documented, abstract and monotheistic
religion.”

“Reports that sentiment exists in Israel to rebuild
the Temple, which could entail destruction of the
present Moslem sanctuary, have further heightened
tension.”
“On 16 August I%7 the military Rabbi of Israel,
Shlomo Goren, expressed the wish to see the Jewish
Temple rebuilt on the site of the Moslem Holy
Shrine of Al-Aqsa.”
This latter item about 16 August 1967 concerning
Rabbi Gorcn was reported by the Agence France
Presse and klnblished in L’Orirrlr
of 17 August 1967.
Tirm~ magazine on 30 June 1967 ran the following
report:
9

76. The Israeli representative made yet another
interesting and highly revealing statement. He said that
is was utterly false that the Arab population of Jerusalem had been compelled to leave their homes. He
stated:

measures of a legislative, fiscal and urban nature
which are impressing on Jerusalem an ever more
special character at the expense of the non-Jewish
population. Moslems and Christians are compelled
for reasons of urban expansion to live in ever
increasingly restricted spaces and, finally, to look
elsewhere for a future they feel they no longer can
find in their homeland’s environment. Reference to
expropriations measures is sufficient to give an idea
of the radical manner with which the physiognomy
is impressed on the city that greatly differs from
its historical and religious character and its
universal vocation. In August 1970 another
1,200 hectares, which is 2,640 acres, were expropriated in the Arab sector of Jerusalem and on the
outskirts of the town for the carrying out of the
Greater Jerusalem Plan. On 21 February 1971 the
Hebrew Municipal Council of Jerusalem approved,
despite open opposition of technicians and
architects, the plans prepared by the Construction
Ministry for housing in the suburbs. This means
that there will be a real belt of buildings on the hills
around the Holy City consisting of 20,000 homes
destined to house 75,000 Jews. A very serious state
of things is developing against international law
through the logic of faits accomplis. Unfortunately,
these are not peace projects and cannot leave indifferent those who really work for definitive peace in
the Middle East.”

“The only Arabs removed in the Old City of
Jerusalem were those who had occupied Jewish
homes in the Jewish quarter after the fighting in
1948. They were obliged to return the property
to their rightful owners and were indeed compensated.” [189&h meeting, pnrct. 90.1
1 take it he would agree, then, that the Palestinians,
when and if they return to their homes, would be
entitled to such restitution.
77. But let us look at this claim about the Jewish
quarter in the Old City of Jerusalem. In an article in
Tjze Guardiun
of 29 April 1972, David Hirst wrote:
“Before 1948 the Jewish Quarter was at the most
20 per cent Jewish-owned. The Israelis are now
taking over the lot. They are in the process of
expelling 5,000 Arabs who live there.”
78. Then, in an attempt to refute the fact that there
is suppression of Islamic and Christian heritage and
institutions, the Israeli representative said that it was
“malicious nonsense” and that there had never been
“such an... expansion and development of religious
life in the city for all faiths as has occurred over the
past few years” [ibid., paru. 921.

82. The representative of Israel then touched on the
situation in the Gaza Strip, claiming [hit the situation
was so peaceful there that the disturbances taking
ulace on the West Bank were the making of agitators
grid agents provocateurs because of fort&omiig elecl
tions in that area of the West Bank. 1 would only
quote a short part of an article written by a member
of the British Parliament, Mr. Carol Johnson, a
member of the Labour Middle East Council which had
toured the Gaza Strip with a British parliamentary
group. He says:

79. Now, what is the truth concerning that?
80. The Italian Jesuit periodical Civiltd Cattolica has
accused Israel of forcing Arabs, particularly Christian
Arabs, to leave East Jerusalem and the West Bank.
Written by Father Giovanni RulIi, the article in that
bi-monthly is considered by many to be the most
severe criticism of Israeli policies yet voiced by a
Roman Catholic. This item was carried by the Jewish
Chronicle,
published in London, on 25 Jilne 1971.

“During our stay we had the opportunity of
judging ‘the resettlement and construction work
on which the Israelis claim they are engaged. One
is always reluctant to make dogmatic statements
after a brief visit, but having seen what had been
done in some of thr: camps and discussed the position
both with Israeli officials and Arabs 1 learned
nothins firm and definite about ‘resettlement’ but
saw a good deal of evidence about destruction and
dispersal.”

81. Another statement from the Vatican was contained in an article in the 22 March 1971 edition of the
Vatican daily, L’Osservafore
Romano.
It had a
prominently placed editorial entitled “Jerusalem and
h”,
whih stated that the Christian and Moslem
PalestMan communities in Jerusalem today feel that
their existence and development is threatined by a
policy which seems to aim at slow suffocation. The
policy of making Jerusalem more Jewish, said the
paper, has been in effect since the occupation of the
Arab sector of the city during the June war of 1967.
It added:

That is from an article in the Midllc~ Eurst Itrtrrtrntiotra/
of Gctober 197 1.
83. The representative of Israel, in his usual tactic
of attacking right and left on matters that are far
outside the agenda item, spoke of the attitude of
Moslem Arabs to various cultural entities, and he
mentioned Iraq specifically. He said, “Look at the fate
of the Syrian Christians in .Iraq... One has but to

“This occupation was transformed by the Israeli
parliament practically into annexation under the
formulaof unification. This determination to acquire
the Arab sector has manifested itself ever since in
10

contemplate the sombre and grim fate of the Kurds in
Iraq”.

the ancient Jewish community in Iraq. I think that the
representative of Israel would be well advised to look
into the position of these so-called Oriental Jews,
the Sephardic Jews, within Israel, their status as
second-class citizens and their deprivations after they
had gone to Israel from Arab countries as a highly
cultured and highly professional people. Now they
are second-class citizens, and their children are
considered as delinquents.

84. Again, these are subjects that the Council should
not be dealing with, but since they have been raised
it is my duty to refer to them, even if briefly.
85. A letter published in T/I~ Chris/h
Science
Monitor
of 9 December 1974 from Professor A. Voobus
of the Royal Academy of Belgium says, under the
heading “Minority in Iraq”:

89. This is not to mention the third-class position of
Arabs who are still in Palestine. That would take
separate and full studies. Chapters could be written
on it and it could be investigated with great ease.

“An event recently occurred in Iraq which would
have made headlines in more normal circumstances.
The Government in Iraq has granted full cultural
freedom to the Syrian Christian minority. Authority
has been given to educate the children in their native
language in the elementary schools. The cultivation of the heritage of the Syrians via Syriac language
and culrural studies in all higher institutions of
learning at the expense of the Government has also
been approved. Radio and television services have
also been put at the disposal of the Syrian Christians.
In addition, a scholarly journal has been established
and an academy for Syriac language and literature
founded, actions heralded by a congress to which
scholars from many countries were invited. As one
who was in attendance, I can affirm that this occasion was indeed a dignified event.”

90. Now again, when the representative of Jordan
stated the fact that Arab cemeteries were also
desecrated by the Zionists, the representative of
Israel could only say that this was a vicious lie, that
it was completely untrue, especially the reference to
the cemetery of Mamillah. -Let me quote from an
article in The Guardiun
of London, also by Mr. David
Hirst, under the title, “Bulldozing
through Arab
history”, published on 27 April 1972. It says:
“It is a frequent Israeli practice to portray the
Arabs as despoilers and desecrators. The Jewish
cemetery on the Mount of Olives is visible from the
Haram, and guides have been pointing it out with the
suitable comment on the vandals who desecrated it
during Jordanian times. An Israeli ‘White Paper’
has expatiated on the official and systematic depredations visited on it. The cemetery did, indeed,
suffer from pilferers; one service which tombstones
performed was as paving stones for the latrines of
a military encampment nearby. But the vast bulk
remains intact. With the ‘unification’ of the city,
the Arabs accused of vandalism in their part of it
have been able to IZOand see what the Israelis have
been doing in theirs. They could see what happened
to Mamillah. It has been swept away, a rubble
of earth, tombs and the bones of their occupants, by
Israeli municipal bulldozers. For the Arabs of
JerusaIem-fo; those with a sense of history, that
is-what the Israelis are doing to their city amounts
to a historic act of ingratitude. Few would dispute
their claim that of all the conquests of Jerusalem
the two Arab ones were the most civilized.”

86. As to the question of the Kurds, we have seen
lately reports in the local press here by a gentleman
who was close to the Nixon Administration,
a
correspondent by the name of William Sa!ire, claiming
that the Israelis were expecting the faction following
the Mullah Mustafa AI-Barzani to stage an attack
on the Iraqi Government while Iraq w& engaged in
the 1973 war against Israel. This bit of information,
apparently gathered from some House committee on
intelligence, should explain the interest of the Israeli
representative in the Kurdish dissident group following
Mustafa Al-Barzani.
87. As to the position of the Kurds in general in
Iraq, I can only refer him to articles such as the one
written by Mr. Arnold Hottinger in the Swiss Review
of World 4ffuirs,
published in July 1975, entitled
“Kurdistan after the revolt”: another article bv
Mr. Edward Mortimer of the iditorial staff of T&
Times of London, entitled “Iraq and the Kurds”,
published in the Middle East International
in 1975:
an article in The Obsenler of 6 April 1975 by Gavin
Young under the title, “VIP treaiment for i<urds”;
and. most imoortant of all, a report by the Commission of the Churches on lnternational.Affairs from a
team sent by the World Council of Churches to visit
Iraq; this is-Report No. 5. dated 1975.

91. Nor was it only the Moslem
cemetery
of
Mamillah; the Christian cemetery on Mount Zion WM
also desecrated and the Augu& Victoria Hospital
in Jerusalem was bombed with napalm by the Israelis.
92. Members of the United Nations have heard time
and again statements about the destruction of the
Jewish quarter. That is another violation laid a’ ‘he
door of the Arabs. But let me quote from a le. :r
written by Sir John Richmond. Sir John Richmond
was a member of the Foreign Office who served in
the Middle East with the Palestine Government in
1946 and 1947. At present he is Lecturer in Modern

88. As to the question of Arab Jews, and Iraqi Jews
in particular, my delegation has already, on 19 January
at the 1876th meeting, referred to that situation and
the circumstances that accompanied the uprooting of
II

Near East History at Durham University. He wrote the
following on 5 June 1971 to the Roman Catholic weekly
The Tublet :

the destruction of the Jewish quarter of the
Old City and the departure of its innocent inhabitants
were ihe direct consequences of attempts by
Haganah and Palmach to carry out Operation
Schfifon. This was part of the Plan Dalet, designed
to achieve Jewish occupation of the Old City of
Jerusalem, which had not been allocated to the Jews
under the partition plan.”
,I

*.*

That is not the word of an Arab against the word of
the Zionist representative; it was written by an authoritative, highly knowledgeable person familiar with the
area and its history.
93. Not content with all that, the representative of
Israel goes on to accuse the Arabs of setting out to
Arabize the Old City of Jerusalem and to erase its
Jewish identity. Now, to be able to erase an identity
one has to establish that there was in fact such an
identity. What are the facts? This time I shall quote a
well-known American writer, historian and journalist
who visited the Holy Land in 1929. He wrote:
“That was, probably, the first impression I
received of walled Jerusalem in the early days: that
it was an Arab city. It was as Arab & Cairo or
Baghdad, and the Zionist Jews (that is, the modern
Jews) were as foreign to it as I was myself. I had
expected this, of course. I knew that the Old City
had not been changed, that the large Zionist pop&
tion of Jerusalem (an actual majority) lived in
new quarters outside the walls, and that Palestine
was still predominantly an Arab country. But a fact
on paper has not the same effect as its physical
confiiuration.
“Two days in Jerusalem gave me a clearer perception of the fact than I could have received from a
volume of statistics. I had enough political experience to realize that such things as these must
determine feeling and action, and from my second or
third day in Jerusalem I began to wonder if all was
as well between the Arabs and the Jews as I had
been led to believe. I knew nothing; but anybody
could see, in halfan hour, that here were the physical
elements of a confIict.”
That was written by Mr. Vincent Sheean in his book
Personnl Histoty,
published by Doubleday Doran and
Company, New York. in 1935.
94. Then the representative of Israel bewailed the
fact that the world had kept silent about all these
violations and desecrations. He repeated some words
of Mr. Abba Eban to that effect. But again let us look
at the facts. In an interview published on 3 July 1971
in the Corrierr
c/r//n SPUR in Italy, Mr. Eban had
almost criticized the Holy Father himself for his

silence about the profanations of the holy Jewish
city before 1967. According to an item by Agence
France Presse published in T/w Hetdti on 17 October
1971, the Pope did not reply, but much later L’Osserl’cr/orr de//~ Dottmicct , through the pen of Vatican
spokesman Professor Federico Alessandrini, revealed
that Christians had also been victims of “profanations” which were not on the “part of the Arabs”
and that the statistics which Mr. Eban cited were
rigged.
95. Members of the Council were also told that an
international committee established ostensibly for the
restoration and beautification of the Old City was
singing the praises of the Israeli Government for its
wisdom in dealing with Jerusalem. Not only that; that
committee established supposedly for the restoration
and beautification of the Old City saw fit to comment
on education in Israel and to give its blessing to
what the enlightened Israeli administration was doing.
96. Be that as it may, let us refer to the work of a
British architect, Alfred Kutcher, who was a member
of that committee on Jerusalem, which in fact in 1970
rejected and condemned Israel’s I%8 master plan for
the city. He wrote a book called The New Jerusct/ettr:
Phttittg
md Politics, and, according to The Christim
Sciettce Monitor
of 5 March 1975:
“Mr. Kutcher insists thal Jerusalem cannot
absorb the rapid growth rate prescribed by Israeli
planners, who are moving in as many Jewish immigrants as quickly as possible. Awareness that
Jerusalem’s spiritual essence is inextricably bound
up with her visual, tangible qualities-an awareness
evidenced by 4,000 years of building in the city-is
now not only simply ignored; it is not even recognized, Mr. Kutcher writes.”
And Mr. Kutcher continues:
“Instead, a new way of thinking about Jerusalem
has sprung up. The city is a resource to be exploited.
11~spiritual and visual qualities are commodities to
be bought and sold. The authorities, in order to raise
ready cash from property investors, have been
selling away the city’s visual and symbolic heritage.
Architects have eagerly joined in building for
Jerusalem as if it were the moon.”
97. Now, a number of speakers have emphasized
the importance of the Geneva Conventions and their
applicability to the areas occupied by Israel. But the
unfortunate fact is that while Arab countries have
accepted the applicability of these Conventions, such
is not the case with Israel.
98. In October 1973, at the start of hostilities. the
International Committee of the Red Cross took immediate steps to enhance the protection of civil:,lns in
communications to the Governments of Syria. Iraq,
Egypt and Israel. It asked them to apply the draft

agreement for the protection of civilisns.’ The Governments of Syria, Iraq and Egypt agreed to do so. On
19 October the Government of Israel refused. The
explanation given by the Israeli representative in the
Special Political Committee in his statement of 19 November was that the Government of Israel considered
that the fourth Geneva Convention “did not apply
for a number of legal reasons” and that Israel “reserved its position on the applicability of the Convention in the administered areas”.8 Perhaps the representative of Israel would like to enlighten public
opinion further. He is always talking of “enlightened
public opinion” and of its being very sympathetic to
Israel. Would he care, perhaps, to inform it why he
and his Government do not consider the Geneva Conventions applicable?

that has been hallowed by our Bible, a right which
has been sanctified by our history, by our sacrifice,
by our prayers and by our yearnings-, a right which
has been strengthened and vindicated by virtue of
our creating the only liberal administration giving
complete freedom of worship to all faiths. [/hit/.,
plircr. 122.1
102 Now, that indeed is a far cry from the statement
made by Israeli representatives before committees of
the United Nations prior to the admission of Israel
to the United Nations. Then they were seeking admission to the United Nations and they were undertaking
responsibilities which subsequently they failed to
fulfil. The representative at the 47th meeting of the
Ad Hoc Political Committee, during the third session
of the General Assembly, had the following to say:

99. In the view of my delegation, the reason is that
Israel considers these occupied territories as liberated
territories, as belonging to Israel again by right. The
Twenty-eighth Zionist Congress, held in Jerusalem
in January 1972, unanimously adopted the following
two resolutions:

“The Government of Israel will co-operate with
the Assembly in seeking a solution to those problems. .. . 1 do not think that Article 2. aaraarauh 7
of the Charter” -which precludes inteifer&ce by
the United Nations in the domestic affairs of Member States-” which relates to domestic jurisdiction,
could possibly affect the Jerusalem problem, since
the legal status of Jerusalem is different From that
of the territory in which Israel is sovereign.l’g

“1. The right of the Jewish people to ‘Eretz
Yisrael’ is inalienable.
“2. During the Six Day War, the aggressors were
repelled, the land of our ancestors was liberated,
Jerusalem was redeemed and reunited.”
Then, on 16 March 1972, the Israeli parliament passed
the following resolution:
“The Knesset has resolved that the historic right
of the Jewish people to the Land of Israel is beyond
challenge.”

103. Many Members at that time wanted to make
sure that Israel would abide by those undertakings and
by the special obligations under the Charter, and they
were in doubt about this. One of them was a jurist
from Latin America, Mr. Castro of El Salvador. He
stated in the Ad Hoc Political Committee on 3 May
1949 that
“The delegation of El Salvador intended to vote
in favour of the admission of Israel, provided that
Israel’s attitude towards the General Assembly
resolution of 29 November 1947”-that
is, the
partition resolution-” on the international&ion
of
jerusalem and the resolution of 11 December 1948
on the repatriation of the refugees, was first fully
clarified by the representative of Israel.“1o

Those, in our view, are the reasons why Israel now
refuses to apply the Geneva Conventions in the
occupied territories.
100. Now, the International Committee of the Red
Cross does not resort to the practice of giving publicity
to its findings. And yet, even that Committee itself
found it necessary, at the end of 1970, to release an
outspoken report accusing Israel of repeatedly
violating the fourth Geneva Convention by blowing
up houses and even whole villages, in a deliberate
oolicv of collective remisals. The report listed
i0 viI&ges and camps which had been totally destroyed
by the Israelis. A spokesman for the Red Cross
justified the International Committee’s decision to
publish the report by saying:

However, when the time came for the admission of
Israel into the United Nations, El Salvador abstained.
It and a number of other, European, delegations were
not satisfied by the assurances given by the representative of Israel in that Committee then or later on.
104. But this is not a new matter. lstael challenged
the United Nations as far back as 1949: on 17 December it decided to move its parliament to Jerusalem
and declared thal city as its capital. On 20 December
the Trusteeship Council met and called upon Israel io
revoke its action. The Council adopted the following
resolution:

“After two years of protest we have not been
able to obtain from the Israeli Government a satisfactorv response on its attitude towards the fourth
Conv&tion.”
101. Finally, the representative of Israel concluded
his statement here with the following words:
“I offer no excuse for our presence in Jerusalem.
I owe no apology. We are there as of right-a right

“Conccr~rd at the removal to Jerusalem of certain
ministries and central departments of the Government of Israel.
13

“Co,luiderDlg that such action ignores and is
incompatible with the provisions of paragraph 11 of
General Assembly resolution 303 (IV) of 9 December 1949,
“I. Is of the opinio/z that the action of the
Government of Israel is likely to render more difficult
the implementation of the statute of Jerusalem with
which the Council is entrusted by the General
Assembly resolution of 9 December 1949;
“2. Reylresrv the President of the Trusteeship
Council:
(n) To invite the Governmentsf Israel to submit
a written statement on the matters covered by this
resolution, to revoke these measures and to abstain
from any action liable to hinder the implementation
of the General Assembly resolution of 9 December
1949;” [resolfctiot~ II4 (S-2)].
Israel’s response to that request by the Trusteeship
Council had already been declared by Ben Gurion,
as recorded on page ?62 of his book, Rebirth and
Destiny oJ’Isr~~el:4
“The United Nations saw fit this year to decide
that our eternal capital should become a corpus
sepuratum under international control. Our reDut!al
of this wicked counsel was unequivocal and resolu!e:
the Government and Knesset at once moved their
seat to Jerusalem and made it Israel’s crown and
capital irrevocably and for all men to see.”
105. Mr. President, I apologize to you and the
members of the Council for having taken such a long
time, but I confined myself to the statements and
allegations made by the representative of Israel in his
statement. I think the members of the Council and
the Members of the United Nations are in a position
now to draw the conclusions that are necessary from
the actions undertaken and the violations committed by
Israel over the past quarter of a century. The inaction
of the Council has only encouraged the aggressor to
persist in its violations. Should it be allowed to continue in this course? That is the question now before
the Council.
lw, ‘I’hc PRESIDENT (interpretation
from French):
The next speaker is the representative of India. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
107. Mr. JAIPAL (India): My delegation is grateful
to you, Mr. President, and to the other members of
the Council for giving us this opportunity to present
our views on a question that is of the deepest relevance
for the establishment of ajust and durable peace in the
Middle East.
108. For nearly a century the world community
has been made aware of the immortal longings of

persons of the Jewish faith whose position as depressed
minorities in European States had alienated them from
their immediate environment and caused them such
intensity of suffering that it created in them an overpowering urge to go at all costs to the land of theb
legendary origin and to establish Jewish sovereignty
in a Jewish State. But what we have been witnessing
in recent years is not the fulfilment of that powerful
urge, but rather its extravagant excesses and its
moments of exaltation manifested in attempts to
expand its sovereignty and to subject its Palestinian
Arab neighbours to an administration that has all the
aspects of colonial rule.
109. The other day we heard about the “enlightened”
and “liberal” policy in the territories administered by
the Government of Israel. What is the legal authority
under which Israel is administering its so-called territories? Does the fact of military occupation during
hostilities give a country the right ta administer areas
under its occupation even after the termination of
hostilities and, If so, for how long? In 1947 when the
Jewish community accepted the United Nations decision to partition Palesrine into two States, was there in
that decision an implied authority for one of the two
States to take over and administer the other State
indefinitely, for reasons of its own security?
110. The position of Israel in relation to Arab territories has been simply that of an army of military
occupation, a role that can only be o’f a temporary
and transient character and not one conferring on
Israel authority, control or administrative power to
alter the status of either the Arab State of Palestine
or the city of Jerusalem, both of which are offshoots
of the same decision of the United Nations that
created Israel.
111. If one accpets the United Nations basis for the
establishment of the State of Israel-as Israel doesthen Israel should also accept the fact that the Arabs of
Palestine are equally entitled to exercise their inalienable rights and their sovereignty in their own lands.
We see no valid reason to delay the exercise of their
rights by the Arab people of Palestine, since the
military necessity that brought about the occupation
of their land by Israel no longer seems to exist.
112. The Arabs of Palestine are entitled to an independent existence, and in this respect they are no
different from the people of Syria, Lebanon and Iraq,
all of which were placed in the same category of
Mandated Territories as Palestine was by the League
of Nations. There can be no justitication, therefore,
for Israeli rule or administration of the Arab territories
in Palestine which continue, in our opinion. to remain
under the sovereignty of the Arab inl.abitants.
113. In brief, the occupied Arab areas may not be
annexed by Israel, nor may they be administered as
if they were territories of Israel. That position has beet1
made clear in several resolutions of the General

Assembly and of the Security Council, Indeed, the
Council on more than one occasion has stipulated that
all legislative and administrative measures taken by
the Israeli occupying force to change the status of
Jerusalem or the occupied areas, to take over Arab
lands and properties, to transfer Arab populations
and to establish Israeli settlements are null and void,
The Council would be justified and would be well
advised to recall and reafftrm its position in regard
to the actions of Israel in the areas under its illegal
occupation. It will be necessary also to reaffirm the
principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of
territory by conquest.
114. The root of the immediate problem continues
to be Israel’s failure to withdraw from areas occupied
by it during the conflict of 1967. Occupation as a
result of military necessity has now become prolonged
into nine years of virtual colonial rule. It is now
28 years since Palestine was partitioned, a period of
time even longer than the entire period of the British
Mandate which came into force in 1922. The longer the
Israeli occupation continues the more frequent and
assertive will be the demonstrations of protest by a
self-respecting people against their enforced occupation.
115. May I add that, however enlightened and
liberal this occupation might be, the lesson of history
is surely that an alien Government, however good,
is no substitute for self-government. The restoration
of Arab sovereignty in Palestine has now become a
matter of the utmost urgency. Nine years is a long
time for any military occupation, and 28 years is a
very long time indeed to wait for promised independence. The terrible disparity between sacrifice and
redress is such that more extreme steps might well
be attempted in order to seek greater redress.
116. My delegation believes that. Security Council
resolutions 242 (1%7) and 338 (1973) constitute an
adequate basis for the search for an honourable, just
and durable peace settlement. This search must be
intensified. But it is surely unrealistic to link the
search for secure and recognized boundaries to the
exercise of their national rights by the Palestinian
Arabs.
117. An attempt should be made to unlink military
aspects from the normal exercise of political rights
and freedoms of the Arab people of Palestine.
Unfortunately, Israel has taken the line that the CNX
of the problem is the Arab .refusal to recognize the
right of Israel to exist. May I suggest that it is
unrealistic to expect any sort of recognition at the
point of a gun’? Fresh efforts at a peace settlement
need to be made. and we hope that the efforts will be
intensified under United Nations auspices and that
Israel will find it possible to accept and recognize the
political and social reality of an Arab State in Palestine.
I 18. The PRESIDENT (irrl~lp,-~,icrtic~/rlianr
Fwt~ch).
The next speaker is the representative of Tunisia.

I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
119. Mr. DRISS (Tunisia) (ir~~erpretdwr
fhm
Frrr~cll): Mr. President, first 1 should like to thank you,
as well as the other members of the Council, for
allowing me to set forth in the Council my delegation’s
views regarding the disquieting situation which
unfortunately obtains in the Arab land of Palestine.
But it would be remiss of me to embark upon the
subiect without first addressing to vou. Mr. President.
my-sincere congratulations on yoir accession to the
presidency of the Council and on the skill and devotion
you have displayed in conducting the Council’s work.
120. I should also like to extend a warm welcome to
Mr. William Scranton, the Permanent Representative
of the United States, whose acumen, experience,
objectivity and prestige will, I am convinced, effectively contribute to the search for appropriate solutions to the serious problems in the agenda of the
Security Council and of various other United Nations
bodies.
121. The decision the Council took to involve the
representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization
in this discussion demonstrates the ability of the
Council to transcend the sometimes inadequate framework of those documents which govern its functioning
and also bears witness to its desire to respect the will
of the i.ntemational community henceforth to have
the Palestinian people, represented by the PLO,
involved in al1 efforts, negotiations or conferences
bearing upon peace in the Middle East. General
Assembly resolution 3375 (XXX) in fact requested
that the PLO, the legitimate representative of the
Palestinian people, be invited to participate in all
efforts, deliberations and conferences on the Middle
East held under the auspices of the United Nations, on
an equal footing with other parties, on the basis of
resolution 3236 (XXIX).
122. The Security Council, bearing in mind the spirit
of that resolution, has applied its rules of procedure,
which are after all provisional, with intelligence and
discernment. Its members have seen to it that justice
prevailed over narrow texts, thus enhancing the
prestige of the Council and simultaneously that of the
entire Organisation. The presence of Israel, the
absence of which we noted last January during the
discussion on the Middle East, including the Pakstinian
question, may well indicate some beginning of an
awareness of the blinding truth, the essential aspect
of which is universal recognition of the fundamental
and legitimate rights for which the Palestinian people
has been struggling so valiantly for the. last 30 years.
123. The situation which at present obtains in Jerusalem and in the occupied Arab territories is both serious
and alarming. The representatives of the PLO, Egypt.
Syria, Jordan and others have detailed those Israeli
practices which affect both the Holy Places in

Jerusalem dnd the human rights of the non-Jewish
population in the occupied territories. It is too damning
a record for the international community to be able
to agree to tolerate it any further.

affecting the Al-Ibrahimi Mosque, and once again
deplored the persistent refusal of Israel to implement
the Geneva Convention on the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War [,euo/rtrio/is 3525 A-D (XXXJ].

124. What are the components of this record? It is
very simple to list them, and the very brevity of this
list will clearly bring out the magnitude of the tragedy
which has not only befallen the heroic people of
Palestine but has also affected the Holy Places which
are venerated by more than 2 billion human beings
of various faiths. They are: the annexation of certain
parts of the occupied territories; the establishment
of Israeli settlements in those areas; the destruction
and demolition of houses inhabited by Arab nationals;
the confiscation and expropriation of Arab property
in the occupied territories and the transfer of this
property to Israeli institutions or nationals; the deportation, expulsion, displacement and transfer of Arab
nationals; mass arrests, administrative detention and
ill-treatment meted out to the Arab population; the
brutal repression of any attempt at protest; the
pillaging of the archaeological and cultural heritage of
the Arabs; constraints placed upon religious freedom
and customs; the illegal exploitation of the natural
wealth, resources and population of the occupied
territories.

128. The Security Council has frequently had
occasion to consider the fate of Jerusalem and this
connexion has adopted resolutions 252 (1968). 267
(i969) and 298 (1971). In his noteworthy -stat&lent,
to which we listened with great interest, the represcutative of the United States [/BY6111 mvfiug]
reminded us very appositely of the statements made
by Ambassador Golhberg in. 1968 and by Ambassador
Yost in 1969, during consideration of Israeli violations
of the status of Jerusalem.
129. The international community has become aware
of the abuses and the actions going beyond the pale of
international law which have-been iniiiated by-Israel.
These abuses are repeated daily and confirm the
intentions of Israel to pursue and tb intensify its policy
of colonization and annexation, partial or total, of the
occupied Arab territories, whether they be in Gaza,
the Golan Heights, the West Bank of the Jordan 01
Sinai, as was pointed out by the representative of
Egypt in his statement on Tuesday in connexion
with a site being set aside for the construction of a
port on Egyptian territory [/895r/l rmwiuy].

125. World public opinion, in its deep concern, has
frequently had occasion in various forums and at
various levels to express its profound disapproval for
the illegal actions that have been systematically undertaken h:l Israel to change the status of the occupied
territories. Thus the General Assembly, since its
twenty-fourth session-not to mention any earlier sessions-has expressed the serious disquiet it feels at
the persistence of the violations of human rights in
the occupied territories and has also condemned such
policies and practices as collective and area punishment, the destruction of dwellings and the deportation
of the inhabitants of the territories occupied by
Israel. I am referring to resolution 2546 (XXIV).

130. International public opinion has been aroused
at the scope of these demolition and disfigurement
operations and the speed with which they have been
undertaken. In this connexion the article by John
Cooley in The Christian Science Mmiror on 5.March
1975 under the heading “A bulldozer battle over
Jerusalem” clearly ilIust;ates the distressing realities.
The author writes, irtfer ah:
“Building promoters in the east sector of Jerusalem which has been annexed by the Israelis are
brinnina constant oressure to bear to “exuel” and to
*Ye&tie” the polklations of the old pari of the city
and to “modemize”
the latter. The exmlled Arab
families have been confronted with the $ectacle of
new buildkgs in an angular style designed for the
Israelis on the rubble of their own shattered homes.”

126. Having continued its consideration of this
matter at its twenty-sixth, twenty-seventh and twentyeighth sessions, in the light of the reports of the
SDccial Committee instructed to inauire into Israeli
pktices.
the General Assembly at-its twenty-ninth
session reaffirmed Iresolrtrion 3240 fXNX)l that all
steps taken by Israel to modify the physical &uacter,
demographic composition and the institutional structure or status of the occupied territories or any part
thereof were null and void. It went on to reaffirm that
the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949
was fully applicable to the !erritories occupied by Israel
in 1967.

131. What is happening in Jerusalem is not an isolated
incident but rather is part and parcel of a deliberate
policy aimed at transforming the character of the
occupied territories. Any territorial occupation is
followed by the same scenario: the expulsion of the
Arab inhabitants, the transformation of the loc.dities
and the setting up of Jewish settlcmentx.. Of course.
with their peculiar logic. the Israeli authorities expect
that the Arabs living under their occupation should
look on like passive bystanders while their homes
are destroyed. while their property is confiscated and
while their holy places are desecrated.

127. At its thirtieth session the General Assembly
once again gave its attention to this unhappy state of
affairs and adopted t’our resolutions in thic connexion
condemning
those practices. particularly
those

132. How has the representative of Israel attempted
to justify these inhuman acts? First of all. by launching
16

a virulent attack against the members of the Council
and those participating in its work and then by an
assiduous and extremely na!ve defence of the benefits
of occupation. Through these attacks the reuresentative of Israel obviously hopes to succeed in distracting
the attention of the members of the Council and world
public opinion. II is his hope perhaps that these
tactics will prevent the members of the Council from
getting down to the root of the problem.

the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people as
defined in General Assembly resolution 3236 (XXIX),
which, I must emphasize, implies the establishment
of a Palestinian State which is both independent and
sovereign. Only the adoption and implementation
of such a decision can prevent the outbreak of a new
conflict which would have incalculable consequences
not only for the peoples in that area but also foi
mankind as a whole.

133. If the international community wants this situation to be stopped, it should set about solving the root
of the problem, namely, the total and immediate
evacuation of the occupied territories, including
Jerusalem, and the complete and full guarantee of the
legitimate and inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people. These two necessary prerequisites tc bringing
about a lasting peace in the Middle East have been
stated and restated forcefully by the Organization, hut
the task has been made difficult because of the persistent refusal of Israel to implement its resolutions.

137. The PRESIDENT (ittfe~p~etutiott~ottt
FtvtdtJ:
I now irrvite the representative of Mauritania to take
a place at the Council table and to make a statement.
138. Mr. EL HASSEN (Mauritania) (itrterpwtrttiotr
Ftwtch):
Mr. President, first of all I should like
to congratulate you on your assumption of the Presidency of the Council, and I should like to say that
I am-indeed very pleased to be taking the floor .under
your presidency. You are the representative of a
brother country which is known for its courageous
stand on the question at present before the Council.
1 should like -also to thank you, and through you
the other members of the Council, for giving the delegation of Mauritania this opportunity to participate-in
this important debate.

from

134. The Israeli leaders must realize that the fact
that they belong to the Organization imposes upon them
obligations which they can no longer continue to
shirk. If they continue to ignore the realities of our
time, if they refuse to grant the Palestinian people
the most elementary human and national rights, Israel
will thereby be clinging to a policy inspired by
mythical vision of the world which is 2,0&i years out
of date.

139. May I also take this opportunity to bid welcome
to Ambassador William Scranton of the United States,
whose reputation as a man with a clear and penetrating
mind has preceded his appointment here to United
Nations Headquarters.

135. In the opinion of my delegation, the Serdrity
Council should firmly demand that Israel put an
immediate stop to the practices and violations which
affect and disfigure the holy places and which modify
the historical character of the Arab monuments, towns
and villages in the occupied territories, but the Council should also view this matter in the context of the
situation of which it is the outcome, namely the crisis
of the Middle East. Therefore, as my delegation sees
it, it should take a decision which not only deals with
that aspect of the matter but at the same time a8iim.s
the inalienable rights of the people of Palestine to
return to their homes and to recover their properties
and their right to exercise their option of selfdetermination and to have an independent and
sovereign homeland.

140. Once again the Security Council has before it
the question of the Middle East, and it is now considering the serious situation arising from the recent
events in the occupied Arab lands. For several days
now the entire world has been witnessing the clashes
producing bloodshed between the civilian populations
of the occupied West Bank and Israeli soldiers who,
using their weapons, have caused many victims, the
majority being young people and students.
141. The facts are known to us all. They have been
presented eloquently by a number of other speakers
who preceded me in the Council. We have in fact
witnessed those events on American television, which
can hardly be accused of any pro-Arab bias, or still
less of advocating the cause of the Palestinian people.
Those televised reports have shown us the true colours
of what has heen called “the only democracy in the
area”.

136. In the opinion of my deIe@tion the resolution
that the Council is about to adopt should above all
require an immediate cessation of the practices in
occupied Arab territories, including the violations of
and interference in the holy places; but no decision
will really have any point as long as it does not
go to the root of the problem. Therefore my delegation
considers that the Council should shoulder its responsibilities and should state, either during the present
meeting or at a forthcoming one, that any solution of
the problem of the Middle East necessarily implies
the immediate and total evacuation of the occupied
tcrritoric\ and the full and complete guarantee of

142. The Israeli police and army, using firearms,
clubs and sometimes even police dogs, have charged
unarmed and defenceless civilian populations, striking
blindly and apparently with some relish. Those scenes
on television were grimly reminiscent of the massacrr
in Sharpeville. South AL‘lica, the anniversary of which
was observed a few days ago by the Special Committee
sgainst .4ptrrrlG/. The methods used by the South
African rigime against civilian populations demon17

strating peacefully for their fundamental rights were
absolutely identical to those used by the Israeli army
against the Arab populations in the occupied territorles.
143. Yet we have been told that Israel is the only
democracy in the area because it has a regime with
separation of powers, as if the form of government
were an end in itself, regardless of the fact that that
form may have no real meaning. That is a travesty
of democracy and an insult to all the countries that
claim to be democratic and that indeed try to give
democracy real content.
144. We have also been told that Israeli policy in the
occupied territories has been beneficial because it has
brought economic and social progress to the Arab
people. That is a simplistic notion which shrewd
propaganda has attempted for a long time to foist on
people, but it is a notion which has been exploded
even more clearly by daily events. In fact, occupied
Arab territories have been physically changed -and
their demographic
- _ composition modified by Jewish
settlements; holy places-have been defiled; and Arab
villages have been destroyed and their populations
driven away. Such then is the beneficial influence of
Israel in the occupied Arab territories. What there
has been in fact-and recent events in the West Bank
have borne this out-is pure and simple colonization
by force.
145. That colonization is quite different in many ways
from the type of colonization that we have been called
on to condemn so often in the United Nations. If we
take the lowest form of colonization, namely, apart/mid, we find that Zionist colonization in Palestine has
been the only one which has actually driven an entire
population from its national territory and has replaced
it with a population of immigrants from all parts of
the world. That is one of the many features of Israeli
colonization which even the apardwid regime has
hesitated to introduce in its policies and methods of
domination.
146. Israel’s machiavellian plans with respect to the
people of Palestine and other Arab peoples are not of
recent vintage. They were summed up by Herzl in
his book The Jewish Sratr:
.“Let us assume, for example, that we wish to
drive wild animals out of‘ a country. Naturally we
would not use spears and arrows. nor would we go
out alone and track down a bear, as people used to
do in the sixteenth century in Europe; but we would
organize a collective hunt, one which was powerful
and well-equipped. Thus we would drive away the
wild animals and we would use very powerful
bombs for the purpose.”
Those animals. in the view of Israelis. are none other
than the Arab inhabitants of Palestine and other Arab
citizens.

147. The events which have shaken the occupied
West Bank, no matter how regrettable the loss of
human life may have been, have at least had the
advantage of exposing Israeli methods and have
proved once again the determination of the Arab
people to fight agahrst the invader until final victory.
But the origin of those events is only one aspect of
the large-scale military aggression perpetrated by
the Zionist against the Arab countries. It is now clear
to everyone that the problem of the Middle East
will be resolved only when the Palestinian people have
their inalienable national rights restored and when all
the occupied Arab territories are liberated. The international community is becoming increasingly aware of
the need to attain those two objectives if peace is
to be restored in the area, an area which, before the
existence of Israel, was the symbol of fraternity and
tolerance.
148. The new trend in world public opinion, which
has, ironically enough, been created by intransigence
of Israel and its systematic refusal to look the facts in
the face, is best illustrated by the fact that the representatives of the Palestinian people are now being
given a place in all world conferences. The decision
of the Security Council to invite the Palestinian Liberation Organization to participate in this debate on a
question which concerns it first and foremost is part
of that trend and accurately reflects the concern of
the international community. Israel an! Israel alone
continues to delude itself by pinning its hopes on the
continuance of differences of opinion and even conflicts which might arise here and there among Arab
States. It is true that the Arab countries as members
of the same family might disagree on given questions,
but whenever a foreign element enters and tries to
lodge in their body, by force and without their consent,
their solidaritv reasserts itself immediately and it is
spontaneously rejected. The October 1973 war has
&en nroof to the authorities in Tel Aviv that the
iolid&ty of the Arab States is a natural thing when
confronting a common enemy who wants t.7 occupy
their territory and dominate their populations.
149. Israel should real& that it cannot pin its hopes
on internal dissension among Arab States as it tries to
perpetuate the occupation of Arab territories and their
kttiexation by force. Peace in the Middle East can be
served only by the strict and faittii application of
the resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council calling for the liberation of occupied
Arab territories and the restoration to the Palestinian
people of their inalienable national rights. Until those
two conditions have been met, Israel will not know
any peace other than a peace with terrorand instability.
150. It is therefore the duty of the Security Council
to make Israel understand that truth and to guarantee
for all the Arab States in the area the rights which
are recognized by international law. We are convinced
that. on the basis of the support of all Member

States, the Council will live up to that hope and will
commit itself to the way of law and morality,
l5 I. The PRESIDENT (hrcrpremriwl
jkm FIWIC/I):
I call on the representative of Israel in exercise of the
right of reply.
152. Mr. HERZOG (Israel): 1 spoke yesterday
i1B@rlr fjreelirrg] about the spectacle of those who
live in glass houses throwing stones. 1 do not think
it could have been better illustrated than by the last
five speakers who have regaled us. The representatives
will have noted a confirmation of what 1 stated earlier
on in the debate, namely, that this forum is being
turned into an instrument of an Arab design to drag
out these meetings for political reasons certainly not
connected with the issue in question. We have long
forgotten the complaint originally made, which was
false. This intermediate recitation of anti-Israel diatribe
will continue if you allow it, Mr. President. I assure
you, Sir, that it has no effect on us.
153. But what a waste of valuable time and how
incongruous is this exhibition. Since our meeting
yesterday, over 130 people have been killed in the
fighting in Lebanon, and a total of approximately
280 since we embarked on this futile debate, and the
Council continues to disregard in the most callous
manner what is happening in Lebanon as a nation is
torn apart and continues to highlight the complete and
tragic lack of relevance of this body to events in the
Middle East.
154. The PRESIDENT(Brtoprutnrioflfrorll
French):
The representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization has asked to speak on a point of order.
1 call on him.
155. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
1 am sorry that 1 had to interrupt again, but the item
we are discussing is the situation arising from the
Hitlerite atrocities committed by the Zionists against
my people in Palestine. We should not divert the discussion to Lebanon or any other place. With your permission, Mr. President, 1 should like you to draw the attention of the speaker to the need to confine himself to
that.
156. The PRESIDENT(inrerpr~tationfrom
Frenchl:
The representative of the United States has asked IO
speak on a point of order. 1 call on him.
157. Mr. SCRANTON (United States of America):
It has been quite clear. as we have all sat here and
listened IO all the statements by all the various countries represented, that this has been an extremely
wide-ranging commentary on the situation in the
Middle East. and 1 feel strongly that the representative
from Israel has the right to comment thereon. This is
aside from bringing io your attention the question
whether the individual who has intervened has a right
to make a point of order.

158. The PRESIDENT lirlrerprera/ioilf~o,rl
Fremh):
I clll on the representative of the Soviet Union on a
point of order.
159. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interprv~aliort
from &&an):
Mr. President, 1 should like to draw your attention to the fact
that the representative of Israel is resorting to completely intolerable methods in his statement. He prefers
to talk about what is happening in other countries,
and this is not a matter which is being discussed. We
are discussing the situation which has arisen in the
territories occupied by the Israeli aggressor, and it
is only on this subject that the representative of Israel
may speak. As far as the Soviet delegation is concerned, although it has, shall we say, its own views
about the domestic affairs of Israel, in our statement
we did not interfere in the \lomestic affairs of Israel.
I think that it would be on;/ correct if the representative of Israel refrained from interfering in the internal
affairs of other countries.
160. The PRESIDENT (imerpretaGon
from French):
I call on the representative of Israel and I would ask
him to take into account the various statements that
have just been made.
161. Mr. HERZOG (Israel): I can understand the
delicacy of the situation and the problems which are
raised by the fact that one mentions points which
are so inconvenient. However, the mere interventions themselves serve a good purpose. Incidentally,
I was very gratified to learn that there is no reference
being made whatsoever to the domestic affairs of
Israel in this debate, and I should hope that this situation will continue. Mind you, I had not noticed it, but
I am willing to take the word of the representative of
the Soviet Union.
162. There are gradations in the lack of credentials
to intervene in this debate, and I believe that the
Iraqi credentials are of the lowest. How dare the
representative of a country from which an ancient
Jewish community of 160,000 had to depart tier
thousands of years intervene in this debate? It lies not
in his mouth to talk about human values, the representative of a country which is engaged in the public
han&ing of innocent Jews in the main square in
Baghdad for the edifiion
and amusement of the
assembled throng. I know what the answer will be;
it will be that not only Jews were hanged then, that
Christians and Moslems were among the victims
there-the Iraqi version of peaceful coexistence on
the gallows. I might remark that one of those hanged
at that time in Iraq was the cousin of a member of
my delegation and that his young pregnant wife was
forced to watch the execution.
163. And now we have learned of the execution of
Alexander Aaronsen, a male nurse, a Dutch Jew, who
devoted his life to helping the sick and the injured in
the developing countries of Africa and Asia, including

in the Albert Schweitzer Hospital in Gabon. While
Really, has the Tunisian representative nothing better
on a mission of mercy to the I<urds in northern Iraq.
to occupy himself with?
he was seized by Iraqi soldiers on 24 March 1975-a
year ago today. It is now apparent that Aaronsen was
168. 1 do not wish to go on. 1 merely wish to ask
cxccuted last December, after a secret trial-a CUS- again, as 1 did yesterday and as I will every day,
tomary phenomenon in Iraq. Mr. Jan Beekman. a what is the purpose of this debate? If it is to achieve
member of the Dutch Parliament who visited lrao last
any form of accommodation in the Middle East, do
January, was told by high Iraqi offtcials, including
you really think that this is the way, that this is the
the Under-Secretary for Foreign Affairs, that manner? Do you expect any self-respecting country to
Aaronsen was still alive then. The charge d’affaires
agree to this form of dialogue or diatribe? Is this the
of Iraq at The Hague informed Aaronsen’s mother by way we are going to achieve peace in the Middle
a simple telephone call the other day that her so11 was
East?
dead. This was the reaction of the Dutch Foreign
Minirtry:
169. The PRESIDENT (itrtc~rprefalior~f,ot~?
Frerrch):
The representative of Iraq has asked to be allowed
“We are dismayed, horrified and deeply outraged,
to speak in exercise of his right of reply. I invite him
especially by the incredible way the Iraqi authorities
to take a seat at the Council table.
have acted. They have fooled us systematically
for a year. We are simply perplexed.”
170. Mr. ZAHAWIE (Iraq): I must admit that in
making my statement 1 did not speak from a prepared
text, but I do not think I used any abusive epithets
I have here the leading articles from all the Dutch
newspapers on this barbaric act. 1 do not want to concerning the Zionists and their representative here.
waste the time of this body on this but merely to The opposite is true. Yet, General Herzog is obviously
stung. Truth must have hurt him, not what I said. A5
say that it lies not in the mouth of the representative
1 pointed out, I confined myself in my statement
of such a regime to talk about human vr’ les in this
solely to points which he had raised himself, and it
or any other forum.
was he who dragged Iraq into this debate. He spoke
of Iraq in a way that made it necessary for my delega164. Furthermore, I am not convinced that Banglation to participate in this debate.
desh is in a position to lecture us about civii liberties,
internal stability and respec! for human rights,
171. I said in my statement that this was not the time
including respect for the lives of political opponents.
nor the place to raise the question of Iraqi Jews, but
I wonder, what is it that the Israeli representative
165. To the representative of India, 1 would say that
objects
to. Iraq is not the first nor will it be the last
I wish the opposition in India the degree of political
to
execute
spies, and I think I can safely assure the
liberty enjoyed today by the Palestinian Arabs in the
representative of Israel that if Israel is thinking of
West Bank, who enjoy today the greatest degree of
sending any more spies or agents into Iraq they would
freedom of speech and writing in the entire Arab
most likely be executed. He sees no harm in Israel’s
world, despite all the problems-and there are probfriend, South Africa, executing not only spies but
lems. How many Arabs are there outside Israel who
innocents. According to the Sunday Times magazine
are free to speak, write and vote openly against the of
IO October 1971, of all executions judicialiy perGovernment of the country in which they live?
formed in the world every year. half occur in iust
one country-South
Aft&.-Israel
is bosom fri&ds
166. ! was also very moved by the representaLIve of with South Africa. The representative of Israel does
Mauritania evincing such concern for the Palestinian
not raise moral issues there; that does not matter.
Arabs. I had not noticed a similar concern for the
rights of the inhabitants of Spanish Sahara. This situa172. May I read one example of what has happened
tion would really be comic if it were not so tragic.
to the Jews in Iraq, which should sufIice:
167. I awaited the remarks of the representative of
Tunisia with great interest. I was convhlced that we
would be regaled with details of the events of the past
few days described in such grim detail by the Tunisian
Foreign Ministry and ;he Tunisian Chief of Police.
I refer to the alleged Libyan plot to kidnap or kill
the Tunisian Premier, to the revelation-and
i quote
here from Reuters of today:
‘That other Libyan special intelligence groups
nave been sent to Egypt. Syria. Lebanon, Somalia
c~ndItaly. and that more than S.OOOTunisian workers
had hcen expelled from I.ibyn in the last two weeks”.

“I have been in lsrael 22 years. I came from
Baghdad, Iraq, when I was six and a half years
old. Why did WC come to Israel? I ask mvself
that question. As a child I. of course, had no choice.
My parents brought me. My parents were rich people
in Iraq. They were merchants. They had a wholesale business in clothing and food-stuffs. I remember
our house in Iraq. II was a nice house. We also had
a car. Here in Israel we have nothing. The reason
my parents gave for coming to Israel was fear. They
were afraid of the Arabs. They believed it was the
Arabs who bombed our big synagogue in Baghdad.
Today it has become clear that it was a Zionist who

threw the bomb so that the Jews there would think
that the Arabs had done it. It was onlv after
practically the entire Iraqi Jewish community got to
Israel that these things started coming out, Somebody says a word here, and people- investigate.
Word of mouth brings the true story out. It was
also published in the papers, and as far as I know
nobody denied it. When we heard that we were
going to build our country here and that this was
going to be a developed country, well, we were
really very excited. We wanted to take part in this,
but after a year and a half we realized it was all one
big bluff. The bluff was that it was exactly the
opposite of what they told us.”

criminatt;d against and oppressed in every way”
-this is aftertheir arrivafin Israel. “A community
with its own high et61cal values was caught in the
spokes of Ashkenazi culture, which is totally foreign
to it. A unified and cultured community began to
produce delinquents of every kind in Israel. Its
fine, well-formed children are now all handicapped.”
This is from an article that has been reproduced in
Easr Intertw~ional,
January 1973, entitled
“How the Iraqi Jews came to Israel”.
Middle

177. The PRESIDENT (ittrerprc~ruriotrfrftttt
French):
The representative of India has asked to bc allowed to
speak in exercise of the right of reply. I therefore
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and
give him the floor.

This is from a book entitled, 7710 Kids Who Want to
Isrtr~I:

Art/ohiogrccpiric~cl

Ske~iws

of

Yotttrg

Ittttni-

~rcol/s, by Harold Flender, a pocketbook published by
Simon and Schuster, New York.

178. Mr. JAIPAL (India): It was not quite clear to
me whether the representative of Israel was questioning our credentials for speaking. I would assure him
that our credentials are quite impeccable. India has
been interested in this question since the early days,
when the termination of the Mandate came up for discussion in the United Nations.

173. These a;e the facts of the case. 1 had mentioned
other sources that were referred to by my delegation
when we intervened in the debate on the Middle East
last January. I think that should suffice.
174. The truth is that the Israelis never cared for the
welfare of these ancient minorities living all over the
world, these Jewish communities. All they were
interested in was that they should be uprooted and
serve the Zionist purposes in the occupied Holy Land.

179. It seems to me that the representative of Israel
was not listening to my statement carefully enough.
If he had been, he would have known that I discussed
only the situation in the Israeli-occupied areas. But in
his wisdom he has chosen to talk about the internal
affairs of my country. I am rather moved by his
concern for certain members ofthe opposition. I should
like to identify them; perhaps there is some bond of
sympathy between them and the representative of
Israel. Members of the Indian opposition who tried to
subvert democracy-that is, certain members of the
extreme left and the extreme right-have
been
detained under our Constitution and in accordance
with our laws. The rest of the opposition is very
active and kicking in the Indian Parliament, which is
currently in session.

175. One more quotation from very orthodox Jewish
groups, the Neturei Karta of the United States. In
Principles

and

Dejhitions:

Judaism

and

Zionism

they say:
“In fact, Zionism is most interested in undermining the position of Jews in other countries so
as to make them emigrate to the State of Israel,
and this plan has already been systematically carried
out in a number of countries. One prime example is
the burning of the synagogues in Iraq I6 Years ago,
not by anti-Jewish enemies but admittedly by Zionist
emissaries who actually succeeded thereby in
uprooting a Jewish community that had endured
literally for thousands of years.”

180. Quite obviously, the representative of Israel
-who is not here at the moment-has been a victim
of what hasbeenreferredto hereas Zionist press

propaganda.
I wouldnot normallyusethat term.But
I wouid like to tell him that this remindsme of a
famousEn&b cticketercalledLenHtttkm. whocapthud tbc Enplinhteamonce.Whenotie of his decisionswas questionedin the press,he waJ asked

176. And one more testament to the position of
t&se Jews uprootedby the Zionistsand the condi-

tionstheynowfmd themselves
in in Israel.I amnot

surprised that the representative of Israel speaks with
such venom against Iraq. According to a news item,
one of the Jews suspected of connexions with a mixed
Arab-Jewish espionage ring was of Iraqi origin, the son
of a Zionist falnily ihich was supposkdly persecuted
for its Zionism in Iraq. This bit of news was published
in Mo’w;l~,
a newspaper in Israel, dated 22 December 1972. And another Iraqi Jew has this to say:

whether he had anything to say about it, and he
replied that his normal reaction, coming from Lancashire as he did, was to regard today’s newspaper as
being good only for carrying home tomorrow’s fish and
chips. I suggest that the Israeli representative accept
Len Hutton’s advice.
181. The PRESIDENT (itrrerpreta~iottfiom
Frrwit):
The representative of the Libyan Arab Republic wishes
to speak in exercise of his right of reply. I now call
on him.

“A community that controlled most of the resources of Iraq, one of the most developed States
of the area. was turned into a subject group dis21

187. The PRBSlDENT(irltcrp~efuliuri
frocn Ft?tlcl~):
The representative of Saudi Arabia wishes to speak in
exercise of his right of reply. 1invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.

182. Mr. KlKHIA (Libyan Arab Republic): We have
listened to the usual fabrications and allegations of
the representative of the Zionist entity; they have
become a tradition here. We are very familiar with
this language. II is not the language only of the representative of the racist rigime in the Middle East; for
a long time it was the language also of the racist
r8gime on the other side of Africa, South Africa.
Every time WCattacked qxo’rlwitl,
the representative
of South Africa here would start making comparisons
with the life and the situution of the Africans in independent Africa, in the independent third world, to
prove that his blacks-as he called them-were living
better than the independent Africans.

188. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I do not see
Mr, Herzog here, He must think that some of US have
the flu-some of us, not all of us. In any case, he
always disappears when I speak. Perhaps he is trying
to mind his glass house somewhere. I myself do not see
any glass houses, All these figures of speech, these
similes, get us nowhere at all. The whole question
resolves itself into a very simple issue, which can be
best expressed by an Arabic proverb that says, “He
hits me and he begins to cry”-in
other words, he is
the first to complain.

183. ‘I’he representative of the Zionist entity talked
about problems we have in the Arab world, in the
Arab nation. We have never denied that such problems
exist. We arc a living nation. This is a very important,
indeed a decisive time in our history. We are fighting
for our rtrogress, for our unity and also for our liberation. We have our problems. We have our experience.
We have a right to that experience and to make our
mistakes, just like all the nations in the history of the
world that fought for their liberation and their unity.

189. I refer Mr. Herzog to 1919 and to 1922, when the
Jewish population of Palestine was only 6 to 7 per cent
-many of them our Jews. Ninety-four per centforget that thev were Arab-were
the indigenous
people of Pale&e,
the natives of Palestine: And,
allegedly, the First World War was fought “to make
the world safe for democracy”; yet he is talking about
democracy and voting. That was the late Mr. Woodrow
Wilson’s phrase: “to make the world safe for democracy”. And amongst the Fourteen Points of the
League of Nations, which I observed later ex officio,
was what was called the principle of self-determination.
The war was fought to free people.

184. i asked to speak only because the representative of the Zionist entity mentioned Libya, my
country, twice. My colleagues from other Arab countries have rcplicd to the other allegations of the representative of-the Zionist entity, bit since he refeired
to Libya 1 want to tell him this. Libya is a young
country. Libya is an Arab country. We are fighting
for our liberation. for our plogress. We are fighting
for our unity. We liberated-ou; country from foreign
armies and foreign bases. Our country is one of the
freest and most independent countries in the world.
We are fighting Zionism not because we wish to fight
the Jews;-we are fighting Zionism because zionism is
agmession, Zionism is racism. This racist entity in the
Middle East must be destroyed and it will be destroyed
one day.

190. By dint of what logic could the Allies-and
by “Allies”
I mean the Allies of the First World
War, Britain and the others, but especially Britainpromise a land that did not belong to them to the
Zionists? And Mr. Herzog speaks of high ideals and
votes.
191. As I mentioned, and will mention time and again,
the world is in such a sad plight because democracy
has been ritualized and reduced to a box and a chit
of paper, whereas the politicians and leaders--or
“misleaders’.--carry
on and do what they want with
the destiny of people, especially those who cannot
defend themselves.

185. When Mr. Herzog spoke the other day he
betrayed his racism with his own WOI-ds. He referred
to “the inherent destructiveness of the Arab purpose”.
He said, “In addition to destroying each other, [the
Arabs] are incapable of tolerating the presence of
a_ny.other element in their area.” [M94th meeting,
prrrrt. /08.] Mr. Herzog was talking about the Arabs
as such. He was not talking about the Arab Govemmerits. He was not talking about the Arab rkgimes.
He was not talking about the Arab leaders. He wds
talking about the Arabs as such. We are very familiar
with such language. Mr. Herzog used some words and
expressions that we find elsewhere; all that is needed
is. to substitute the word “Jew” for the word
“Arab”. All the anti-Semites use that language. It can
he found in ;\~a;~ Krr/?tg/‘.

192. To paraphrase a verse from the Holy Koran,
“He who initiates evil is the more tyrannical.”
Mr. Herzog speaks of what the Arabs did here and
there, but he forgets that those European Khazar
Zionists did not hail from the area. ft is an alien
ideology tantamount to colonialism. They moved on
into the land of Palestine, the land of peace, and have
created trouble ever since they set foot there.
193. As I mentioned, had it not been that the Allies
received the help of the United States in 1917, they
would have been beaten by the Imperial German armies
of Wilhelm II. And who brought’the Zionists into our
midst? The British, because the Zionists promised
them that they would bring the United States into the
First Wor!d War. And they did. And Mr. Herzog talks
of justice and of self-determination.

186. 1 think that Mr. Hcrrog is among those who
have not Icarncd their lesson.
22

.

194. Yesterday 1 refuted the allegation that God
parceled out lands to people, and I asked the developed, industrialized countries-those
which have
electronics and electronic communications-to try and
get us some message from the Deity as to whethet
God gave Palestine to the Jews. And Mr. Herzog has
the temerity to throw mud at the Arabs. What a selfrighteous, supercilious attitude he takes, as if to say:
“Who are those Arabs‘? This land was given to us by
God.” He never could answer what proof he has
that God gave them Palestine. 1 still am waiting fol
the answer.

sitting at my left because he raised a relevant point to
the effect that Mr. Herzog was trying to divert attention from PAlestine to what is happening in Lebanon.
Had there been no refugees in Lebanon things would
have been better. Who drove the Palestinians to
Lebanon, Syria, Jordan and other parts of the world,
to countries not even contiguous to Palestine? Who
drove out the peaceful Palestinians who lived in
Palestine but those Khazars, those European colonialists.
200, But, good Lord, colonialists? The other colonialists were a blessing in comparison with the
Khazars. Neither the British nor the French for that
matter ever expropriated the properties of the people
of the land. 03 cburse they ‘had to rationalize their
colonialism, and at one time they called it “the white
man’s burden”. But how could the Zionists rationalize
their colonialism? “God gave us Palestine. We are the
chosen people of God and you, all the peoples of the
world, have to go down. You are upstarts because
we are the chosen people of God.” What fiction,
what hoaxes.

195. Nor has he yet replied to what 1 maintain, and
repeat again: that many of the people of Palestine had
been the ethnic Jews of the land and became Christians
and later Moslems. And these Khazars, whose forebears never laid eyes on the Holy Land, can come and
claim the land as their own?
196. He talks about atrocities. What about Deir
Yassin, where 250 or 260 people were slaughtered at
dawn, just because they happened to be Palestinians
and non-Jews. What about the hanging of the British
soldiers from trees in Palestine? Those who brought
the Jews to Palestine were the British. I do not want
to blame the British people; it was Balfour who was
responsible, yet Balfour did not give them CUI’IPblnnc/le in Palestine. How dare Mr. Herzog throw mud at
the Arabs and engage in rhetorical invective? But I do
not blame him. We had an Arab poet who lived in the
seventies of the last centurv who wrote-and
here
I am speaking in figurative terms--“If a rabid dog is
tied to the door of a house. don’t blame the dog: it
is the one who tied the rabid dog that bites who
should be blamed.” Some of you Europeans and
Americans brought this figurative rabid dog into our
midst.

201. They have even played on the emotions of the
Euroceans and swindled them. bv savinr: “Those
Paleitinians are trying to benefit from- the death of
Jews who perished in the Second World War.” Before
those Jews had a country, so to speak, before Israel
was established, they made West Germany pay billions
ofdollars. And,.likeothers, 1 was touched whkn I read
a book which Mrs. Roosevelt pointed out to me, saying:
“You read that book. It is-very touching.” It-w&
7‘/re Dirtry uf Alme Frrml;, a girl of a Jewish family
which lived-in the Netherlands. She, her parents and
her brother and sister were interned by the Germans.
It was not until recently that it dawned on me that
90 per cent of the alleged dialogues were written by
a certain Mr. Levine. The father of the young girl
who died published that book as the authentic diary
of his daughter and made money because the book
ran into 40 editions. I was touched when I read that
book, but I did not know about it until this year.
Mr. Levine, who furnished the dialogues, wanted to
be paid and asked for $SO,OC@.Of course the father
did not want to pay. So he went to court and brought
an action-spit in my face if I am saying something
which is not based on my findings-and
the court
said, “Well, you had better pay $SO,OOO.” Finally,
an’ out of cotin settleriicnt of $50,000 was made. It
was all fiction. As human beings we feel sorry that
Anne Frank died. It reminds me of the fiction that God
gave them Palestine.

197. He talks about Arabs fighting one another. Why
does not he talk about the Christians in two World
Wars who fought one another? He picks out of their
context the differences which we Arabs sometimes
have. It is a healthy sign to have differences. And
what if we Arabs have fought one another at times?
That is none of his business. 1 feel sorry for him, but
let him beware: he is arousing not only the Arab people
of the Arab world, but the people of the Moslem
world, and the friends of those who believe that the
Arabs have been treated with iqjustice. But he gets
away with it and talks about “glass houses” and
“diatribes”.
198. Let those who support Israel beware that they
cannot maintain their strength and power if they are
based on injustice. Where are the empires of yore?
Crumbled-and the modern empires too. I do not want
to exacerbate matters by naming them.

202. Then what about Dachau? 1 am not a German
-and the Germans are not my cousins-nor
am
I British: that is why I talk objectively. There were
no gas chambers in Dachau, perhaps there were in
other concentration camps. There was a crematorium,
and people, Jews and Gentiles. were dying like flies
at the end of the war. The Zinnist mass media made
everybody believe that it was not a crematorium but

199. A few words to my good friends from the United
States. I was flabbergasted when our good friend
Mr. Scranton intervened to chastise this gentleman
23

a gas chamber. But an English researcher-and 1 did
not want to exacerbate matters or I would have brought
his findings-said it would have taken about 230 years
to cremate all those who were allegedly gassed in
Dachau. People who do not know the truth shed tears,
including myself. 1 feel sorry for anybody who is killed.
And this Mr. Herzog comes and throws mud at us
and leaves. What is he doing, building a new glass
house outside? Let him come and look us in the eye
if he has the courage.

States then. We were all livina like your country, Sir,
under the foreign yoke. And irymy lifetime I find there
are 20 independent Arab States Members of the United
Nations. And we are afraid of these Khazars coming
from-where? Eastern and central Europe, originally
from the northern tier of Asia. They will melt like a
pinch of salt in a boiling kettle when the time comes.
210. In conclusion, 1 think Yasser Arafat and the
leaders of Palestine will still have the Arab olive
branch available, if you want to take it. And if not,
please clear out so as to save yourselves and your
children-not now, but in the long, long run.

203. One word more. 1 want to assure him and those
representatives seated behind the Israel sign that, even
with all the iJustices that have been perpetrated
against the Palestinians-that
I know about from the
Palestinians-the
Palestinians are willing to let the
Jews live in peace amongst them, provided that they
allow them to go back to their homes. Will the
Zionists allow these people to go back to their homes?

211, The PRESIDENT(Orlcrp,rlarionf~o~~~
Frej?c/i):
The representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization wishes to speak in exercise of his right of
reply. 1 now call upon him.
212. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
Mr. President, I sincerely thank you for having made
your ruling permitting me to raise a point of order.
This is covered by rule 30 of the provisional rules of
procedure, and I should like to read the text of the
invitation you and IO other members of the Council
extended to us. It says, inter oh:

204. He talks of Lebanon, Syria and Egypt and of
their excesses, but he forgets that the leaders of
Zionism are stark colonialist usurpers who will never
succeed in remaining in the Holy Land of Palestine
if they pursue the same policies.
205. They have cursed Arafat. I spoke with Arafat
before he made his statement to the Assembly.r* He
told me: “1 am going to say something that will please
you. We are willing to offer them the olive branch.”
I did not know that that was in his speech. And what
do they call them? “Terrorists. He had a gun. He
is inhuman.” Of course they want to make him the
Devil incarnate, a man who is trying to defend his
country.

“the invitation to the PLO will confer on it the
same rights of participation as are conferred on a
Member State when it is invited to participate in a
debate under rule 37” [1893rd rmefing, pura. 41.
I was not surprised that the representative of the
Government of the United States opposed your ruling.
It is very well known that the United States has
developed some sort of psychosis against the rights
of the Palestinians, so any time the Palestinians wish
to exercise their right it is the United States Government that is opposed to that.

206. Let these people around this table note: I am
researching the troubles in Lebanon and I have found
seven foreign sources of help to the tough guys, to
the gangsters, and the leaders of the Palestinians are
trying to calm the situation; they are not setting
Lebanon on fue.

213. On the other hand, concerning the situation in
Lebanon, I understand that the Lebanese authorities
have asked the Palestine Liberation Organization to
co-operate with them tomorrow in maintaining order
and discipline when the Lebanese Parliament meets.

207. Let Mr. Herzog keep his nose out of Lebanon,
because there is a hornets’ nest there. And let the big
Powers stop pulling strings, because, by the law of
nature, leave aside divine wisdom, they wig pay a
p&e @at will mean their dissolution. If not in my life&18, y6u, Sir, who (VC #ill young. will see them
crumble as they have crumbled in Africa, not, perhaps.
through our might, but because in nature-if you do
not want to believe in the Divinity-there is something
very simple that we have been taught; those who
sow evil will reap evil, and they will crumble and
dissolve.

214. The representative of the Zionist authorities
spoke about the haven of the Palestinians under
occupation. JMes he want us to believe that paratroopers and border oolice and shootine and the use of
guns against the population are only~ &ns ofjoy and
jubilation? He mentioned somethinr! about freedom.
We know today that the lnternation~l Press Association in occupied Palestine has protested because !he
Zionist authorities arrested a cameraman and struck
another newsman. And one wontiers why. Simply
because they were covering a journalistic storv about
the funeral of the I I-year-aid boy who died as a result
of the Zionist-Israeli shooting uoon demonstratina
youngsters.

208. Go back to where you came from if you do not
want to live at peace with the Palestinians. The
Palestinians are the c-ore of the question. All the
trouble around about is peripheral.
209. I have been a Pan-Arab since 1922, when 1 was
laughed at for becoming one. There were only two Arab
74

6 Ibid.,

NOIt

7 United
* Ibid.,

Fifrb

Emergemy

Speciul

Seasiotr,

Pltwury

1530th meeting, para. 134.
’ Unlted Nations, Trmfy Series, vol. 75, p. 287.
’ New York, Philosophical
Library,
1954.
’ Official

Records

of the

Ad Hoc f’olirkol
Commiffee.
sect. C. article 4.

Gerlerol

Am~x,

Assemb/y.

vol.

B, para. 4.
Nations, Treafy Series,

swl.

vol. 75, P. 402.

0 oflidal
Records of f/w Gemral
Assembly,
T~wWelgklk
SI,NI, Special PolitIcal
Conrrtdtree,
890th meeting, para. 23.

Mecfhgs.

9 Ibid.,

Third

Session,

Parr

II,

Ad Hoc PoNtical

Ses-

ComdUee,

p, 286.
Fourfh

1, document

Sessh

,

A/ I 113.

25

10 Ibid.,

p. 187.

11 Ibid..

Twewry-halt

Srssiou.

Pltwtry

Meeiirrgs,2282nd

meeting.

Ln pubhcatlom
drs Narlons Umcs son, en vcnte dam les libraines CL les ageences dPpositaires du
monde cnurr. Inlbrmez-vous
aupr+s dc vow librairc ou adresrez-vous B : Nations Unier. Section
des vcnws. New York o” Gent+.

Litho

in United

Nations.

New

York

M1400

83.60801-August

1984-2,200
