VII,

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

peoples is incompatible with the relevant resolutions
of the United Nations,
Noting that a constitutional referendum is proposed
to be held in the Territory in May/June 1979,
Mindful that Guam requires the continued attention
and assistance of the United Nations in the achievement by its people of the objectives embodied in the
Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration,
A ware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of Guam, and
stressing the necessity of diversifying the Territory's
economy as a matter of priority in order to reduce
its dependence on fluctuating economic activities,

1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
relating to Guam; 23
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people
of Guam to self-determination and independence in
accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the
Declaration with respect to the Territory;
4. Calls upon the Government of the United States
of America, as the administering Power, in consultation with the freely elected representatives of the people, to continue to take all the necessary steps to
ensure the full and speedy attainment of the goals set
forth in the Declaration with respect to the Territory;
5. Welcomes the invitation extended by the Government of the United States to the Special Committee
to send a visiting mission to Guam to observe the
forthcoming referendum on a draft constitution and
to observe conditions in the Territory;24
6. Calls upon the administering Power to take all
possible steps to strengthen and diversify the economy
of Guam and to work out concrete programmes of
assistance and economic development for the Territory;
7. Recalls its relevant resolutions concerning military bases in colonial and Non-Self-Governing Territories, recognizes that the presence of military bases
could constitute a factor impeding the implementation
of the Declaration and reaffirms its strong conviction
that the presence of military bases in Guam should
not prevent the people of the Territory from exercising
their .inalienable right to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration and the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations;
8. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation
with the freely elected authorities and representatives
of the people of Guam, to safeguard the inalienable
right of the people of the Territory to the enjoyment
of their natural resources by taking effective measures
which guarantee the right of the people to own and
dispose of those natural resources and to establish
and maintain control of their future development;
2s Ibid., Thirty-third Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/33/23/

Rev.1 ), vol. IV, chap. XXVII.
24 Jbid.,

annex II. See also A/ AC.109/575.

175

9. Requests the administering Power to continue
to enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
in accelerating progress in all sectors of the national
life of Guam;
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the implementation
of the Declaration with respect to Guam, including the
dispatch of a visiting mission in consultation with the
administering Power, to observe the constitutional
referendum, to acquire first-hand information on the
situation in the Territory and to ascertain the views
of the people of Guam concerning their future political
status, and to report to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fourth session on the implementation of the
present resolution.
81 st plenary meeting
13 December 1978
33/34.

Question of the United States Virgin
Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the United States
Virgin Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 25
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and all other resolutions and decisions of the United
Nations relating to the United States Virgin Islands,
Noting the active co-operation given by the administering Power, both through its active participation
in the work of the Special Committee and through its
willingness to receive visiting missions to small Territories under its administration,
Recalling the report of the 1977 United Nations
Visiting Mission to the United States Virgin Islands, 26
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power, 27
I. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the United States Virgin Islands; 28
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the United States Virgin Islands to self-determination
and independence in accordance with the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the
Declaration with respect to the Territory;
u Ibid., vol. I, chaps. III and V, and vol. III, chap. XXVI.

26 Jbid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/32/
23/Rev.1 ), vol. IV, chap. XXVII, annex.
27 Ibid., Thirty-third Session, Fourth Committee, 26th meeting, paras. 1-9.
28 Jbid., Thirty-third Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/33/23/
Rev.I), vol. MI, chap. XXVI.

176

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

4. Requests the Government of the United States
of America, as the administering Power, to continue
to take all necessary measures, in consultation with
the freely elected authorities and representatives of the
people of the United States Virgin Islands, to enable
the people of the Territory to exercise fully their right
to self-determination in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and
the Declaration;
5. Requests the administering Power to encourage
further and meaningful discussion regarding the political and constitutional status of the Territory and
to take such additional measures as would ensure
preservation of the identity and cultural heritage of the
people of the United States Virgin Islands;
6. Urges the administering Power, in consultation
with the freely elected authorities and representatives
of the people of the United States Virgin Islands, to
safeguard the inalienable right of the people of the
Territory to the enjoyment of their natural resources
by taking effective measures which guarantee the right
of the people to own and dispose of those natural
resources and to establish and maintain control of
their future development;
7. Expresses the view that measures to promote the
economic development of the United States Virgin
Islands are an important element in the process of
self-determination and, to this end, calls upon the
administering Power, together with the freely elected
authorities and representatives of the people of the
United States Virgin Islands, to take all measures
necessary to achieve a viable and stable economy in
the Territory;
8. Requests the administering Power to continue
to enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
in the development and strengthening of the economy
of the United States Virgin Islands;
9. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including the possible dispatch of a further visiting
mission to the United States Virgin Islands at an
appropriate time and in consultation with the administering Power, and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session.
81 st plenary meeting
13 December 1978
33/35.

Question of Bermuda, British Virgin
Islands, Cayman Islands, Montserrat and
Turks and Caicos Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Bermuda, British
Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Montserrat and Turks
and Caicos Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 29
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
29 Ibid.,

vol. I, chaps. III-V, and vol. Ill, chaps. XXI-XXV.

of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and all other resolutions and decisions of the United
Nations relating to the Territories listed above, in
particular General Assembly resolutions 32/29 and
32/30 of 28 November 1977,
Taking into account the statement of the administering Power relating to the Territories listed above,R0
Noting the continued readiness of the administering
Power to grant independence to the peoples of the
Territories under its administration on the basis of
their express wishes and aspirations in that regard, and
its declared policy of fostering the growth of free and
democratic political institutions in those Territories,
Conscious of the need to accelerate progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration with respect
to the Territories concerned,
Bearing in mind the constructive results that can be
achieved as a consequence of United Nations visiting
missions to colonial Territories, which provide an
effective means of ascertaining the situation in the
Territories visited, and reiterating its conviction that
the dispatch of such missions is essential for securing
adequate and first-hand information in regard to the
political, economic and social conditions in those Territories and to the views, wishes and aspirations of the
peoples therein,
Mindful that those Territories require the continued
attention and assistance of the United Nations in the
achievement by their peoples of the objectives embodied in the Charter of the United Nations and in
the Declaration,
A ware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of the Territories concerned, and stressing the necessity of diversifying and strengthening further their economies as a
matter of priority in order to promote economic
stability and reduce their dependence on fluctuating
economic activities,
I. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Bermuda, British Virgin Islands, Cayman
Islands, Montserrat and Turks and Caicos Islands; 81

2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples
of those Territories to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the
Declaration with respect to the Territories concerned;
4. Calls upon the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as
the administering Power, in consultation with the freely
elected representatives of the peoples, to continue to
take all the necessary steps to ensure the full and
speedy attainment of the goals set forth in the Declaration with respect to the Territories;
30 Ibid., Thirty-third Session, Fourth Committee, 24th meeting, paras. 23-30.
3 1 Jbid., Thirty-third Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/33/23/
Rev.I), vol. III, chaps. XXI-XXV.
