S/2020/979

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 October 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 7 October 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of a briefing provided by
Ms. Helen Meagher La Lime, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Haiti and Head of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti, as well as the
statements delivered by His Excellency Mr. Roberto Álvarez Gil, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Dominican Republic, and by the representatives of Belgium, China,
Estonia, France, Germany, Indonesia, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines (on behalf of the African members of the Security Council plus one —
the Niger, South Africa, Tunisia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines), the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and
Viet Nam, in connection with the video-teleconference on “The question concerning
Haiti” convened on Monday, 5 October 2020.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light
of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
the enclosed briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Vassily Nebenzia
President of the Security Council

20-13237 (E) 081020 121120

*2013237*

S/2020/979

Annex I
Statement of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Haiti and Head of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti,
Helen Meagher La Lime
It is an honour to have the opportunity to provide the Security Council with an
update on the situation in Haiti, on the eve of the first anniversary of the departure
of peacekeeping troops from the country and the creation of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH). During its first 12 months of operation, BINUH
has strived to carry out its mandate by, among other actions, seeking to foster a
favourable environment for key sectors of Haitian society to overcome the impasse
in which the country is currently entrenched and set it on a path towards long-term
stability and sustainable development.
Nevertheless, as we meet today, Haiti is once again struggling to avert the
precipice of instability. Apprehension about the future has become increasingly
palpable, but especially since the shocking assassination, on 28 August, of the
President of the Port-au-Prince Bar Association, Monferrier Dorval — a respected
scholar whose murder epitomizes for many the weak state of the rule of law in the
country. The slaying of Maître Dorval constitutes a tragic loss for Haitian society, as
he represented an example of civic engagement and commitment to the promotion of
the rule of law. In the past few months, unrest — sometimes in the form of violent
protests — has become increasingly prevalent, and perceptions of insecurity have
grown ever more acute. Gangs continue to challenge the authority of the State,
especially in the more populous neighbourhoods of Port-au-Prince, and a fringe
group of disaffected police officers calling themselves “Fantôme 509” has, along
with its followers, brought disorder to the capital on several occasions.
As the police and judicial authorities struggle to address the persistent
challenges they face in meeting the Haitian population’s legitimate demands for
security and accountability, violence persists, and human rights violations continue
to be committed. The widespread perception of impunity these dynamics elicit
can only be countervailed by ensuring that the rights of victims of human rights
violations and abuses are upheld and that perpetrators are held to account.
Although the Haitian National Police (HNP) has consistently proven its
operational proficiency since assuming sole responsibility for providing security
throughout Haiti’s territory, it would require at least an additional 10,000 welltrained and well-equipped police officers to meet internationally accepted policing
standards and cement its capacity to deliver professional, human rights-compliant
police services to the population. While, over time, it has proven successful in
reversing such negative trends as the sharp increases in homicides and kidnappings
observed in past months, the HNP needs to be adequately funded and equipped by
its Government to overcome its recurrent shortcomings and continue developing so
as to meet those international standards.
Similarly, whereas progress has been made towards the operationalization of
the National Commission for Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration —
the State body charged with coordinating efforts to curb gang activity — continued
support, steadfast political resolve and decisive action will be necessary to ensure that
the Commission is capable of performing its tasks as the Government moves towards
adopting a national strategy for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
and community violence reduction and steps up efforts to aimed at countering the
proliferation of illicit weapons and ammunition.
Haiti’s contemporary history has demonstrated time and again that acute
political polarization and weak State institutions constitute catalysts for violence.
2/24

20-13237

S/2020/979

Since I last addressed the Council in June (S/2020/568, annex I), several Government
initiatives, including on economic and governance reform, have gained momentum
despite running up against some internal criticism. A new penal code was enacted,
certain elements of which will in the next two years provide an opportunity for
finetuning to build consensus around a text all Haitians can embrace. Finally, the
recent appointment by President Moïse of the new Provisional Electoral Council
has elicited strong reactions from segments of Haitian society, including the Court
of Cassation, purportedly because of the body’s lack of representativeness and the
scope of the mission it was given.
The continued lack of trust among political forces is impeding all but the
slightest progress on priorities that had previously garnered a wide consensus across
the political spectrum, such as the necessity to undertake constitutional reform to
better reflect current Haitian realities and address key shortcomings of the 1987
Constitution prior to holding new elections. Even as the window to design a process
acceptable to all is rapidly closing, many political stakeholders view the forging of
a political consensus and the establishment of a Government of national unity as
essential to an environment conducive to participatory elections.
As the country prepares to enter a new electoral cycle, it is paramount that
key aspects of the electoral process, such as the electoral framework and calendar,
be addressed in order to reduce the risk of contested elections and further violence.
While BINUH will continue to engage national stakeholders, I urge States Members
of the United Nations to amplify their support for a process that, if properly managed,
will contribute to ensuring that the overdue polls renew Haiti’s elected leadership,
lead to a greater representation of women in political life and reinvigorate the social
contract between Haitian citizens and the State.
Though less virulent in Haiti than initially forecast, the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic appears to have compounded the already debilitating effects
of almost two years of sociopolitical unrest on the country’s economy. The onset
of the health emergency in the spring stopped any potential economic recovery
in its tracks, and, since then, the situation has only further deteriorated. Despite
an increase in remittances and the recent success of measures to strengthen the
national currency, households across the country have seen their incomes drop while
prices of basic goods have risen sharply, thus leading to a further increase in food
insecurity. Investments in the critical manufacturing and agriculture sectors have
stalled, resulting in the loss of thousands of jobs. Overall, the domestic impact of
the pandemic, as well as the effect it has had on the economies of essential trading
partners, will likely contribute to Haiti experiencing another year of recession
in 2020.
To countervail the effects of the protracted multidimensional crisis and
revitalize the economy, the Government intends to launch a three-year post-COVID-19
economic recovery plan premised on the stimulation of domestic production and
exports through economic diversification, support to small and medium enterprises,
and investment in the energy and agricultural sectors. Likewise, through the
implementation of the recently adopted National Social Protection and Promotion
Policy, the Government will seek to reinforce social safety nets and enhance the
provision of relief to the most vulnerable, an undertaking that would unquestionably
be bolstered by increased levels of donor funding for humanitarian assistance.
Above all else, it is the ability of Haiti’s political and economic classes to
compromise and resolve their differences without resorting to violence and the
capacity of the country’s fledgling institutions to take the necessary steps that will
determine whether free, fair and inclusive elections will be held in a favourable
climate, whether attempts to restart the economy and put the country back on a
20-132373/24

S/2020/979

positive development trajectory will succeed, and whether the perennial issue of
impunity will finally be addressed.
Leveraging the complementarity of the diverse expertise shared between
BINUH and the United Nations country team, we stand ready to continue supporting
authorities in the accomplishment of these endeavours and accompany Haiti as it
strives to rekindle the sustainable development agenda. To effectively fulfil these
roles, we will continue to transform the way in which we work, by making more
efficient use of the political and programmatic resources of the United Nations
to better address the intractable structural obstacles that prevent meaningful and
tangible progress in Haiti.

4/24

20-13237

S/2020/979

Annex II
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Dominican
Republic, Roberto Álvarez Gil
[Original: Spanish]
I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti, Helen
Meagher La Lime, for her detailed briefing, which clearly reflects the various crises
Haiti is going through.
We would like to begin by acknowledging the efforts made by the Haitian
Government to counter the effects of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
in the country, under the leadership of its multisectoral commission for the
management of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The Dominican Republic is extremely concerned about the profound social,
economic, health and political crisis in its sister Republic of Haiti, marked by the
stagnation in the organization of the legislative elections and the lack of consensus
on a shared political agenda to break the deadlock and set forth a new electoral cycle
that will put the nation on a path of lasting stability. For this reason, in the first
Dominican statement on the Haitian issue made in the Security Council last year,
we warned of the danger of a premature departure of the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti without first having achieved conditions conducive
thereto (see S/PV.8502). We hope that this situation will serve as an example when
the extension of the mandates of other missions is analysed, in order not to make the
same mistake.
This complex political and economic crisis has degenerated into an
impossibility of good governance and is therefore of deep concern to the Dominican
Republic. The economic situation and insecurity in the country — and the food
crisis that, according to the World Food Programme, today affects approximately
5 million Haitians — significantly affect not only the operations of United Nations
personnel, but all activities aimed at improving the situation in the country. The
problem is multidimensional and requires interdisciplinary action.
Although intentional homicides reported to the police decreased by 12 per
cent between 1 June and 31 August, violence and impunity continue to wreak havoc
and affect the normal course of daily life. Kidnappings have rebounded and ongoing
clashes between gangs have recently led to the displacement of hundreds of families.
In recent days, we have heard with astonishment how violence has cut short the
productive lives of high-profile citizens, such as the professor, lawyer and President
of the Haitian Bar Association, Monferrier Dorval, as well as the father of the
Director of Haitian National Police, who was found dead inside a water tank. These
actions have been interpreted as threats and expressions of rejection from minority
sectors that prefer chaos and are betting against the constitutional reform process in
the country.
Hopefully, sooner rather than later, the perpetrators of these atrocious crimes
will be brought to justice; both inaction and impunity are unacceptable. In this
context, we call upon the United Nations to provide the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti (BINUH) with the necessary personnel to enable the mission to
be effective and to fulfil its mandate. Mindful of the global economic downturn,
it must be stressed that BINUH needs to be fully staffed in order to be effective,
and, similarly, we call on BINUH, the international community and the Haitian
Government to redouble their efforts in support of the Haitian National Police
strategic development plan 2017-2021 and also to provide the judicial system with
20-132375/24

S/2020/979

the resources and tools necessary to protect the rights of citizens, particularly the
most vulnerable.
It is paradoxical that one of the aspects in which the United Nations has
achieved some success in Haiti since 2004, namely, generating a critical awareness
of human rights among the population, does not find the institutional support to
enforce human rights in the courts. There is a gap today between the expectations
and demands of society and the capacity of rights holders to ensure that they
are respected.
The humanitarian situation in Haiti remains worrisome. Fifty-three per cent
of Haitian households experienced hunger between May and June, and the number
of children suffering from malnutrition is expected to increase by 25 per cent by
the end of the year. A revised humanitarian response plan for 2020 was launched
in June, aimed at reaching 2.3 million of the 5.1 million Haitians considered to
be the most vulnerable. Including the response to COVID-19, the plan requires
$472 million. However, disconcertingly, as of 10 September, only 16 per cent of the
that amount had been funded. This situation could be exacerbated by the still-active
hurricane season.
To minimize these aggravating factors, it is necessary for the Haitian
Government and its institutions to intensify their efforts in order to establish
mechanisms for risk assessment and the designing of plans and strategies to strengthen
the most affected sectors. Similarly, information and collaboration channels must be
established with local communities to expand early-warning mechanisms that help in
joint planning for the impact of climate shocks. The combination of the institutional
crisis, COVID-19 and adverse climate phenomena could be devastating for a country
that should not be left to fend for itself.
The shared border between the Republic of Haiti and the Dominican Republic
means that the political, social, health and economic processes of each country
significantly impact the other. The success of health, security, defence and climatechange adaptation policies requires binational coordination. Given the situation in
Haiti, to achieve this coordination, the support and assistance of the international
community and multilateral organizations is essential — I repeat, essential.
Instability in Haiti threatens the stability of the Dominican Republic and potentially
that of the region. Inertia or avoidance can never be viable policies for the situation
in Haiti. In that context, we once again echo the words of the Secretary-General,
who said:
“Absent additional financial support, the country will fall further behind in
addressing its development challenges.” (S/2020/537, para. 32)
That should not be countenanced by the international community.
Good-neighbourliness between the two countries can never undermine the principle
of strict compliance with Dominican and international law. In the almost two years
as a non-permanent member of the Council, the Dominican Republic has made
consistent proposals with regard to the political process in Haiti and has abstained
on resolutions that, while well-intentioned, did not taken due account of the reality
in Haiti. We have worked bilaterally and multilaterally to advance the peace and
security agenda in Haiti, offering our good offices.
As this is our last engagement on this issue in the Security Council, just as
BINUH celebrates its first year of deployment in Haiti and at a time when that
country is facing more difficult political, socioeconomic and security conditions than
last year, we wish to emphasize our ongoing concern that, despite the progress of the
One United Nations plan, and even with the United Nations country team’s support
6/24

20-13237

S/2020/979

to the Haitian authorities, the Council cannot afford to transfer the responsibilities
of the mission to the Haitian Government while the current deep political instability
and humanitarian crisis in that country continues.
However, we must clearly state our firm belief that the well-being and future
of the people are in the hands of the citizens. While providing additional and vital
support, the international community cannot bring about the necessary changes
in Haiti on its own. The meaningful participation of civil society and the Haitian
political leadership is essential, including the active involvement of the diaspora,
with common approaches and a joint agenda. That can be achieved only if the
pending electoral process in Haiti is successful.
We therefore urge the international community to take a more active role
in organizing that process and to extend the BINUH mandate, providing it with
the necessary resources for its proper functioning. BINUH must facilitate a
comprehensive political agreement in Haiti, ensuring that legislative elections are
held, which is the most urgent task.
Finally, the Dominican Government calls on the international community
to provide the Haitian people with much-needed humanitarian assistance and the
resources necessary to invest in infrastructure and job creation.
The Dominican Republic will continue a policy of openness to ongoing
cooperation with the people of Haiti — cooperation that characterizes the deep sense
of solidarity of our people — but also equally affirms that there is not, and cannot
be, a Dominican solution to the situation in Haiti.

20-132377/24

S/2020/979

Annex III
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the
United Nations, Philippe Kridelka
[Original: French]
I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Meagher La Lime for
her briefing and her tireless efforts to create an atmosphere of trust and ownership
in Haiti.
I would like to address three aspects today: first, the importance of the
elections, stability and political accountability; secondly, the need to promote human
rights and to combat impunity and insecurity; and, thirdly, the role of the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH).
First, the political climate remains highly polarized and a common political
agenda is lacking. Uncertainty over the electoral calendar, the composition of the
new Provisional Electoral Council and the necessary constitutional reform remain
factors of instability. We are concerned about the increase in violent gangs and their
impact on State institutions. For the legitimacy of the political system, it is urgent to
agree a realistic timetable for the holding of the elections. Women must be involved
at all stages of the electoral process.
Secondly, with regard to human rights and combating impunity and insecurity,
we strongly condemn the shocking assassination of Monferrier Dorval, a highly
respected lawyer. The active participation of civil society is, for us, particularly
crucial. It cannot be silenced. We urge the authorities to spare no effort in bringing
the perpetrators to justice. We remain deeply concerned that the perpetrators of
large-scale massacres are still at large and that there are ongoing allegations of
collusion between gangs and State agents. In that regard, we welcome the steps to
increase the operational capacity of the General Inspectorate of the National Police.
Policing should remain a primary concern of BINUH and major donors, who have
invested heavily, including in the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti, to achieve a more professional and reliable Haitian National Police. The gains
in that area cannot be lost, particularly in the run-up to politically sensitive deadlines
for the country.
The pandemic has highlighted protection challenges, especially for women
and girls, who face increased risks of sexual and gender-based violence. The United
Nations-European Union (EU) Spotlight Initiative on gender supports the national
response in that regard. The new penal code brings Haiti’s legal framework further
in line with international legal and human rights standards. We hope that, among
other things, this will lead to a more humane approach to law enforcement, help to
reduce prison overcrowding and better protect the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender
and intersex persons community.
Finally, Belgium fully supports the work of BINUH in facilitating political
dialogue in Haiti. Given the high level of polarization, it is now more important than
ever to address the trust deficit and promote a more conducive political environment.
We welcome the close cooperation between BINUH and the United Nations country
team in implementing the integrated strategic framework. We encourage the Haitian
authorities to approve the establishment of a stand-alone office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights in the country, which could assist it in
addressing the various challenges that I have discussed today.
Haiti cannot face its challenges alone. Together with our EU partners, we are
providing financial, technical and political support, and we call on all international
partners to do the same.
8/24

20-13237

S/2020/979

Annex IV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Geng Shuang
[Original: Chinese]
China thanks Special Representative Meagher La Lime for her briefing.
Since the previous meeting on this issue in the Security Council in June (see
S/2020/568), Haiti has been mired in a prolonged political impasse and continued
constitutional crisis, with a deteriorating security situation that put its people in
danger. The situation of women is a matter of particular concern. The economic
reality is grim, and the coronavirus disease further aggravates the already difficult
livelihoods of Haitians. The political, economic and social crises that Haiti is facing
show no signs of lessening.
To defuse the crises and achieve stability and development, Haiti ultimately has
to rely on its own efforts, and the Haitian authorities bear the primary responsibility.
However, it is regrettable that the Haitian Government’s governance capabilities are
severely inadequate and that corruption has persisted despite repeated prohibitions.
According to the Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/944), certain Government
authorities have committed abuses. It is reported that some Haitian police officers
took to the streets to protest over low salaries, and even exchanged fire with police
officers on duty. The Haitian Government must effectively improve its governance
capabilities, shoulder its own responsibilities and meet the people’s expectations.
At the same time, the Haitian authorities and various domestic factions must
put the interests of the people first, abandon personal interests, put aside their
differences and commit themselves to inclusive dialogue and extensive consultation
in order to reach a political solution. Haiti will hold a presidential election next year.
Election preparations must be in compliance with Haiti's Constitution and laws and
on the basis of broad consensus among various parties to ensure the legitimacy and
credibility of the election.
Haiti, the first country in Latin America to achieve independence, was
once under foreign occupation and control for decades. Its national resources were
plundered for far too long. Its people were plunged into misery and suffering. China
sympathizes with the Haitian people about this unfortunate historical experience and
has always called on the international community to scale up its assistance to Haiti.
Over the past 10 years, Haiti has received billions of dollars in aid, but there has been
no fundamental improvement in the lives of the Haitian people. The main donors
to Haiti should pay earnest attention to the needs and priorities of Haiti and invest
funds in the areas that are most urgent for the Haitian people, particularly the areas
of poverty reduction and economic and social development. The Haitian Government
should also use its aid in a rational and effective manner and continuously improve
the effectiveness of the aid it receives.
The mandate of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) will
expire on 15 October. As a special political mission, BINUH, established a year ago,
has made some efforts in promoting dialogue between the Haitian government and
the opposition. However, there has been little progress. There is no external solution
to the problems in Haiti. Unless all parties in Haiti truly demonstrate their political
will, it would be impossible to break the deadlock. We therefore recommend the
Security Council consider the future United Nations presence in Haiti in the light
of the development of the situation, to make an assessment and take onboard the
previous experiences and lessons learned.
20-132379/24

S/2020/979

Annex V
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Estonia

to

the

I would like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Helen
Meagher La Lime for her informative briefing. I would also like to express Estonia’s
strong support for the activities of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti and
for the work of the Special Representative.
Estonia is concerned about the lack of political stability in Haiti. More
progress is needed in setting a consensual reform agenda and ensuring free, fair
and transparent elections. Moving forward with the political process requires a
comprehensive dialogue that results in a national consensus.
We urge that stronger measures be taken against insecurity and impunity.
Despite some progress, justice has still not been met. The cases of the Raboteau
massacre, Lilavois, Grand Ravine, La Saline and Bel Air prove the lack of
accountability for human rights violations and abuses. Impunity is also a contributing
factor to the increase in gang-related violence. We reiterate the importance of
enhancing accountability and call on the Government of Haiti to modernize the
justice system. Judicial institutions need to be strengthened to ensure that all cases
are properly investigated and perpetrators are held accountable for their crimes.
We welcome the appointment of a new Minister-delegate for Human Rights and
the Fight against Extreme Poverty. That is a sign of the Government’s commitment
to strengthening national policies on human rights. We encourage the authorities to
support the establishment of an office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights in Haiti. In a long-term perspective, that would help to maintain what
has already been achieved.
We commend all measures taken by the Government of Haiti to combat
the coronavirus disease pandemic. It is of the utmost importance to address the
socioeconomic impacts of the pandemic, which has increased the vulnerability
and inequality of the people of Haiti. Implementing the United Nations-supported
assessment and recovery plan can be a great support for Haiti in dealing with the
already dire situation.
Haiti and its people deserve a stable State with democracy, the rule of law and
sustainable development. That is what we hope the Government of Haiti will strive
for. More important, that is what the Haitian people have the right to expect from
their political leaders.
In conclusion, we encourage all parties to continue to work in a constructive
spirit. We remain hopeful that continued efforts will bring about a better future
for Haiti.

10/24

20-13237

S/2020/979

Annex VI
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations, Nathalie Broadhurst Estival
[Original: English and French]
I too thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Haiti, Ms. Helen Meagher La Lime, for her extremely comprehensive and
enlightening briefing.
Haiti is currently going through a crisis that is above all political. We observe
with great concern the continued deterioration of the institutional situation. Indeed,
I recall that, due to the lack of elections, the Parliament has not been able to sit since
January and the Government appointed in March has not been installed. We deplore
the fact that all dialogue initiatives have failed over the past two years.
Yet, as we all know, the resolution of this crisis can be achieved only through
an inclusive national dialogue among all political forces in the country, including the
opposition, civil society and the private sector. That dialogue is essential to ensure
the credible and transparent organization of the upcoming elections and the revision
of the Constitution, if that is what Haitians indeed want. France urges President
Jovenel Moïse to put an end to the deadlock.
This call for political responsibility is all the more necessary since the
credibility of the institutions has been deeply undermined in Haiti by cases of
corruption. Haitian civil society has for many years demanded transparency in the
face of such cases, which destroy the confidence of the population in their institutions.
Taking such demands into account is an essential condition for rebuilding trust with
the Haitian population. That is why the fight against corruption must be the top
priority of the Haitian political class.
Haitian society has quite legitimate demands in terms of security and respect
for human rights, which must be heard by the authorities. We strongly condemn the
assassination of Maître Dorval, President of the Port-au-Prince Bar Association, on
28 August. That murder is an extremely disturbing sign of the increasing insecurity
since the beginning of the year and of the violence by gangs that are operating
with impunity. I am also thinking of the massacres at La Saline and Bel Air, which
have given rise to damning reports by the United Nations. Given that situation, it
is essential that the Haitian State ensure the security of its citizens and guarantee
that those responsible for such violence are brought to justice. The Haitian National
Police is mobilizing to address the situation; it must be beyond reproach to ensure
respect for the rule of law.
In addition, as we know, the coronavirus disease pandemic has weighed
heavily on an already extremely deteriorated economic, humanitarian and social
situation. Millions of Haitians are living in a very vulnerable situation, and that
trend is increasing. France and the European Union will continue to mobilize to
provide all the humanitarian assistance needed to meet the most urgent needs.
We are all aware that the multidimensional nature of the crisis in Haiti makes
its resolution particularly complex. One year after its establishment, the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) has mobilized tirelessly, under the
leadership of Ms. Meagher La Lime, to support Haiti. The work that BINUH is
carrying out in support of political dialogue and governance and the strengthening
of the rule of law is absolutely essential. It must be continued and BINUH must be
given every means to fully implement its mandate.

20-1323711/24

S/2020/979

The Security Council will continue to maintain full vigilance and take
appropriate measures, particularly if the situation in Haiti should continue to
deteriorate. Finally, I wish to reaffirm that France stands more than ever alongside
Haiti and the Haitians to meet the challenges of the current crisis and build the
environment of stability and prosperity to which they quite legitimately aspire.

12/24

20-13237

S/2020/979

Annex VII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Germany to
the United Nations, Günter Sautter
I would like to make four points. One is on the political crisis, one on gangrelated violence, one on the police and justice sectors and the last point is on the
work of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH).
I will start with the political crisis. Let me say, first of all, we are disappointed
that Haitian stakeholders have still not reached a minimum consensus over a political
agenda addressing the root causes of the problems that Haiti has been facing for a
long time. We encourage all stakeholders to reach an agreement on the revision
of the Constitution, on the implementation of reforms and on a realistic electoral
framework for credible and transparent elections.
We condemn in the strongest possible terms the assassination, on 28 August,
of Monferrier Dorval. This has been a major setback, and we join the SecretaryGeneral’s call to the Haitian authorities to spare no effort to bring the perpetrators
of this crime to justice.
On gang-related violence, we remain highly alarmed by the resurgence of
this kind of gang activity, which has a long and terrible tradition in Haiti. We are
particularly concerned to learn that certain political actors and businessmen have
close ties with criminal gangs. We strongly condemn all actions that undermine
democratic processes and the rule of law, and we call on all stakeholders to refrain
from acts that could contribute to instability.
It is important that the Government continue to support the National
Commission for Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration. We deplore, once
again in this context, the scant progress made in pursuing accountability for human
rights violations, such as the events in La Saline, Bel Air and Grand Ravine, and the
same goes for corruption scandals. We encourage the Government to support the
establishment of a standalone Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights in Haiti to safeguard continued collaboration with State authorities
on human rights issues.
My third point is on police and justice, on which we see some hopeful
developments. We hope that these positive signs of the continued professionalization
of the Haitian National Police, in an environment that is becoming even more
challenging, will gain momentum. In this context, accountability for members of the
police forces for their actions is of the utmost importance, as it will make confidence
grow in the police as an institution.
At the same time, we remain worried that the limited amount of resources
provided to the Haitian National Police over the past several years is beginning to
erode not only the organization’s operational capacity but also public confidence
in the country’s sole functioning nationwide public safety institution. We are also
concerned about the growing trend of polarization within the police forces, especially
with regard to a violent group of mostly former, but also active, policemen named
Fantôme 509. We are also worried about support for a group called “G9 an fanmi”.
Major challenges also persist in the justice and corrections sectors. It is most
illustrative of this that the occupancy rate in prisons has risen 338 per cent, mainly
owing to rising numbers of pretrial detainees resulting from bottlenecks in the judicial
sector. We welcome the support provided by the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund
in order to achieve a reduction in prison and detention centre inmates in the context
of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
20-1323713/24

S/2020/979

My last point is on the work of BINUH. We reaffirm our continued support
for the work of a mission and the 19 United Nations agencies, funds and programmes
in Haiti that are working and delivering as One United Nations. We are in favour
of an extension of the mandate of BINUH, which will be negotiated over the next
couple of days. All components of the mandate still remain relevant to us, and we, of
course, continue to fully support the important work of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Helen Meagher La Lime and her entire team on Haiti.

14/24

20-13237

S/2020/979

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
At the outset, I would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Her Excellency Ms. Helen Meagher La Lime, for her
comprehensive briefing.
Indonesia is deeply concerned about the lack of progress in the country as
demonstrated in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/944). Sadly, the people
of Haiti continue to pay the price for the instability and insecurity, confronting
growing inflation, poverty and hunger. On that note, I would like to bring the
following three points to the attention of the Council.
First, political stability is a key factor, and the political polarization and
impasse in Haiti can only make the situation worse. To that end, I reiterate my call
to all stakeholders to set their differences aside and work together to find common
ground through national dialogue towards a free, fair and successful election. Once
again, the responsibility is on the Haitian authorities, who have the obligation to
provide a peaceful and stable environment. It is their duty to set the table for progress.
Secondly, with regard to the security situation and community violence,
Indonesia commends the continued efforts of the National Commission for
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration in consolidating security as the
leading national institution on community violence reduction. Nonetheless, we are
concerned that, despite several important developments, major challenges persist
in the police, justice and corrections sectors. In that regard, we urge the Haitian
authorities to make more meaningful efforts to uphold the rule of law and combat
corruption and impunity, especially during the pandemic. Gang-related criminal
activities are also on the rise. This may be a signal that the situation is getting even
more out of control, and bold action needs to be taken.
Thirdly, with regard to the economic and social challenges, as I previously
mentioned, the people of Haiti are suffering the most. The political havoc is driving
prosperity away from them. The dire economic and social challenges need to be
addressed accordingly, even as a political solution is being pursued. A robust
recovery effort will be required to reverse the negative trends and reinvigorate the
economy. On this note, my delegation encourages the Haitian authorities to support
the United Nations-supported socioeconomic impact assessment and recovery plan.
In conclusion, we support the Secretary-General in urging the Haitian
authorities to establish a fully functional provisional electoral council to ensure free,
fair and transparent elections that will lend legitimacy to the political system and
strengthen State institutions and good governance.
Indonesia commends the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti, the
United Nations country team and United Nations personnel on the ground for their
remarkable dedication to assisting the Haitian people in the pursuit of their right to
live in peace and stability.
The situation is critical. International support is needed more than ever, but
the Haitian authorities must take the lead.

20-1323715/24

S/2020/979

Annex IX
Statement by the First Deputy Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation to the United Nations, Dmitry Polyanskiy
[Original: Russian]
We are grateful to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Helen Meagher La Lime, for her briefing on the situation in the country and the
work of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH).
The months-long increase in tension in Haiti raises the most serious concerns.
The root cause of instability is the lack of progress in the internal dialogue between
political forces and society, which has led to the de facto paralysis of the legislature.
In turn, that has affected the ability of the State to effectively deal with urgent daily
tasks, primarily that of ensuring the safety of the population. As a result, criminal
elements have become more active. All this has been complicated by the coronavirus
pandemic. Its second wave will soon present a new challenge to the health-care
system, the state of which is not difficult to imagine given the deplorable economic
situation in the country.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/944) gives us an ambiguous
impression. On the one hand, the assessments it contains leave no doubt about the
need to extend the United Nations mission to maintain international support in such
a difficult period for the country. On the other hand, it is obvious that its key task
of assisting in establishing a national dialogue remains unresolved. Haitians run the
risk of taking the path of unilateral decisions, and that, as is known, only increases
the risks of escalation.
We see that the proposal to overcome the crisis by changing the basic law
of the country received a mixed reception, including from the judicial branch of
Government. Significantly, the Haitian Supreme Court refused to swear in the
members of the provisional electoral council. Society has split. However, there are
those who believe that the time is ripe for changes to the Constitution, and if the
Haitians so decide, the United Nations invariably stands for compliance with the
current legislation, no matter what country it is.
All of this, of course, is an internal affair of the Haitians themselves, who
must sit down at the negotiating table and overcome their differences. Therefore,
we understand the position to those in Haiti who were outraged by the statement by
a United States State Department official who threatened consequences for those
who disagree with American ideas about democracy. In the United States, for some
reason, it is considered normal to insist on elections in one country and to call on
politicians to ignore the elections and demand the resignation of the legally elected
head of State in another. With such double standards, it is no surprise that the number
of crises around the world is on the rise, despite United Nations efforts to resolve
them.
The complex of problems that has accumulated in Haiti must be urgently
addressed, starting with the main thing — political stabilization. That is possible
only through dialogue based on current legislation, which should lead to elections
and increase confidence and support from the general population. If that is not done,
the country risks returning to its darkest past, and then recovery and development
will be postponed for many years.
We call on Haitians to urgently engage in internal dialogue to find a solution
to the crisis. The United Nations mission should help with that. Port-au-Prince needs

16/24

20-13237

S/2020/979

responsible international assistance in order to avoid further division of society and
a slide into a humanitarian crisis of a regional scale.
Russia, as a member of the Security Council, will continue to work to ensure
that the United Nations international assistance results in genuine normalization of
the situation in Haiti and the strengthening of its sovereignty and self-sufficiency.

20-1323717/24

S/2020/979

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
At the outset, permit me, on behalf of the African members of the Security
Council — namely, the Niger, South Africa and Tunisia — and Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines (A3+1) to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Helen Meagher La Lime, for her comprehensive briefing. We further commend
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Meagher La Lime and her team for
their efforts in helping to advance the peacebuilding process in Haiti during the first
year of operation of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH).
The situation in Haiti is extremely complex. It has been approximately eight
months since the fiftieth legislature concluded its tenure, and parliamentary elections
have not yet been held. The ensuing institutional vacuum created by the absence of
a parliament has further impeded the socioeconomic and political stability of the
country. Coupled with the multidimensional challenges of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic and Haiti’s long-standing vulnerabilities, the current situation
may spiral out of control.
The A3+1 takes note of the marginal progress on BINUH’s six benchmarks, as
highlighted in the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/944), and commends
the Government of Haiti for its response to the pandemic under the leadership of the
COVID-19 multisectoral commission and in cooperation with the United Nations.
While the pandemic has moderately impacted Haiti, our sister Caribbean country
is still far from being out of the proverbial woods — both in responding to the
pandemic and tackling outstanding challenges. In this regard, the A3+1 offers the
following perspective.
First, on the political front, the uncertainty surrounding the elections
and the constitutional crisis are of great concern. It is incumbent that all Haitian
stakeholders engage in inclusive and constructive dialogue and assume their
collective responsibilities towards resolving the current political impasse. We wish
to take this opportunity to stress, in line with our previous interventions regarding
Haiti, that dialogue remains the only viable means of achieving a peaceful settlement
to the political stalemate. In this respect, we urge all Haitian political leaders to
convene a national dialogue and refrain from acts that may trigger further violence
and compromise the country’s gains under the guidance of the United Nations.
Importantly, therefore, we call on the Haitian political leaders to forge ahead with
the urgent formation of a Government in order to enable the State to undertake its
mandate, including service delivery to its people, as well as to attract more bilateral
and multilateral support.
Secondly, the A3+1 reiterates its support for the role of the National Commission
for Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration in reducing community violence.
We encourage the Government to urgently undertake the necessary measures to
adopt the draft national strategy on community violence reduction, as it represents a
critical opportunity to curb the crime and violence plaguing Haiti. Equally, the draft
strategy can assist in bolstering the State security apparatus.
In addition, we applaud the contribution of the United Nations through its
Peacebuilding Fund initiatives geared towards minimizing community violence
and strengthening the capacity of the Haitian National Police. Adequate resources
need to be devoted to the Haitian National Police so that this critical institution
can effectively execute its mandate, including an intensive recruitment drive and
training. We also urge the Government to effectively implement the 2017-2021
Haitian National Police Strategic Development Plan.
18/24

20-13237

S/2020/979

We further appreciate the efforts to enhance the role of women in the Haitian
National Police. The full participation of women in Haiti’s political and economic
life is crucial for advancing peace and security. Women are an integral constituent
in Haiti and, as such, empowering them through appropriate mechanisms and
facilitating their equitable participation in formal and informal processes must
be priorities.
We remain concerned about the scourge of violence resulting from gang
activities across Haiti. The expansion of their networks and the amalgamation of
others, such as the recently formed G9, have the potential to worsen the country’s
security situation. Therefore, the A3+1 welcomes the efforts of the Haitian National
Police in combating these plagues.
Peace and security, the central pillars of the Security Council, cannot be
divorced from the fight against human rights violations. We urge the authorities to
address the lack of accountability and the impunity for instances of human rights
violations, including sexual and gender-based violence. We note that the Government
of Haiti has appointed the Minister for Human Rights and are therefore hopeful
that this will assist the nation in improving its record regarding human rights. We
reiterate the importance of respecting international human rights law and call for all
perpetrators to be held accountable.
Allow me to come to our third point. The socioeconomic realities remain dire
and, in addition to the complexities of the COVID-19 pandemic, Haiti continues
to grapple with the existential threat of climate change, as exemplified with this
year’s devastating tropical storm, which claimed 31 lives and left many homeless and
in distress.
Acute food insecurity and a gloomy economic outlook further compound these
challenges, and it is heart-wrenching and most concerning that children continue
to suffer from malnutrition. Accordingly, the A3+1 appeals to the international
community to continue providing humanitarian support to the people of Haiti.
We also repeat our call for debt forgiveness and debt relief to help Haiti
address its economic challenges. We maintain that debt relief based on the magnitude
of exogenous shocks is an unavoidable element of any serious Haitian-centred
development discussion. Haiti’s development and economic health must also include
a structured evaluation of its vulnerability and resilience.
The A3+1 impresses on the Council that, as long as the legacy of
underdevelopment in Haiti is not fundamentally addressed, stability and sustainable
development in Haiti will remain elusive. Consequently, it is our conviction that,
during this International Decade for People of African Descent, the initiation of
a dialogue process for proper recompense for the legacies of underdevelopment in
Haiti must be undertaken. The historic importance of the Haitian Revolution and its
symbolic meaning of triumphing over adversity in the pursuit for liberty, equality
and the control of one’s fate continues to be an inspiration to all.
In conclusion, the A3+1 reaffirms its support for BINUH and emphasizes the
importance of adequate funding in order for it to effectively carry out its mandate.
Accordingly, we renew our support for BINUH’s mandate extension.
Haiti’s needs are long-term, but its current socioeconomic and political
challenges are very immediate. Haitian-ownership remains central to resolving
existing challenges. Now is not the time for dithering or continued divergence of
opinions on the elections or constitutional reform, but for Haitians to band together,
in the spirit of compromise, to overcome their challenges.

20-1323719/24

S/2020/979

We call on the United Nations, the Caribbean Community, the Organization of
American States and the wider international community to continue accompanying
Haiti in attaining political and socioeconomic stability.

20/24

20-13237

S/2020/979

Annex XI
Statement by the Deputy Political Coordinator of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations, Alice Jacobs
I will be brief this morning. I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for her comprehensive update. The United Kingdom recognizes
the challenging circumstances faced since the Secretary-General’s last report
(S/2020/944) — as the Special Representative and others have described today —
and we welcome the progress made. The people of Haiti deserve an end to the
dysfunction that has plagued State institutions and governance in that country for
so long.
I would like to start by joining others in calling for credible and transparent
legislative elections as soon as possible. They are necessary to put Haiti on a path
towards stability and prosperity.
Concurrent progress on human rights is critical to underpin stability. The
United Kingdom welcomes the appointment of a Minister-delegate for Human Rights
and the Fight against Extreme Poverty. This is an important step in demonstrating
the political will to safeguard human rights. However, we are concerned that the
national action plan for human rights is yet to be adopted by the Council of Ministers.
I also wanted to express our grave concern over the assassination of the
President of the Port-au-Prince Bar Association, Monferrier Dorval. The United
Kingdom calls for a prompt and transparent investigation into this and welcomes the
commitment by President Moïse to hold the perpetrators to account.
The establishment, almost one year ago, of the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti (BINUH) reflected the Security Council’s conviction that the
international community’s engagement with Haiti needed to rest on a new model of
cooperation, with Haitians firmly in the lead.
The United Kingdom welcomes the finalization of the United Nations
Integrated Strategic Framework that supports and underpins Haiti’s national
priorities. We are pleased to see the United Nations country team stepping up, and
instruments such as the Peacebuilding Fund — to which the United Kingdom is
wholeheartedly committed — being deployed strategically.
As we approach discussions on mandate renewal, the United Kingdom
continues to be supportive of BINUH’s work. But it is political commitment — from
all leaders — that is needed to overcome national divisions and give Haiti the chance
to break through the cycles of instability and to begin a new chapter.

20-1323721/24

S/2020/979

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Kelly Craft
I am pleased to welcome today Foreign Minister Álvarez Gil of the Dominican
Republic. And I thank Helen Meagher La Lime for her comprehensive update on the
situation in Haiti, both today and during our meeting on Friday with Sancho and
Laura. I thank her as well for the work she and the team from the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) have undertaken in support of stability and
reform in Haiti. The United States — and I personally — remain committed to
working closely with all stakeholders in the service of a secure and prosperous Haiti.
During my conversation on Saturday with President Moïse, I urged him and
the Government of Haiti to hold legislative elections as soon as technically feasible
in order to re-establish Haiti’s Parliament. The United States continues to encourage
the Government of Haiti to take the necessary steps to organize these overdue
legislative elections and to exit the current period of rule by decree.
While the Haitian Government’s announcement of the members of the
Provisional Electoral Council was a necessary step in that direction, there is much
more work to be done, including the approval of an electoral law, an electoral budget
and an electoral calendar. The people of Haiti deserve peace, prosperity and stability,
which can come only through partnership between a Government responsive to its
citizens and a functioning legislature.
We are deeply concerned, as is President Moïse, that armed gangs continue
to violate the human rights of residents of vulnerable communities throughout Haiti
and have displaced hundreds of families. We urge the Haitian Government to protect
its most vulnerable citizens by implementing a comprehensive anti-gang strategy
to undermine support for gangs and hold the perpetrators of violence and their
accomplices accountable.
Haiti’s justice system has taken no concrete action to prosecute human rights
abuses in recent months, and the lack of accountability for perpetrators of human
rights abuses reinforces an environment of impunity. The assassination of Monferrier
Dorval, on 28 August, was an attack on civil society and on all of those working
for a better future in Haiti. We call on the Government of Haiti to investigate and
prosecute those responsible, and we will continue to advocate for the strengthening
of the rule of law in Haiti.
I conveyed to President Moïse that the United States remains committed to
working with the Haitian National Police to strengthen its capacity to disrupt armed
gangs and violence and to provide citizen security. We recently reprogrammed
$5 million in assistance towards anti-gang efforts and will provide additional
advisers to the Haitian National Police to help address human rights and police
conduct concerns. However, the Haitian National Police continues to face budgetary
constraints and increasing operational pressures. Without timely and sufficient
funding and a long-term commitment from the Government of Haiti, the Haitian
National Police cannot effectively fulfil its public safety mandate.
Haiti continues to face the threat of coronavirus disease (COVID-19), as we
all do. But as the Secretary-General’s report notes (S/2020/944), the Government
of Haiti’s performance in limiting the impact of the crisis has been laudable. We
commend the Moïse Government for its implementation of the National COVID-19
Preparedness and Response Plan, and we pledge to continue assisting the Haitian
people to fight this pandemic. To date, the United States has committed over
$16 million in combined assistance to support Haitian efforts to fight COVID-19
22/24

20-13237

S/2020/979

and transferred ownership of 37 ventilators to the Haitian Government to assist in
its efforts.
As we approach the end of BINUH’s first year, we affirm the essential role
of the good offices of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
BINUH’s vital work in the service of good governance and reform. We also note the
enhanced cooperation between BINUH and the United Nations country team over
the past year. It is essential to continue these coordinated efforts, and the country
team’s distinct areas of expertise and responsibilities, to ensure the most effective
United Nations support for Haiti.
Just a year ago, I met with President Moïse and a cross section of Haiti’s
political and economic leaders to discuss a path forward. And I must tell Council
members that, on Saturday, I felt cautiously optimistic during my conversation. And,
just to be very transparent, if members do not know, the President’s father passed
away on Sunday. And due to the death of his beloved father, the meetings with the
opposition parties will be delayed for four or five days.
It is long past time for Haiti’s stakeholders to resolve their prolonged political
impasse, build strong institutions and enact necessary reforms. The United States
will continue to stand with Haiti as it works to build a secure and prosperous future.
And, again, our thoughts and prayers are with President Moïse at this time.

20-1323723/24

S/2020/979

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2020/944) on
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH), and his Special Representative,
Ms. Helen Meagher La Lime, for her insightful briefing and her work on the ground
at this very challenging time. I would also like to welcome the presence and statement
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Dominican Republic at our meeting today.
We are concerned that Haiti continues to face extreme political, economic
and social uncertainty, which has been exacerbated by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. The continued violence, especially the gang-related
criminality, over parts of the country has contributed to the existing instability. The
political impasse and unscheduled electoral framework agenda remain the biggest
challenges hindering the constitutional reforms. On the matters under discussion
today, I would like to stress the following three points.
First, on political progress, we share the concerns about the difficulties
noted in the report of the Secretary-General, especially the adverse effects of the
COVID-19 pandemic. The political uncertainty and impasse are the main causes of
the multifaceted difficulties and instability in Haiti, which harm the livelihoods of
the Haitian people and their enjoyment of their human rights. In this context, we call
on the Government, political parties and other stakeholders in Haiti to set aside their
differences and engage in constructive dialogue. It is high time for a compromise
and political consensus to be struck on constitutional and broader reforms. There is
no other way to address the root causes of the country’s problems for the sake of its
sustained stability and development.
Secondly, on the electoral process, we are concerned about the absence of
consensus on key aspects of election preparations, including an electoral framework,
calendar and a fully functional Provisional Electoral Council. In this regard, we
call for timely and credible elections acceptable to all Haitian stakeholders in
2021. We also urge all related parties to make further efforts to engage in inclusive
dialogue to reach a political agreement on the new composition of the Provisional
Electoral Council and the modalities and timing of the elections, including the
political representation of women and youth. We call on the United Nations and the
international community to increase technical assistance and measures needed to
protect Haitian citizens and political parties on the road ahead.
Thirdly, regarding threats of violence, Haiti continues to face a number of
long-standing threats and challenges. Gang violence has increasingly challenged
State authority over parts of Haiti. The fighting among gang groups targeting local
communities has had adverse impacts on the livelihoods of Haitians. Women,
children and other vulnerable groups remain risk of violence and continue to be
marginalized in the political life of the country.
We condemn such violence and attacks. We urge the Haitian Government
and local authorities to uphold their responsibilities, take more decisive actions in
improving the country’s legal framework as well as undertake all security measures
needed to stop violence and to protect civilians, especially women and children.
To conclude, we commend the unceasing work and tireless efforts of BINUH.
We reiterate our support for the extension of its mandate. We would like to reaffirm
our support for the Secretary-General’s call for long-term and structural changes in
Haiti geared towards putting the country on the path to sustainable development.

24/24

20-13237
