S/PV.8754

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8754th meeting

Monday, 10 August 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Djani. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Indonesia)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Bing Dai
Mr. Bencosme Castaños
Mr. Auväärt
Mrs. Fanton
Mr. Sautter
Mr. Abarry
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Ladeb
Ms. Farrey
Mr. Hunter
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau and
the activities of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (S/2020/755)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-20715 (E)
*2020715*

S/PV.8754

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

in addressing its reform agenda, including the 2016
Conakry Agreement and the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS)road map, and to
tackle the challenges impeding stability and longterm development.

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and the
activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(S/2020/755)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Guinea-Bissau to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. João Genésio
de Almeida Filho, Deputy Permanent Representative
of Brazil, on behalf of the Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission;
Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau and Head of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau; and Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime.
Ms. Sori-Coulibaly and Ms. Waly are joining
today’s meeting via video-teleconference from Bissau
and Vienna, respectively.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2020/755, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau.
I now give the floor to Mr. De Almeida Filho.
Mr. De Almeida Filho: On behalf of the GuineaBissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), I am grateful for the invitation to brief the
Security Council, and I recognize the excellent
cooperation between the Council and the PBC.
Since its establishment, in 2007, the configuration’s
primary focus has been to support the Government
2/19

10/08/2020

While there has been notable progress over the years
on peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau, today the challenges
to stability and development have deepened with the
arrival of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
during a year of three transitions — first, the drawdown
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) and transfer of tasks
to the United Nations country team; secondly, the
country’s transition to new political leadership, which
has not been uneventful; and, thirdly, the closure of the
ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau.
During the past months, the Permanent
Representative of Brazil, His Excellency Ambassador
Ronaldo Costa Filho, has engaged with several experts
and stakeholders to fully grasp current dynamics in
the context of COVID-19 and the way forward for the
country’s peacebuilding priorities. I note in particular
his engagement with the World Bank’s Country Director
for Guinea-Bissau, with whom he discussed the Bank’s
activities, its response to the COVID-19 pandemic
and the economic outlook for Guinea-Bissau. He was
pleased to learn that, while continuing to implement
its ongoing portfolio, including increasing access to
basic services and expanding economic opportunities,
the Bank is also employing a multipronged approach
to COVID-19 that includes a direct medical response
as well as support for livelihoods, with a focus on
agriculture and post-COVID-19 recovery needs.
While the Bank’s response to the crisis is
encouraging, the economic outlook for Guinea-Bissau
is fragile and uncertain. The pandemic’s restrictions
on mobility hamper exports, and the 4.5 per cent gross
domestic product growth once projected by the World
Bank before the pandemic could now be a contraction
of roughly 3 per cent instead. The Bank continues
to work closely with the broader humanitarian and
development community on socioeconomic issues, as
well as with the International Monetary Fund on key
macroeconomic issues.
Continued international engagement and sustained
focus on the country’s peacebuilding priorities will be
critical to ensuring economic recovery and sustainable
development in Guinea-Bissau. In that context,
20-20715

10/08/2020

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

Ambassador Costa Filho convened a meeting of the
configuration on 24 June, with the participation of
Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau and Head of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Fernando Delfim da Silva,
Permanent Representative of Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Abdou
Abarry, Permanent Representative of the Niger, Chair
of ECOWAS, and Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco,
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacebuilding Support,
who provided an update on political developments and
the COVID-19 pandemic in the country, and how both
are impacting peacebuilding and the United Nations
transition process.
During the meeting, configuration members were
deeply concerned that the institutional crisis and the
outbreak of COVID-19 and its accompanying movement
restrictions were hampering United Nations support for
peacebuilding efforts, including political dialogue and
urgent reforms such as the constitutional review, as well
as the fight against drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime. Furthermore, members recognized
that the poor socioeconomic situation risked further
weakening social cohesion and community resilience
and deepening gender inequalities.
In the light of that, members emphasized the
expectation for the Peacebuilding Commission to
continue to play a catalysing role in helping to mobilize
and sustain international and regional support for
Guinea-Bissau’s peacebuilding priorities, particularly
for national development plans and the future United
Nations
Sustainable
Development
Cooperation
Framework. Keeping in mind the simultaneous
challenges of post-COVID-19 recovery and the
UNIOGBIS transition, they also underscored that the
PBC’s attention to economic revitalization, the country’s
cooperation with international financial institutions
and institution-building will be of particular relevance
in the coming months.
In addition, members recognized and valued
the important role played by the Peacebuilding
Fund in Guinea-Bissau, especially through projects
aimed at dialogue on reforms, empowering women,
fostering meaningful engagement with youth and
promoting reconciliation and conflict resolution. I
recognize the Fund as a unique avenue for assisting
the United Nations country team during and after the
transition in its critical functions linked to dialogue

S/PV. 8754

and stabilization, and I encourage Member States to
consider additional support.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
Peacebuilding
Commission’s
commitment
to
UNIOGBIS and the United Nations country team
during this transition and to the immediate longer-term
needs of the Bissau-Guinean people.
I thank the members of the Security Council for
their continued support for the configuration and for
their interest.
The President: I thank Mr. Almeida Filho for
his briefing.
I now give the floor Ms. Sori-Coulibaly.
Ms. Sori-Coulibaly: I thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to brief the Security Council once
more on the situation in Guinea-Bissau, particularly as
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) draws nearer to its closure
on or before 31 December 2020.
As countries around the world grapple with
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the
situation in Guinea-Bissau is particularly fragile given
its dire health infrastructure and limited resources,
with the peak still to come. The United Nations is
supporting the implementation of the national response
plan to the pandemic, led by my deputy in his capacity
as Resident Coordinator, together with the World
Health Organization, the World Bank and other United
Nations agencies. As a result, a coordination framework
was established and resources have been channelled to
support national efforts. Meanwhile, United Nations
staff in the country has been telecommuting since
26 March.
Recent political developments in the country have
led to a politically charged atmosphere, with mounting
mistrust among stakeholders. Mutual accusations and
reported acts of intimidation against those opposing
the new political dispensation have created a hostile
environment, making it difficult to reach a compromise
for the sake of political stability and consensus-building
around national peacebuilding priorities. While the
new authorities are focused on consolidating power, the
African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape
Verde (PAIGC) is contesting the parliamentary vote
of 29 June that approved the programme of the Nuno
Gomes Nabiam Government. The PAIGC continues to
question the legality of the session, alleging procedural

20-207153/19

S/PV.8754

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

errors and denouncing threats and intimidation
against members of Parliament, which preceded the
session. The PAIGC continues to reiterate its call for a
political solution.
While President Umaro Sissoco Embaló has
expressed the wish to form a broad-based Government
with Nuno Gomes Nabiam as the Prime Minister, the
prospects of a breakthrough are poor, given the PAIGC’s
strong opposition to joining the Government under
the current circumstances. A sustainable solution that
promotes stability requires all sides to compromise, but
this appears far-fetched at the present time as both sides
remain deeply entrenched in their positions.
Concerns about insecurity and human rights
abuses, such as the 26 July raid on Radio Capital FM,
which is considered to be allied to the opposition, as
well as the arbitrary arrests, intimidation and detention
of persons and political figures perceived as opposing
the current Administration have been reported. These
occurrences have heightened political tensions.
Resolutions 2458 (2019) and 2512 (2020) determined
a phased closure for UNIOGBIS. The transition, the
reconfiguration of the United Nations presence in the
country and the drawdown of UNIOGBIS are proceeding
accordingly. The political crisis and the parliamentary
paralysis that emerged following the presidential
election prevented the mission from supporting urgent
reforms outlined in the Conakry Agreement, including
the review of the Constitution, the electoral law and
the law on political parties. Regretfully, therefore, the
UNIOGBIS mandate is unlikely to be fully implemented
before the mission’s departure.
Regarding the Constitution, the technical
commission established by President Sissoco Embaló
on 11 May to review the Constitution is expected to
submit a draft to the President in the next few days. The
establishment of the commission has been criticized by
several national stakeholders, including the President
of the National Assembly, the PAIGC alliance, civil
society organizations and prominent legal figures,
who argue that the revision of the Constitution is
the prerogative of the legislature. President Sissoco
Embaló counterargues that the work of the commission
is in line with the request of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) and will provide
the foundation for the revision of the Constitution
in conformity with the country’s legal framework.
It remains unclear how the technical commission’s
4/19

10/08/2020

draft will reconcile with the one being drafted by the
parliamentary ad hoc commission on the review of the
Constitution, which UNIOGBIS has been supporting.
While there is no political consensus at this juncture
on the approval process of a constitutional review, the
parallel mechanisms and processes have a potential to
further exacerbate political tensions.
Meanwhile, the President has expressed his
desire to change the system of governance — from
semi-presidential to presidential — under the new
constitution. This will likely lead to internal disputes
within the new Movimento para Alternância
Democrática parliamentary alliance as well as with
its supporters and the new Prime Minister, if not
carefully managed and widely discussed, thus further
compounding an already fragile situation.
Regarding the drawdown of UNIOGBIS, despite
the political crisis and challenges posed by COVID-19,
coordination with the United Nations country team
on the transition is ongoing. The Peacebuilding
Fund has been utilized to identify and support key
partners, including United Nations agencies and civil
society organizations, for the continuation of the
implementation of key peacebuilding priorities. Efforts
are ongoing to reconfigure the United Nations presence
in the country to allow the United Nations country team
to continue critical peacebuilding activities, including
political dialogue, confidence-building measures,
urgent reforms and combating drug trafficking and
transnational organized crime, following the closure
of UNIOGBIS.
In coordination with the United Nations country
team and the Peacebuilding Fund, capacity-building
activities for the National Assembly were supported,
including training tailored for parliamentarians.
Further to those endeavours, a comprehensive action
plan is being defined by the mission in coordination
with the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel (UNOWAS) and ECOWAS, to, inter alia, extend
technical support to specialized commissions towards
achieving cross-party consensus. In this framework,
civil society contributions to political dialogue and
peacebuilding are also being supported, in coordination
with the European Union. In that context, women’s
groups continue to play a prominent role.
My plan to establish a high-level platform that
brings together relevant international partners and
national authorities to discuss, sustain momentum in and
20-20715

10/08/2020

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

S/PV. 8754

accompany the country’s reform efforts is progressing.
Following the closure of UNIOGBIS, the platform
would continue under the leadership of the Resident
Coordinator and in line with commitments made by the
Peacebuilding Commission. Despite challenges, regular
meetings of the United Nations Strategic Policy Group
ensure high-level coordination and decision-making on
joint strategic and operational issues. The assessment
of the United Nations country team’s capacity to meet
peacebuilding priorities identified in the conflict
analysis was concluded. A comprehensive assessment
of the capacities of the Government and other partners
remains outstanding.

consolidate past democratic gains and preserve the
much-needed peace and stability.

Meanwhile, opportunities and challenges for the
United Nations country team have been identified,
and peacebuilding priorities will be anchored in
the new United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework, which will need to be aligned
with the country’s development programme following
consultations with the national authorities.

The implementation of key reforms, notably the
constitutional review as well as the continuation of
efforts in key peacebuilding priorities, namely, the
protection and promotion of human rights and the rule
of law, women’s participation and gender parity and
the fight against drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime, are an imperative beyond UNIOGBIS.
I would also recall that as included in the Conakry
Agreement, the local elections are to be considered
among the peacebuilding priorities.

Continuing our efforts in support of the country
will remain crucial. Funding will be essential to
averting a financial cliff, and I appeal once again to
the international community to generously support
the Cooperation Framework. Considering the closure
of UNIOGBIS, the mission remains committed to
exploring options to move the process ahead.
I have been engaging with regional partners to
ensure that the United Nations transition is fully
supported by all stakeholders. Coordination with
international partners, including with the group of five
in Bissau and particularly with ECOWAS, continues.
Additionally, tripartite coordination meetings between
UNIOGBIS, ECOWAS and UNOWAS are being held
to accompany the transition process and for supporting
ECOWAS mediation efforts. A strengthened Resident
Coordinator’s Office is being envisioned, with adequate
and dedicated capacity to continue supporting the
protection and promotion of human rights in the country.
Meanwhile, the first phase of UNIOGBIS staff
separation was concluded in July. Further separations
are planned for September and December. A residual
number of 28 staff will remain, for mission closure and
liquidation purposes, until 28 February 2021.
A prognosis of the current impasse and beyond
underscores the need for continued and robust
engagement by the international community to avoid a
deterioration of the political and human rights situation,

Entrenched postures and divisions among political
stakeholders pose a serious threat to stability and
sustainable development. All political forces must
be encouraged to commit to constructive dialogue
and consensus-building around national priorities.
The military and security forces must consistently be
reminded not to interfere in politics. Security-sector
reform remains paramount, as the Conakry Agreement
had highlighted. The military and security forces should
become agents of change towards peace and stability.

Accordingly, the continued role of the
Peacebuilding Commission in maintaining the
international community’s attention on Guinea-Bissau
will be of utmost importance following the departure of
UNIOGBIS. That will help ensure long-term sustainable
support for the implementation of peacebuilding
priorities that remain crucial. Allow me therefore to
encourage Council members and international partners
to extend additional financial contributions to the
Peacebuilding Fund, in support of its catalytic role
and the United Nations transition in Guinea-Bissau, to
help shape the United Nations country team’s footprint
and enable it to continue supporting national efforts in
implementing the Conakry Agreement.
As UNIOGBIS advances towards its closure in
less than five months, I would like to stress that the
support provided by the international community
to the 2019 electoral process was necessary but not
sufficient to address the long-term political instability
of Guinea-Bissau. Therefore, I wish to emphasize the
need for the country to remain high on the international
community’s agenda, with paramount focus on reforms
and the strengthening of State institutions. The
recent political crisis linked to the electoral dispute
is self-explanatory of the structural weaknesses of
the country. The country and its people need the

20-207155/19

S/PV.8754

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

Council’s support to uphold stability, sustain peace
and advance socioeconomic development. UNOWAS
will be required to play a greater good-offices role.
More importantly, the Council’s support for ECOWAS,
in its role as lead mediator and in putting in place an
effective monitoring mechanism for its decisions, will
remain imperative.
In conclusion, I would like to express my deep
gratitude to the Security Council for its continued
support for Guinea-Bissau in the face of the recurrent
political crises. The people of Guinea-Bissau deserve a
country with stable, transparent and independent State
institutions that adhere to the principles of separation
of power, accountability and the rule of law.
The President: I thank Ms. Sori-Coulibaly for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Waly.
Ms. Waly: I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
threats posed by drug trafficking and organized crime
to peace and security in Guinea-Bissau.
I welcome this discussion, which comes at a
challenging time of transition for international support
to Guinea-Bissau and as the coronavirus disease crisis
further heightens vulnerabilities and hampers efforts
to deliver much-needed technical assistance. Urgently
coordinated action based on shared responsibility is
very much needed. As noted by the Security Council
and most recently in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2020/755), tackling transnational organized crime,
including drug trafficking and trafficking in persons, is
critical to building peace and working towards lasting
political and economic stability in Guinea-Bissau.
Guinea-Bissau’s coastal geography and related
border-management challenges have been exploited
by organized criminal groups, in particular for
trans-Atlantic cocaine trafficking, a situation that has
been greatly aggravated by instability, poverty and
constrained justice and law-enforcement capacities.
Despite these severe challenges, Guinea-Bissau can
nevertheless be proud of some recent law-enforcement
successes. Last year two operations undertaken with
the support of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), Operation CARAPAU, in March, and
Operation NAVARA, in September, led to the seizure
of close to three tons of cocaine. The operations were
not a matter of chance or luck. They represent hard-won
6/19

10/08/2020

achievements enabled by the integration of the GuineaBissau Judicial Police into regional and international
anti-trafficking platforms. Notably, 19 drug traffickers,
including foreign nationals, have been convicted by the
judicial authorities since 2019, and assets were seized.
But these gains are proving difficult to take forward.
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is also
concerned about the resurgence of drug trafficking and
the re-emerging influence of criminal operations in the
country. The recent return of convicted drug traffickers
to the country observed by UNODC is a further concern.
In addition, the dismissal of key counterparts within
law-enforcement agencies threatens to compromise the
sustainability of what has been accomplished.
Security sector reform, as Ms. Sori-Coulibaly has
mentioned, is fundamental and essential to a lasting
solution to Guinea-Bissau’s chronic political instability
and vulnerability to transnational organized crime,
which UNODC has sought to support since the Office
started implementing activities in the country in 2006.
In view of that cardinal objective and as mandated
by resolution 2512 (2020), UNODC assistance to
Guinea-Bissau will focus on strengthening the capacity
of national institutions to combat corruption and
enhance criminal justice responses to all forms of
organized crime. Our work will be undertaken in the
framework of the national strategic action plan on drug
trafficking, organized crime and security threats, which
was developed with UNODC support and approved by
the Council of Ministers in February. The new national
strategic action plan is a comprehensive and integrated
multilevel approach for the entire security and justice
system chain to effectively address drug trafficking,
organized crime, corruption and money-laundering.
UNODC will start implementing two new
projects this summer, in partnership with the United
Nations Development Programme, the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) and the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (UNIOGBIS). Those projects are aimed at
supporting specific objectives laid out in the national
strategic action plan, strengthening coordination
between law enforcement and criminal justice actors and
promoting anti-corruption and integrity mechanisms.
Moreover, UNODC is providing technical
support to the Ministry of Women, Family and Social
Protection and, in partnership with IOM and the United
States, our Office has contributed to the design of the
20-20715

10/08/2020

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

trafficking in persons contingency plan for 2020. That
plan will further serve as a basis for the preparation of
the national action plan for 2021-2026, which will take
the important step of including an integrated referral
mechanism to identify and assist trafficking victims.
At the same time, UNODC will continue supporting
the operational law enforcement units our Office has
helped to establish in Guinea-Bissau, which have
yielded important results on which we can build.
The Joint Airport Interdiction Task Force of the
Airport Communication Project, created by UNODC in
partnership with INTERPOL and the World Customs
Organization, is a specialized multi-agency unit in
charge of detecting and intercepting drugs and other
illicit goods, as well as preventing terrorism and
intercepting high-risk passengers in airport settings.
In the framework of the West Africa Coast Initiative
implemented by UNODC, the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and INTERPOL, we have
also helped to establish the Transnational Crime Unit,
a specialized inter-agency law enforcement unit tasked
with collecting and analysing information on organized
crime and producing national operational intelligence to
support complex crime investigations. Both those units
have helped to include Guinea-Bissau law enforcement
agencies in networks of cooperation supporting SouthSouth exchanges and coordination, especially along the
cocaine route between Latin America and West Africa.
Those are important steps, but much more work needs
to be done to sustain and improve operationalization,
with the enhanced support and participation of national
counterparts.
As we approach the UNIOGBIS transition, let us be
clear — Guinea-Bissau needs and deserves the renewed
and redoubled commitment of the international
community. For nearly 15 years, UNODC has responded
to the calls of the international community to support
Guinea-Bissau’s peace and stability. Today, political
will and extensive, long-term assistance, backed
by sufficient funding, are needed more than ever.
UNODC is fully engaged in supporting the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa and UNOWAS in devising effective strategies to
contribute to the country’s stability.
As stated by the Secretary-General in his latest
report on Guinea-Bissau, UNODC will continue to
closely monitor and report on the drug trafficking and

S/PV. 8754

organized crime situation with a view to preventing
traffickers from exploiting the current pandemic
situation and political dynamics. In that regard,
and taking into consideration the evolving political
situation, UNODC will continue delivering its large
array of technical assistance activities to GuineaBissau. That will be supported by an expanded team
on the ground. Going beyond that important but largely
technical expertise, our Office stands ready to offer
more formal advisory services on drugs, organized
crime and justice reform to the United Nations country
team and the United Nations Resident Coordinator,
pursuant to resolution 2512 (2020), which mandates our
continued support.
The UNODC Regional Office for West and Central
Africa, based in Dakar, will also provide technical and
advisory support and continue its strategic coordination
with UNOWAS and the United Nations country team.
Furthermore, UNODC is providing GuineaBissau with integrated support that acknowledges and
addresses important regional dynamics affecting drug
and organized crime challenges. We do that through our
cooperation with UNOWAS and the implementation
of the UNODC Regional Programme for West Africa,
with ECOWAS and global programmes, including the
CRIMJUST programme to strengthen investigation
and cooperation along drug trafficking routes, and our
Global Maritime Crime Programme.
UNODC relies on the international community’s
engagement and resources to advance and strengthen
that assistance to Guinea-Bissau in the transition
and beyond.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the Security
Council for continuing to prioritize the fight against
drug trafficking and organized crime, and for its
repeated calls for increased support for UNODC’s
work, with and for the people of Guinea-Bissau.
The President: I thank Ms. Waly for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): It is with
deep sorrow that I inform the Council that a cowardly
attack perpetrated by individuals on motorcycles took
place yesterday in Kouré, 60 kilometres from Niamey.
The attack regrettably resulted in eight deaths — two
Nigeriens and six French citizens. Following that grave
incident, the Nigerien defence and security forces,

20-207157/19

S/PV.8754

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

supported by elements of the Operation Barkhane and
American special forces, launched operations that are
still under way. In the context of this tragic event, I
would like, on behalf of the President, the Government
and the people of the Republic of the Niger, to convey
my heartfelt condolences to the grieving families of the
victims and to the French and Nigerien Government
and people.
Let me also, on behalf South Africa, Tunisia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines and the Niger (A3+1),
welcome the efforts to normalize the political situation
in Guinea-Bissau, and thank the briefers Ms. Rosine
Sori-Coulibaly, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Guinea-Bissau; Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime; and Mr. João Genésio de Almeida
Filho, Deputy Permanent Representative of Brazil, on
behalf of the Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, for their excellent
briefings, which reflect their respective commitment to
continuing to work to resolve the current political crisis
in Guinea-Bissau.
As the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau prepares to close its doors by
31 December 2020, I commend Ms. Sori-Coulibaly and
her team for their good offices, which have strongly
helped all Bissau-Guinean parties to fully commit to a
process to emerge from this crisis. On behalf of the A3+1,
we hope that the significant progress made to date will
continue, including with regard to the peacebuilding
efforts of the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and the United Nations
country team in Guinea-Bissau. Indeed, despite the
political challenges, gains have been made in reducing
Office troops, as well as in identifying peacebuilding
priorities to be jointly pursued by UNOWAS and the
United Nations country team.
Since the end of the electoral process in GuineaBissau in December 2019, the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) has been constantly
engaged in the search for a lasting solution to the
political and institutional crisis in the country. At
this juncture, I wish to commend the sustained
commitment of international partners, including the
group of five international organizations — comprised
of the African Union, ECOWAS, the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries, the European Union
and the United Nations — that has made it possible
to strengthen the process of stabilizing the political
8/19

10/08/2020

situation in the country. I also wish to commend the
eminently positive role played by the ECOWAS Mission
in Guinea-Bissau, whose mandate is coming to an end,
following the completion of the electoral process and
the gradual normalization of the political situation in
Guinea-Bissau. The A3+1 welcomes the establishment
of the tripartite integrated cooperation and coordination
mechanism comprised of ECOWAS, UNIOGBIS and
UNOWAS to support the United Nations political and
transitional process in Guinea-Bissau.
It is clear that Guinea-Bissau is now at a crossroads.
It therefore needs our collective assistance and support
more than ever. It is in this spirit that ECOWAS, in its
communiqué of 22 April, recognized the victory of
Mr. Umaro Sissoco Embaló and called on him to appoint
a Prime Minister and establish a new Government by
22 May, at the latest. In the same communiqué, President
Embaló was invited to launch a reform process with
a view to adopting a new Constitution to be put to a
referendum within six months, in order to ensure the
country’s lasting institutional stability. In this regard,
we welcome the establishment of a Constitutional
review commission, comprising experienced BissauGuinean legal experts, to carry out that task. The recent
approval by the majority of the Members of Parliament
of the programme of the new Government should
enable the appointed Prime Minister to continue the
implementation of the programme until a Government
of national unity is in place. We welcome the proposal
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to establish a high-level platform to accompany the
reforms that the country so badly needs. Coordination
of the many international and regional efforts in
Guinea-Bissau is crucial at this stage.
Despite all the efforts that we have commended
today, the context created by the COVID-19 pandemic
that has struck Guinea-Bissau has greatly slowed the
pace of implementation of the various reforms under way,
as some political actors have themselves tested positive
for the COVID-19 virus. We encourage the authorities
of Guinea-Bissau, who have the primary responsibility
for ensuring the security of the population, as well as
all political actors, to work together to mitigate the
threat at this critical time. The A3+1 welcomes the
decision of the West African Health Organization, a
specialized agency of ECOWAS, to send health kits to
all member countries, including Guinea-Bissau, as part
of the response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
20-20715

10/08/2020

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

As I have said previously, Guinea-Bissau is at
a crossroads. Indeed, the holding of elections alone
cannot solve the many challenges facing the country. As
we move to a new configuration of the United Nations
presence in Guinea-Bissau, we call on the international
community to support national initiatives in the context
of peacebuilding, particularly in the area of sustainable
development, including food security and rural
development. The strengthening and modernization of
democratic institutions and the reform of the judicial
sector are areas where substantial support should
be provided. The A3+1 supports the expansion of
socioeconomic development actions, which are genderand youth-sensitive, so as to ensure the participation
of all social strata in Guinea-Bissau. We commend
Ambassador Ronaldo Costa Filho for the excellent
work done by the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission in this regard.
With regard to the issue of drug trafficking, while
we are concerned about a possible resurgence of this
dangerous phenomenon following the progress made
recently with the significant seizures made in March and
September 2019 and the conviction of those involved,
we must recognize that Guinea-Bissau is neither a
producer nor a consumer of these illicit narcotic drugs.
Guinea-Bissau is quite simply a victim of a situation
that is beyond its control, owing to its fragility in terms
of the lack of surveillance and control equipment on
its many islands — a fragility that is unfortunately
accentuated by its political instability. Today more
than ever, the international community should provide
greater support to Guinea-Bissau in all areas likely to
strengthen its capacity to deal with this terrible scourge.
In this regard, the A3+1 welcomes the continued
support provided by the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime in the framework of capacity-building
for actors engaged in the fight against drug trafficking
and the terrorism- and organized-crime-related
gateway crimes of corruption and money-laundering in
the region.
We remain convinced that, through the mobilization
of substantial financial resources, Ms. Waly’s Office
will strengthen the important work it is already doing
in this regard. This could be done through increased
support for Guinea-Bissau in the implementation of its
national strategic action plan adopted in December 2019.
In conclusion, the promotion and protection
of human rights and respect for the rule of law are
essential for peace, security, development and political

S/PV. 8754

stabilization in Guinea-Bissau. To that end, we
encourage the defence and security forces of GuineaBissau to observe strict neutrality towards the ongoing
political process, as they have done up until now.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, I would like to express our
condolences in connection with the attack that took
place near Niamey and our hope that those responsible
for this attack will be found and punished.
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau, Ms. Rosine SoriCoulibaly; the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Ms. Ghada
Fathi Waly; and the representative of Brazil, Mr. João
Genésio de Almeida Filho, who spoke on behalf of
the Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
Since the start of 2020, Guinea-Bissau has gone
through a very complex post-electoral period. The
disputes about the outcome of the presidential election
have had a negative impact on the political, social and
economic situation in the country. The neutrality of the
military has come into question.
At the same time, we need to acknowledge that the
situation has gradually been returning to normal since
April. The Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) recognized Umaro Sissoco Embaló
as the legitimately elected President. In June, Parliament
endorsed the programme of work of the Government
of Prime Minister Nuno Nabiam, a decision that was
welcomed by the leadership of ECOWAS.
Naturally, some disagreements remain among the
main political actors. In this regard, we call on all
public and political forces to behave responsibly, which
would lead to creating the conditions for the easing of
political tensions. We call on the military to stay out of
politics, as it has in the past.
We believe that the formation of a new Government
in Guinea-Bissau will allow the country to focus on
implementing the reforms envisioned by the Conakry
Agreement, including the revision of the national
Constitution, the electoral law and the law on political
parties. It is particularly important to start resolving
the socioeconomic problems of the country, which
have clearly become more acute in the context of the
coronavirus pandemic.

20-207159/19

S/PV.8754

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

10/08/2020

As we have said in the past, we believe that
restructuring
the
United
Nations
Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
must be done gradually and in the framework of the
timetable set out in resolution 2512 (2020). By the
end of December, when UNIOGBIS is set to end its
presence in Guinea-Bissau, the United Nations country
team must be given all the instruments it needs not
only to assist Guinea-Bissau in its development but
also to provide it with effective support in addressing
such important challenges as drug trafficking and
corruption and in ensuring the smooth operation of
Government institutions.

Bissau as well as the six-point road map of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS).

In that connection, I should like to stress in
particular the work that UNODC is doing in the region
and which will continue, as we heard during the briefing.
Furthermore, we are convinced that the time has come to
consider the possibility of gradually lifting the Security
Council sanctions against Guinea-Bissau, as they are
now obsolete. The current situation has nothing to do
with the coup d’état that took place in 2012, when the
sanctions were introduced. As the events of the first half
of this year have shown, sanctions in no way influence
the internal political situation. It turns out that they
exist as though they were in a parallel dimension. Their
further maintenance, given the closure of UNIOGBIS
and the absence of genuine threats to international
peace and security, is increasingly puzzling.

Secondly, we are deeply concerned by the reports
of violence and threats against political actors. We
have noted what Rosine has just reported on this issue.
Respect for human rights and basic human freedoms
are not negotiable; they have to be respected at all times
and without preconditions.

Mr. Sautter (Germany): First of all, I wish to
extend condolences following the heinous attacks
near Niamey. I would like also to thank the briefers.
We appreciate the insights from Mr. João de Almeida
Filho, on behalf of the Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, as
well as the briefing by Ghada Fathi Waly of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. Both will play an
even more prominent role in future.
At this last regular Security Council meeting
before the drawdown of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS),
we would like to thank the mission for all the work done
over the past 21 years. Above all, I should like to extend
warm thanks to Rosine Sori-Coulibaly and her team.
We are happy that the Office will continue to provide
its expertise in supporting the full implementation of
the Conakry Agreement on the Implementation of the
Economic Community of West African States Road
Map for the Resolution of the Political Crisis in Guinea10/19

The drawdown of the mission does not imply that
we can be satisfied with the situation in Guinea-Bissau.
The situation there continues to be of concern, for
three reasons.
First, we regret that the political crisis resulting
from last year’s peaceful presidential elections remains
unsolved. With the coronavirus disease pandemic, a
functioning Government and trustworthy institutions
are more important than ever. Continued work
is necessary.

Thirdly, to achieve stability in the country, all
stakeholders have to act responsibly and in accordance
with the Constitution. This includes the security forces.
The lack of neutrality displayed by the military in
occupying State institutions is clearly not in line with
that requirement.
Any sustainable solution to the political crisis needs
to involve all political actors; in particular, civil society
needs to play a central role. This includes the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women at all stages
of the political and peacebuilding processes. In that
context, we commend the efforts made by UNIOGBIS
to engage with women representatives and to adopt
a gender-sensitive approach to their work. Still, a lot
remains to be done. Above all, we need to end impunity
for gender-based crimes and human rights violations.
With the drawdown of the mission on the horizon,
we appreciate the transition process continuing,
despite the additional challenges posed by the political
tensions and the pandemic. An active and coordinated
role on the part of other United Nations presences
and regional organizations, especially ECOWAS,
remains crucial to avoiding destabilization. The
cooperation of the group of five, the Peacebuilding
Commission country configuration and the support
provided by the Peacebuilding Fund need to continue.
Regional cooperation is also paramount to addressing
transnational organized crime and drug trafficking,
precisely because of their grave implications for the
20-20715

10/08/2020

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

stability of the entire region. Indications that political
and military personnel are involved in these illegal
businesses are appalling and need to be followed up.
We should also bear this in mind when we discuss the
future of the sanctions here in the Security Council.
We support the important work of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and UNIOGBIS in
supporting and empowering national law-enforcement
authorities to effectively prosecute organized crime.
Let me close by welcoming the efforts made by
UNIOGBIS as well as ECOWAS to foster dialogue and
to overcome political tensions. Yes, national ownership
remains a central requirement for real progress, but we
need to, and we will, uphold international attention to
this crisis. Enacting the critical reforms envisioned in
the Conakry Agreement and the ECOWAS road map is
a crucial first step.
Mr. Auväärt (Estonia): Allow me also to extend
my condolences with regard to the attacks near Niamey.
I thank the briefers for their thorough reports
on the latest developments and the peacebuilding
activities carried out in Guinea-Bissau. I would like to
express Estonia’s full support for the work of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Sori-Coulibaly
and the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS).
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
and the continued political and institutional crisis in
Guinea-Bissau have put a significant burden on the
mission. With this in mind, we commend the mission’s
steps towards drawdown as well as the ability to
quickly take a more pandemic-sensitive approach to
its activities.
At the same time, the developments in GuineaBissau have been less than encouraging. The ongoing
political impasse and the military’s interference in
politics are very concerning. The decisive steps taken
by the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) have been very useful, and we commend
them for having done so.
We further call on ECOWAS to continue on this
path of active engagement in helping to solve the
institutional crisis. We also urge the people of GuineaBissau themselves to take constructive steps towards
finding a peaceful way out of the current political
crisis. It is especially important now, in the context

S/PV. 8754

of the COVID-19 pandemic and to avoid any potential
destabilization of the country.
We are extremely concerned about reports of
an increased number of human rights violations and
the excessive use of force by State security forces.
The reports of women being beaten up to enforce the
lockdown measures are simply appalling. We urge that
investigations be carried out in these cases and the
perpetrators held accountable.
We commend the international organizations
present in Guinea-Bissau for taking an integrated
approach to addressing the humanitarian challenges
in the country. Furthermore, it is important to take a
holistic and gender-sensitive approach to peacebuilding
activities, which will be especially important after the
closure of UNIOGBIS.
The role of the Peacebuilding Commission in this
regard is essential. It is also a positive development that
the Peacebuilding Fund has approved a new project to
address the destabilizing effect of drug trafficking and
organized crime.
Mrs. Fanton (France) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I would like to first spare a thought for
the group of humanitarian workers and their assistants
who were the victims of a deadly attack yesterday in
the Niger, approximately 50 kilometres from Niamey. I
express my condolences and the support of the French
nation to the families and loved ones of the victims. As
the President of the Republic, Mr. Emmanuel Macron,
said yesterday, in an exchange with his counterpart in
the Niger, our determination to continue with the joint
combat against terrorist groups in the Sahel remains
undiminished, and all possible measures are being and
will continue to be put in place to shed light on the
circumstances surrounding this deadly attack.
I also thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau, Ms. Rosine SoriCoulibaly; the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly;
and the Deputy Permanent Representative of Brazil,
Mr. João Genésio de Almeida Filho, representing
the Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for their briefings.
I wish to make three points.
My first point concerns the political situation
in Guinea-Bissau, which remains fragile. France
has taken note of the recognition by the Economic

20-2071511/19

S/PV.8754

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

Community of West African States (ECOWAS) of
the victory of Mr. Umaro Sissoco Embaló in the
presidential election. However, we deplore the fact that
the political transition has taken place in defiance of
the rule of law and regret that the recommendations
made by ECOWAS, in particular regarding the
formation of a new Government by 22 May, have still
not been implemented by the President of GuineaBissau. We have noted with concern the occupation
of the People’s National Assembly and the Supreme
Court by the military. Numerous acts of intimidation
by the authorities against journalists, judges of the
Supreme Court, as well as political opponents, have
been reported.
We call on all political and institutional players to
pursue dialogue and to work towards the stability of
the country while respecting the rule of law and human
rights. The objective is to enable Guinea-Bissau’s
institutions to devote themselves to the country’s
development and economic recovery, which has been
particularly upended by the coronavirus disease
pandemic. The resolution of the political crisis requires
fundamental work, including the implementation of the
reforms recommended in the Conakry Agreement of
14 October 2016, the ECOWAS six-point road map and
the constitutional review.
My second point relates to international support
for Guinea-Bissau. As the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau will soon
conclude its activities, I reiterate our support for the
Special Representative in her efforts to assist GuineaBissau actors and transfer tasks to the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel and the country
team. In this critical phase, we believe that it is
important for the international community to remain
united and involved in order to assist the new authorities
and convey to them the appropriate messages regarding
our expectations. France commends the commitment of
the country’s partners, in particular the group of five
international partners, ECOWAS, the African Union,
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries,
the European Union and the United Nations. I would
also like to commend the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission, under the leadership of Ambassador
Vieira, and the role of Peacebuilding Fund projects.
In a final point, I would like to stress the importance
of the fight against drug trafficking and organized
crime. Progress in that area remains insufficient.
We expect the Guinea-Bissau authorities to make a
12/19

10/08/2020

sustained and long-term commitment to the issue. The
support of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime is beneficial, and several of its programmes have
recently assisted in drug seizures. That cooperation
must continue for the benefit of peace and security in
the region as a whole.
Mr. Bing Dai (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to preface my statement with a condemnation of
the attack that took place yesterday in the Niger and to
express our condolences to the families of the victims.
I would like to thank the three briefers — Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Sori-Coulibaly,
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Executive
Director Waly and Ambassador De Almeida Filho,
Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission — for their briefings.
China has been closely following the developments
in Guinea-Bissau. Presidential elections were held at
the end of 2019, which went smoothly despite some
dispute of the election results. The parties have, by and
large, been able to resolve their differences through
dialogue. China is pleased to note that the National
Assembly approved the new Government programme
on 29 June this year and that the political process is
gradually getting back on the right track. We find these
developments commendable.
In the light of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2020/755), I would like to make the following points.
First, the formation of the new Government created
a pivotal opportunity. The parties in Guinea-Bissau
should seize that opportunity to put the long-term
interests of their country and their nation first, take
practical steps to continue implementing the Conakry
Agreement and the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) six-point road map, expedite
the constitutional review and other political reforms,
consolidate the hard-won political stability, promote
economic development and improve the people’s living
standards. The challenge of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) makes it all the more important for the
parties to keep the interests of the people foremost
in their minds and to work as one in the fight against
COVID-19. The parties should also work harder to
combat drug trafficking and transnational organized
crime in the defence of the rule of law and justice.
Secondly, given Guinea-Bissau’s economic fragility,
in addition to its own efforts, greater international
20-20715

10/08/2020

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

support is in order through increased investment in
the country’s poverty reduction efforts, education,
health care and infrastructure, among other areas, so
that the country can develop sustainably on both the
economic and social fronts. China stands ready, along
with the rest of the international community, to provide
assistance where we can to support Guinea-Bissau’s
national development and COVID-19 response.
Thirdly, ECOWAS played an important role in
resolving the election-related dispute through active
mediation. China continues to support African countries
in seeking African solutions to African issues. China
supports regional and subregional organizations, such
as the African Union and ECOWAS, in continuing to
provide tailored support for Guinea-Bissau’s peace
and development, while respecting its sovereignty and
without interfering in its internal affairs. The United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (UNIOGBIS), for its part, can continue to
play a coordinating role to create synergies among
various actors.
Fourthly, China has taken note of the phased
implementation of the transition plan by UNIOGBIS
and encourages the Office to strengthen its
communication and coordination with the United
Nations country team and the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel and to take fully on board
the views of the Government of Guinea-Bissau in order
to ensure a seamless transition between mandates.
China stands ready to continue supporting the work
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and UNIOGBIS.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I want to
first join my colleagues in condemning the attacks in
the Niger and expressing our condolences to the victims
and their families.
We thank Special Representative Sori-Coulibaly
for her comprehensive briefing. On behalf of the
United States, I would like to express our gratitude
for her leadership of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
during this very difficult period. I would also like to
thank the other briefers for their fantastic information.
Guinea-Bissau faces a wide range of challenges.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has
brought new negative economic effects and has further
complicated the political landscape. The United
States is particularly appreciative of the efforts of

S/PV. 8754

the Special Representative and her team to execute
a comprehensive and sustainable transition of the
mission’s responsibilities to the United Nations country
team and other United Nations organizations working
in West Africa. Such efforts are vital to ensuring that
support for the people of Guinea-Bissau does not falter.
As UNIOGBIS continues its phased drawdown and
prepares to transfer tasks to the United Nations country
team and the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel at the end of its mandate in December,
the United States would like to commend the Special
Representative and the men and women who have worked
with her to support both the Conakry Agreement and
the full implementation of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) six-point road map for
solving the political crisis in Guinea-Bissau. We laud
UNIOGBIS for its work to help strengthen capacity,
promote the rule of law, consolidate constitutional
rule and enhance cooperation and coordination with
the African Union, ECOWAS and other international
partners. We truly thank the Office.
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to raise concern
in a country where cases among health-care workers
have been rising at an alarming rate in recent days. It
is of paramount importance that the Government of
Guinea-Bissau continue taking affirmative measures
to combat the spread of COVID-19. The international
community is here to support, but the local authorities
must assume a leadership role.
The United States is committed to supporting the
efforts of the people of Guinea-Bissau as they work
to end the cycles of violence and instability that have
overwhelmed the country for far too long. To that end,
we desire a positive and constructive relationship with
the new Government of Guinea-Bissau — one based
on respect for human rights, the rule of law and true
democratic governance. We will continue to provide
important humanitarian and development assistance to
the people of Guinea-Bissau.
The United States supports a free and independent
press as essential to democratic Government. We were
deeply concerned by the acts of vandalism committed
against Radio Capital FM and note the statement of
29 July by the group of five international partners of
Guinea-Bissau, strongly condemning those acts as an
infringement upon the rights of the Guinea-Bissau
people to freedom of expression and freedom of
the press.

20-2071513/19

S/PV.8754

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

We further encourage the Government of
Guinea-Bissau to remain vigilant in the fight against
drug trafficking.
The United States will continue to stand with the
people of Guinea-Bissau as they create a stronger and
better future for themselves and their children.
Mr. Bencosme Castaños (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): First of all, we extend our
condolences to the Government and the people of the
Niger for the attack committed over the weekend.
We would like to thank the briefers for their
briefings today.
The way forward for the authorities of GuineaBissau is not easy. The current landscape is full of
challenges, including the need for greater political
dialogue, accompanied by urgent reforms, such as a
constitutional review, the fight against drug trafficking
and transnational organized crime, a continuously
deteriorating socioeconomic situation, worsening
gender inequalities and the health effects of the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
The year 2020 is also a critical one for Guinea-Bissau
as it faces four major transitions, namely, the drawdown
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau, the transfer of tasks of the United
Nations country team, the transition to a new political
leadership and the closure of the Economic Community
of West African States mission. As such, as the
international community’s involvement on the ground
gradually diminishes, the responsibility falls more
heavily on the local authorities to be accountable to
their citizens and improve their quality of life.
As indicated in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2020/755), there was clear involvement of the
military during the political crisis following the 2019
presidential elections. We deeply regret its actions,
as they remind the Security Council that the army
has not yet proved to be impartial or independent in
an internal conflict. As a result, the humanitarian and
security situation in the country has deteriorated, thus
highlighting the essential role played by the armed
forces and the direct negative impact on the population
when they do not faithfully carry out their mandate.
With regard to freedom of expression, we consider
the recent acts of vandalism against the premises and
equipment of Radio Capital FM to be reprehensible.
Those acts, allegedly carried out by unidentified armed
14/19

10/08/2020

men wearing uniforms of the Guinea-Bissau National
Guard, constitute a clear violation of the freedom of
expression and the right to information and directly
attack a cornerstone of democratic States. In that
connection, we urge the authorities to conduct thorough
investigations into those and other human rights
violations in order to bring those responsible to justice.
Of particular concern are reports of police officers
beating women and of the security forces engaging
in excessive use of force and inhumane treatment,
especially towards women and children, as they enforce
confinement measures related to the pandemic.
Nevertheless, the Dominican Republic, as a
member of the Peacebuilding Commission, applauds
the commendable work the Commission is doing on
the ground at this unprecedented time, especially to
mobilize funds, prioritize peacebuilding objectives,
foster the participation and inclusion of women and
young people in the political process and promote
internal reforms in the country that are crucially needed
to achieve lasting stability.
We would not wish to conclude without commending
all of Guinea-Bissau’s regional and international
partners, especially the Economic Community of West
African States, for their efforts and good offices and
their vital ongoing support during the contentious 2019
electoral processes.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to join my
colleagues in expressing my country’s condolences to
the Governments of France and the Niger following
yesterday’s heinous attack in the Niger.
I would also like to thank the briefers for
their statements.
Belgium notes that the political dispute following
the presidential election is still not fully resolved,
despite the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) recognizing the election of
President Umaro Sissoco Embaló, on 22 April, and
Prime Minister Nuno Gomes Nabiam’s Government
programme on 29 June. Tensions and a climate of
mistrust continue to characterize the political sphere.
In that context, the efforts made by ECOWAS and the
group of five international partners must be recognized
and supported. However, like the Secretary-General, we
call on all political actors in Guinea-Bissau to engage
in an inclusive and sincere dialogue, including with
civil society, to reach consensus on contentious issues.
20-20715

10/08/2020

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

That spirit of cooperation is also necessary in order
to embark upon a much-needed reform programme
for the country and a revision of the Constitution, all
in accordance with the Conakry Agreement and the
ECOWAS six-point road map.
Political stability is essential for socioeconomic
recovery; the pandemic adds an additional level of
complexity to that challenge. In that regard, it is
important that the measures taken by the authorities
to combat this threat and its consequences take
sufficient account of the situation of the poorest, who
are threatened by food insecurity, malnutrition and
inaccessible health care. The fight against the scourges
of drug trafficking and organized crime will also be
crucial to prevent drug traffickers from exploiting the
current situation in the country.
Despite the challenges of the political context
and the fight against the pandemic, it remains crucial
that the Government and all State institutions ensure
respect for the rule of law, freedom of expression and
the protection of human rights. Those are indispensable
ingredients for the country to return to the path of
stability. Belgium calls on the Government to investigate
recent events, including threats against members of
Parliament and the violent attack on the media.
We commend the efforts made by the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau, in cooperation with the country team and the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel, in
the context of its closure. We reiterate that the transition
must be as smooth and painless as possible for the
country. The success of the transition will also depend
on the authorities of Guinea-Bissau taking ownership
of the Integrated Office’s tasks.
The departure of the Integrated Office does not
in the least imply the abandonment of Guinea-Bissau
by the international community. The monitoring of
the situation by the Guinea-Bissau configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission and the support of
the Peacebuilding Fund are positive. The work of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in the
region will continue to be of crucial importance. It will
be important to continue that support in the new phase
in Guinea-Bissau.
Let me conclude by expressing Belgium’s full
support for the work and efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sori-

S/PV. 8754

Coulibaly, and the entire Integrated Office to promote
dialogue and national reconciliation in the country.
Ms. Farrey (United Kingdom): First, I should like
to join others in extending condolences to France and
the Niger for all those killed in yesterday’s attacks in
the Niger.
Let me start by thanking Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Sori-Coulibaly and all the
briefers for setting out clearly the challenges and
opportunities facing Guinea-Bissau.
At the briefing in February (see S/PV.8736), we
welcomed the peaceful conduct of the presidential
election and expressed concern at the risks posed by
the post-electoral fallout. Unfortunately, many of those
risks have since been realized.
First, the Bissau-Guinean military has taken an
active and unwelcome role in politics. On 2 March, it
occupied the Supreme Court, disrupting the ongoing
legal challenge to the election results, and on 7 May,
it briefly occupied the People’s National Assembly
building, preventing parliamentarians from entering.
Secondly, we have seen reports of sustained
violence and intimidation against political opponents,
including Members of Parliament Marciano Indi and
Armando Dias and former Prime Minister Aristides
Gomes, as well as judges and journalists, including,
on 26 July, the vandalism of the premises of Radio
Capital FM.
Thirdly, the new authorities appear to have turned a
blind eye to drug traffickers, with reports of increased
trafficking and no reported seizures. The serious
drug-trafficking offender Braima Seidi Bá, who was
convicted and sentenced by a Bissau-Guinean court
in March, is not serving his sentence and is reportedly
operating in Guinea-Bissau under military protection.
Should that be the case, it would constitute a flagrant
breach of the country’s own judicial system.
The destabilizing conduct by the new authorities
comes at a great cost to the Bissau-Guinean people, who,
suffering in poverty, compounded by the coronavirus
disease, expect and deserve more from their leaders.
However, there are also opportunities — opportunities
for the Bissau-Guinean Government to show that it
takes its responsibility to its people seriously. We
call on the Government to take these opportunities
by demonstrating inclusive governance, by resolving

20-2071515/19

S/PV.8754

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

problems through dialogue and by enacting crucial
political reforms. Those include the urgent revision
of the Constitution under the authority of the National
People’s Assembly and the implementation of the
national strategic action plan on countering drug
trafficking and organized crime.
The Government should feel supported in taking
those important steps. In that regard, we welcome the
role of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) in mediating the ongoing political
crisis and call on ECOWAS to remain united, to keep
the interests of the Bissau-Guinean people foremost and
to strengthen its presence in Bissau in order to monitor
and ensure the proper implementation of its decisions
and of the reforms agenda.
We call also on the group of five international
partners and the international community to support
Guinea-Bissau and to encourage its new authorities
to live up to their responsibilities. In that regard, we
support the Secretary-General’s recommendations, in
particular the establishment of a high-level platform to
accompany the reforms agenda and the establishment
of an Independent National Human Rights Institution
compliant with the Paris Principles.
In conclusion, as the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
prepares to withdraw from Guinea-Bissau, on behalf
of the United Kingdom I would like to thank Special
Representative Sori-Coulibaly and all the UNIOGBIS
staff for their efforts and to congratulate them on having
done a good job in difficult circumstances. We hope
that Guinea-Bissau’s leaders can take the responsibility
to build on UNIOGBIS’s efforts, move past the
challenges and take advantage of the opportunities to
carry Guinea-Bissau into the stable and democratic
future that its people deserve.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): First, I would like to join
others in condemning the recent attacks in the Niger and
in expressing our deep condolences to the Governments
of the Niger and France and the families of the victims.
I would like to thank Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Guinea-Bissau and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS), for her comprehensive briefing. I would
also like to thank Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), and Mr. João Genésio de Almeida
16/19

10/08/2020

Filho, Deputy Permanent Representative of Brazil, on
behalf of the Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, for their contributions.
I also welcome the representative of Guinea-Bissau
to this meeting.
We join other Member States in expressing concern
about the deteriorating security and humanitarian
situations in Guinea-Bissau. We are worried about
the potential risk of a resurgence of drug trafficking
and organized crime in the country. We believe that
maintaining unity and reconciliation is the only viable
path for ensuring the stability and development of
Guinea-Bissau.
We commend the mediation efforts of the United
Nations, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the group of five and other
international partners to bring peace, stability and
security to Guinea-Bissau. Without such efforts, the
Bissau-Guinean people would have experienced more
tension and unrest.
Due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, Guinea-Bissau is coping with many
challenges, especially the fragility of its health-care
system, food insecurity and malnutrition. According
to the World Food Programme (WFP), about 63 per
cent of households in Guinea-Bissau have reportedly
experienced food shortages, and 80 per cent have
met with difficulties in accessing markets due to the
curfew, the lack of transportation or fear of infection.
Around 180,000 children are not able to receive school
meals because of the closure of schools. The situation
could be aggravated by the negative impact of the fight
against COVID-19.
We welcome the international efforts of UNICEF,
the WFP, the United Nations Development Programme
and the International Organization for Migration in
providing support for the authorities of Guinea-Bissau
in creating and strengthening relevant mechanisms to
fight the COVID-19 pandemic and develop pandemic
risk-communication strategies, national contingency
plans and funding the mobilization strategy. We note
the challenges that the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
is facing in implementing its mandate under resolution
2512 (2020) and the United Nations transitional process
ahead of the withdrawal and closure of UNIOGBIS by
31 December. In that regard, we would like to make the
following points.
20-20715

10/08/2020

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

First, we urge all parties to work together to narrow
their differences, promote national reconciliation,
consolidate government and ensure the effective
functioning of institutions, while addressing political
and socioeconomic challenges.
Secondly, we call on the President of the country, the
Government, Members of Parliament and all concerned
parties to work in a collaborative manner to enact the
critical reforms envisioned in the Conakry Agreement,
the Stability Pact and the ECOWAS road map. It is
also important to focus on the implementation of the
reform agenda, in line with the ECOWAS decision of
20 April. We also welcome the proposal by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to establish a
high-level platform to accompany the reform agenda.
Thirdly, we stress the importance of enhancing the
fight against drug trafficking and transnational crime
and strengthening cooperation with the United Nations,
particularly UNODC, and other partners in addressing
the challenges. We emphasize the importance of the
participation of women and youth in all decision-making
processes. We also call on the United Nations, ECOWAS
and the international partners to further provide
substantial support and assistance to Guinea-Bissau so
that essential aid can be delivered to those who need it.
Last but not least, we reiterate our support for the
full implementation of resolution 2512 (2020). We call
on the United Nations, UNIOGBIS, the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and
the Government of Guinea-Bissau to work closely
together in implementing the transfer of the mandate
from UNIOGBIS to UNOWAS and its drawdown plan
and closure by 31 December.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Indonesia.
First, I too would like to start by expressing our
condolences to the Governments and the people of the
Niger and France on the demise of humanitarian aid
workers near Niamey, and our condemnation of that
cowardly attack.
Next, I would like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Sori-Coulibaly; the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly; and Ambassador De
Almeida Filho, for their briefings.
I would also like to reiterate our appreciation of and
support to the work of the United Nations Integrated

S/PV. 8754

Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
in pursuing dialogue among all stakeholders, as well
as to the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) in facilitating the resolution of
the political impasse that crippled the functioning of
State institutions.
Guinea-Bissau is facing political, security, and
socioeconomic challenges that are further exacerbated
by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
Against this backdrop, I would like to highlight
three points.
First, concerted efforts by all national stakeholders
are crucial. Although the new Government has been
formed and its programme approved, we feel it is
important for all parties to continue dialogue to resolve
outstanding issues and pursue national reconciliation.
We urge all parties to put aside their differences and
work together to further implement the reform agenda,
as stipulated in the Conakry Agreement, the ECOWAS
road map and the Stability Pact. Of particular
importance is expediting the completion of urgent
reforms, including the reform of the Constitution, the
electoral law and the law on political parties, pursuant
to resolution 2512 (2020).
The second point is the importance of overcoming
the immediate challenges. We are heartened to hear
that security situation in Guinea-Bissau remains stable.
Yet we are also concerned that the recent challenges,
including those posed by the COVID-19 pandemic,
seem to create an enabling environment for drug
trafficking and organized crime. In this regard, we
commend the work of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and UNIOGBIS in assisting national
authorities on law-enforcement and judicial processes.
We feel it is important to continue building national
capacity and working to prevent crime networks from
taking advantage of the current situation.
We hope that Guinea-Bissau can also redouble its
efforts in ensuring the functioning of State institutions,
in protecting human rights and the rule of law and in
improving the lives of the population. It is therefore
crucial for regional and international partners to remain
mobilized in supporting the country, particularly in the
light of the planned drawdown of UNIOGBIS at the end
of this year.
Thirdly, on the drawdown of UNIOGBIS, as
Guinea-Bissau is undergoing critical reforms, we need
to ensure the seamless transition of UNIOGBIS tasks to

20-2071517/19

S/PV.8754

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
and the United Nations country team. We welcome the
peacebuilding priorities outlined by the mission and
feel that continuous engagement and support from
the international community is crucial for subsequent
peacebuilding and reform efforts. We also commend the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) for the mobilization
of funds to support the United Nations country team.
Lastly, we would like to commend the ongoing
efforts by, and sustained support from, regional and
international actors, including ECOWAS, the group
of five international partners represented in GuineaBissau and the PBC, to restore peace and stability and
ensure sustainable development in the country. We
wish all the best for Guinea-Bissau.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the f loor to the representative of
Guinea-Bissau.
Mr. Da Silva (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French):
First and foremost, I would like to condemn yesterday’s
deadly attack near Niamey and offer my condolences to
the families of the victims. I would also like to reiterate
my feelings of solidarity with the Niger and France in
this difficult situation.
I would like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
for inviting me to take part in this meeting of the
Security Council on the political situation in GuineaBissau. This meeting, which is being held at a moment
when my country is gradually overcoming enormous
difficulties that we have been facing for some time, is
symbolic for me personally.
I welcome the presence and briefings of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for GuineaBissau and the representative of the Chair of the
Guinea-Bissau country-specific configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
I would like to inform the Council that GuineaBissau has a democratically elected President of
the Republic who is exercising the full range of his
constitutional functions at both the national and
international levels. My country has a democratically
elected National Assembly that functions normally on
the basis of its own rules of procedure and in accordance
with the norms of good parliamentary practice. GuineaBissau has a legitimate Government whose programme
18/19

10/08/2020

has been adopted by a majority of the deputies sitting in
the National Assembly.
All of those points, which reflect the evolution of
the political situation, are no longer a secret, as they
are in the public domain. To that fact, we should add
that we are now witnessing a new discourse in Guinean
society — one that is based on national reconciliation.
The recent past, which was marked by the discourse
of hatred and the social and political divide, is over;
today we are clearly witnessing a decline in political
and social tensions in Guinea-Bissau.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/755)
refers to the increase in cases of human rights violations
in Guinea-Bissau. While there may have been some
isolated incidents, as referred to in the report, it is far
from being a human rights crisis. I would like to reiterate
the commitment of the Bissau-Guinean authorities to
respecting those rights and the principles governing the
rule of law.
With regard to the alleged military intervention
in political life, it should be recalled that, since the
general elections of 2014 — six years ago — we have
not witnessed any military intervention in national
political life. The democratically elected President of the
Republic, proclaimed winner of the elections on several
occasions by the National Electoral Commission,
with the unanimous recognition by the international
community of the transparency of the elections, does
not need to resort to a military coup to assume his
constitutional power with all its prerogatives.
On the issue of drug trafficking, like many other
countries, the borders of Guinea-Bissau are not exempt
from this criminal activity. My country appreciates the
role of international cooperation in the fight against
drug trafficking, which is a transnational crime that
requires the commitment of all relevant actors at the
national and international levels. We therefore oppose
any attempt by national political actors to politicize the
fight against drug trafficking in order to derive political
or partisan dividends.
The political synthesis that I have just described is
undoubtedly an illustration of the internal commitment
of the authorities of Guinea-Bissau and the political
line that His Excellency Mr. Umaro Sissoco Embaló,
President of the Republic, wished to give to his
presidency. But the foregoing political synthesis also
reflects the constructive role of the international
community, first and foremost the United Nations,
20-20715

10/08/2020

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

S/PV. 8754

which, through its Office in our country, the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (UNIOGBIS), has engaged, since 1999,
together with Guinea-Bissau, in, inter alia, the peace
process, the rule of law, support for civil society and
electoral assistance.

The consequences of the pandemic over the next few
years, initially devoted to combating poverty and
reducing economic and social inequality, will be even
more severe if we cannot count on the support and
the assistance of the United Nations as whole and its
agencies, in particular the World Health Organization.

UNIOGBIS has consistently sought to devise
responses to numerous issues, including those relating
to young people, women, civilians and military
personnel, journalists, facilitators of the political
dialogue and actors with opposing interests that needed
to be reconciled in the framework of the Conakry
Agreement on the Implementation of the Economic
Community of West African States Road Map for the
Resolution of the Political Crisis in Guinea-Bissau.

In addition to the operations carried out on the
ground by United Nations agencies, I believe that it is
important to recall the importance of the Peacebuilding
Fund, which has proved to be a very useful instrument
in the various areas in which it has been called on
to become involved, including in combating the
COVID-19 pandemic.

It is true that the work of UNIOGBIS — which
dates back to 1999 — has never been easy. However,
we also must acknowledge that it has never lacked
perseverance. I should like to take this opportunity,
as we near the end of a political cycle, to express our
gratitude to UNIOGBIS for its support throughout
those years.
Allow me to commend the commitment of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), our subregional organization, for having,
thanks to its effective diplomacy, helped us to overcome
major difficulties, putting an end to the political crisis
by making the decision to close out the electoral
cycle following the second round of the most recent
presidential elections.
I wish here to express to the Ambassador and
Permanent Representative of the Niger our immense
gratitude for the solidarity and the perseverance that
ECOWAS has demonstrated under the presidency of
His Excellency Mahamadou Issoufou, President of the
Republic of the Niger.
Like the rest of the world, Guinea-Bissau has
not been spared by the global health crisis caused
by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
and its economic consequences. It is clear that the
decade devoted to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, which is aimed at promoting universal
progress and our commitment to achieving sustainable
development, will, unfortunately, be strongly impacted.

Since we will be witnessing a reconfiguration of
the model of the United Nations institutional presence
in Guinea-Bissau, the Government of my country will
be monitoring very closely the institutional design of
this new presence in order to draw lessons from the
past and prevent any dysfunction and, above all, to reap
the greatest possible benefit from the United Nations
engagement, that is, to increase its effectiveness.
At the political level, we are relying heavily on
technical assistance from the United Nations in the
implementation of all the structural reforms that
are considered to be vital to political stability in our
country. The establishment by His Excellency the
President of the Republic of a technical commission for
the review of the constitution set in motion the reform
process in our country. It is important to recall here that
this reform is envisioned by the Conakry Agreement,
whose implementation has long been stalled.
In closing, I should like to inform the members
of the Council that my mission as the Permanent
Representative of Guinea-Bissau to the United Nations
has reached its conclusion. This is a unique opportunity
for me too express to all present, on behalf of my
country, our gratitude for their ongoing support for and
solidarity with Guinea-Bissau.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

20-2071519/19
