S/2003/920

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 September 2003
Original: English

Letter dated 29 May 2003 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
In my report to the Security Council last November (S/2002/1259), I noted that
the signing of an inclusive ceasefire agreement in Burundi would necessitate a
review of the tasks entrusted by the Council to the United Nations Office in Burundi
(UNOB) and the resources to accomplish them.
Since then, the Transitional Government of Burundi has signed ceasefire
agreements with the National Council for the Defence of Democracy-Forces for the
Defence of Democracy (CNDD-FDD) (Ndayikengurukiye) and the Party for the
Liberation of the Hutu People-National Liberation Forces (PALIPEHUTU-FNL)
(Mugabarabona), on 7 October 2002, and with CNDD-FDD (Nkurunziza), on 2
December 2002. The only armed group that has not yet signed a ceasefire agreement
with the Government is PALIPEHUTU-FNL (Rwasa). As members of the Council
are aware, the African Mission in Burundi (AMIB) is in the process of being
deployed to assist with implementation of the ceasefire agreements.
You will recall that the Security Council had expressed its intention to support
the immediate and full implementation of the ceasefire agreements in its presidential
statement of 18 December 2002 (S/PRST/2002/40). It had also asked me to “study
ways of responding positively and with urgency” to the requests of the parties in
Burundi and of the Facilitator, particularly with regard to the designation of a
Chairman for the Joint Ceasefire Commission. The Commission was provided for in
the Arusha Agreement as a subsidiary organ of the Implementation Monitoring
Committee, and consists of the Chairman, representatives of the Transitional
Government, rebel movements and the African Union, and the Force Commander of
AMIB.
More recently, in its presidential statement of 2 May 2003 (S/PRST/2003/4),
the Security Council requested me to continue to support the peace process in
Burundi, including the immediate and full implementation of the ceasefire
agreements signed by the parties in Burundi.
To help expedite the work of the Joint Ceasefire Commission, I have appointed
Colonel El Hadji Alioune Samba (Senegal) to chair the Commission. He was
deployed to UNOB on 25 February 2003 and the Commission was able to
commence its activities soon thereafter.
The Joint Ceasefire Commission will coordinate and resolve issues relating to
the implementation of the ceasefire agreements and address military issues arising

03-53531 (E)

300903

*
0
3
5
3
5
3
1
*

S/2003/920

from the implementation period. Following the signing of the ceasefire agreements
between the Government and the armed groups, it will be necessary to increase the
staffing and resources of UNOB in order to enable the Chairman of the
Implementation Monitoring Committee to provide the substantive and
administrative support needed for the activities of the Commission. The additional
staff required at this stage should include: the Commission Chairman, a civil
police/rule of law adviser, two political affairs officers with peacekeeping
backgrounds, one disarmament, demobilization and reintegration adviser, and the
necessary support staff.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

2
