General A11embl,-El1hteenth Se11lon

16

to its natural or juridical persons by such object or its
component parts on the earth, in air space, or in outer

space.
9. States shall regard astronauts as envoys of mankind in outer space, and shall render to them all possible assistance in the event of accident, distress, or
emergency landing on the territory of a foreign State
or on the high seas. Astronauts who make such a landing shall be safely and promptly returned to the State
of registry of their space vehicle.
1280th plenary meeting,
13 December 1963.
1963 (XVID). International co-opei:ation in the
peaceful uses of outer space
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1721 (XVI) of 20 December
1961 and 1802 (XVII) of 14 December 1962 on international co-operation in the peaceful uses of outer space,
Having considered the report submitted by the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,4
Mindful of the benefits which all Member States
would enjoy by participation in international programmes of co-operation in this field,

I
l. Recommends that consideration should be given
to incorporating in international agreement form, in
the future as appropriate, legal principles governing the
activities of States in the exploration and use of outer
space;
2. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to continue to study and report on legal
problems which may arise in the exploration and use
of outer space, and in partict1lar to arrange for the
prompt preparation of draft international agreements on
liability for damage caused by objects launched into
outer space and on assistance to and return of astronauts
and space vehicles ;
3. Further requests the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space to report to the General Assembly
at its nineteenth session on the results achieved in
preparing these two agreements ;

II
l. Endorses the recommendations contained in the
report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space concerning exchange of information, encouragement of international programmes, international sounding rocket facilities, education and training and potentially harmful effects of space experiments;
2. Welcomes the decision of the Co~mittee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space to undertake, in cooperation with the Secretary-General and making full
use of the functions and resources of the Secretariat :
(a) The preparation of a working paper on the
activities and resources of the United Nations, the specialized agencies and other competent international
bodies relating to the peaceful uses of outer space ;
( b) The preparation of a summary of national and
of co-operative international space activities ;
( c) The preparation of a list of available bibliographic and abstracting services covering scientific and
technical results and publications in space and spacerelated areas ;
• Ibid., agenda item 28, documents A/5549 and Add.I.

(d) The compilation, in co-operation with the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, of reviews of information on facilities for education
and training in basic subjects related to the peaceful
uses of outer space in universities and other places
of learning;
( e) The establishment, at the request of the Government of India, of a group of six scientists to visit
the sounding rocket launching facility at Thumba and
to advise the Committee on its eligibility for United
Nations sponsorship in accordance with the basic principles endorsed by the General Assembly in resolution
1802 (XVII);
3. Notes with appreciation that, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 1721 (XVI), the Secretary-General is maintaining a public registry of objects
launched into orbit or beyond on the basis of information being furnished by Member States;
4. N ates with appreciation that certain Member
States have, on a voluntary basis, provided information
on their national space programmes and invites other
Member States to do so;
5. Invites Member States to give favourable consideration to requests of countries desirous of participating in the peaceful exploration of outer space for
appropriate training and technical assistance on a bilateral basis or on any other basis they see fit;
6. N ates the considerable measure of co-operation
in the peaceful exploration and use of outer space under
way among Member States;
7. N ates that the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America have reached
an agreement looking towards co-operation in the fields
of satellite meteorology, communications and magnetic
field mapping ;
8. Encourages Member States to continue and to
extend co-operative arrangements so that all Member
States can benefit from the peaceful exploration and
use of outer space ;
9. Believes that international co-operation can be
beneficial in furthering the exploration of the solar
system;
III
1. Notes with appreciation:

(a) The second report of the World Meteorological
Organization on the advancement of atmospheric
sciences and their application in the light of developments in outer space ;11
( b) The organizational and financial steps taken by
the Fourth Congress of the World Meteorological
Organization in response to resolution 1721 C (XVI)
and resolution 1802 (XVII), section III;
2. Endorses efforts towards the establishment of a
World Weather Watch under the auspices of the World
Meteorological Organization to include the use of satellite as well as conventional data, with data centres to
facilitate the effectiveness of the system ;
3. Urges Member States:
(a) To extend their national and regional meteorological efforts to implement the expanded programme
of the World Meteorological Organization;
(b) To co-operate in the establishment of the World
Weather Watch;
11 E/:1794

and Corr. I.

Reaoludom adopted on the report. of the Flr1t Committee

( c) To increase research and training in the atmospheric sciences ;
4. Invites the World Meteorological Organization
to make a progress report to the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space in 1964 relating to its
activities in this field;

signed at Seoul, Korea, on 23 August 1963,' and the
addenda to the report signed at Seoul on 21 and 29
November 1963,8
Reaffirming its resolutions 112 (II) of 14 November
1947, 195 (III) of 12 December 1948, 293 (IV) of
21 October 1949, 376 (V) of 7 October 1950, 811 (IX)
of 11 December 1954, 910 A (X) of 29 November
1955, 1010 (XI) of 11 January 1957, 1180 (XII)
of 29 November 1957, 1264 (XIII) of 14 November
1958, 1455 (XIV) of 9 December 1959, 1740 (XVI)
of 20 December 1961 and 1855 (XVII) of 19 December
1962,
Noting that the United Nations forces which were
sent to Korea in accordance with United Nations resolutions have in greater part already been withdrawn,
and that the Governments concerned are prepared to
withdraw their remaining forces from Korea when the
conditions for a lasting settlement laid down by the
General Assembly have been fulfilled,
Recalling that the United Nations, under the Charter,
is fully and rightfully empowered to take collective
action to repel aggression, to restore peace and security
and to extend its good offices to seeking a peaceful
settlement in Korea,
l. Reaffirms that the objectives of the United Nations
in Korea are to bring about, by peaceful means, the
establishment of a unified, independent and democratic
Korea under a representative form of government, and
the full restoration of international peace and security
in the area;
2. Calls upon the North Korean authorities to accept
those established United Nations objectives which have
been repeatedly affirmed by the General Assembly;
3. Urges that continuing efforts be made to achieve
those objectives;
4. Requests the United Nations Commission for the
Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea to continue
its work in accordance with the relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly.
1280th plenary meeting,
13 December 1963.

IV
1. N ates with appreciation the second report of the
International Telecommunication Union on telecommunication and the peaceful uses of outer space ;6
2. Welcomes the decisions of the Extraordinary Administrative Radio Conference, held in October and
November 1963 under the auspices of the International
Telecommunication Union, on the allocation of frequency bands for space communication and procedures
for their use as a step in the development of space
radio communications ;
3. Invites the International Telecommunication
Union to make a progress report to the Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space in 1964 relating to
its activities in this field;
4. Recognizes the potential contribution of communications satellites in the expansion of global telecommunications facilities and the possibilities this offers for
increasing the flow of information and for furthering
the objectives of the United Nations and its agencies;

V

Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to continue its work as set forth in General Assembly resolutions 1472 (XIV), 1721 (XVI)
and 1802 (XVII), as well as in the present resolution,
and to report to the Assembly at its nineteenth session
on the activities of the Committee.
1280th plenary meeting,
13 December 1963.

1964 (XVID). The Korean question
The General Assembly,
Having noted the report of the United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea

• 7 Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighteenth Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/5512 and Corr.I).
8 Ibid., Supplement No.12A (A/5512/Add.1).

SE/3770.

•

11

*

•

Note

Aetiona on the regional level with a view to improving good neighbourly
relatiom among European State• having different social and political
ayatema ( item 84)
At its 1280th plenary meeting, on 13 December 1963, the General Assembly
approved the recommendation of the First Committee9 that the consideration of
this item should be postponed to the nineteenth session.
•9 Ibid., Eiglsltnulf StssiOJJ, AnMsts, agenda. item 84, document A/5668.
