S/PV.8460

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8460

th meeting
Monday, 11 February 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ndong Mba. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Equatorial Guinea)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Trullols Yabra
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Eighth report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh)
to international peace and security and the range of United Nations efforts in
support of Member States in countering the threat (S/2019/103)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-03515 (E)
*1903515*

S/PV.8460

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
Eighth report of the Secretary-General
on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh) to
international peace and security and the range
of United Nations efforts in support of Member
States in countering the threat (S/2019/103)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate in
this meeting: Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-SecretaryGeneral, United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism,
and Ms. Michèle Coninsx, Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/103, which contains the eighth
report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh)
to international peace and security and the range of
United Nations efforts in support of Member States in
countering the threat.
I now give the floor to Mr. Voronkov.
Mr. Voronkov: On behalf of the Secretary
General, I would like to start by expressing my sincere
condolences to and solidarity with Member States where
terrorist attacks have recently taken place, namely,
the Philippines, Mali, Colombia, Kenya, Afghanistan
and Pakistan, to name but a few. I would also like
to thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the eighth report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/103) on the threat posed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh)
to international peace and security and the range of
United Nations efforts in support of Member States in
countering the threat, as requested by resolutions 2253
(2015) and 2368 (2017).
The report was prepared by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) and the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team of
2/22

11/02/2019

the Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities, and in close collaboration with the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and other United
Nations entities and international organizations. The
report highlights that ISIL remains a threat as a global
organization with a centralized leadership despite
the decrease in the number international attacks and
plots in 2018. The threat is increased by returning,
relocating or released foreign terrorist fighters. The
report illustrates how the United Nations has continued
to support Member States in their efforts to address the
threat since the Secretary-General’s most recent report
(S/2018/770), which was published on 16 August 2018.
Let me illustrate some key aspects of the new report.
With its centre of gravity in Iraq and the Syrian
Arab Republic, where it is reported to control between
14,000 and 18,000 militants, including up to 3,000
foreign terrorist fighters, ISIL has continued to evolve
into a covert network that operates at the local level
and organizes itself at the provincial level, with the
stated intent of undermining any form of stabilization
on the ground. Despite the more concealed or locally
embedded activities of ISIL cells, its central leadership
retains an influence and continues to seek to generate
internationally directed attacks, thereby still playing
an important role in advancing the group’s objectives.
That is exacerbated by the challenge of foreign terrorist
fighters who are leaving conflict zones, returning
or about to be released from prison. In this context,
radicalization in prison settings is seen as a particular
challenge in Europe and Iraq.
The report also notes that so-called frustrated
travellers — namely, those who have failed to reach the
core conflict zone or have been redirected elsewhere
either by ISIL or at their own initiative — may
contribute to increasing the threat, which has already
been observed in Europe and South-East Asia. Likewise,
the handling of dependents, radicalized women and
traumatized minors is pointed out as a challenge and
potential serious threat.
In terms of ISIL’s financial strength, the report
notes that despite some loss of revenue due to territorial
setbacks, ISIL could sustain its operations through
accessible reserves, in cash or investment in businesses,
ranging between $50 and $300 million. ISIL cells are
also reported to generate revenue through criminal
19-03515

11/02/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

activities. The report accounts for the evolving threat
and ISIL’s activities in different regions of the world,
from the Middle East and Africa — particularly North,
West and East Africa — to Europe, Central and South
Asia, and South-East Asia.
In the Middle East, the residual threat in Iraq is
reported to emanate both from local ISIL remnants and
from fighters crossing the border from the Syrian Arab
Republic. Equipment has been retained from the time
when its regime was intact. The report also highlights
a threat posed by unarmed aircraft systems within the
conflict zone. For Africa, the report highlights the
threat posed by ISIL in Libya, where police stations in
various locations and oil facilities have been targeted.
In Europe, the number of returnees reaching the region
in the period under review is reported to be relatively
low. Approximately 1,000 foreign terrorist fighters are
reported to have travelled from the Western Balkans
to the conflict zone in Iraq and the Syrian Arab
Republic; of those, 100 have been reported killed and
300 returned, with the remainder unaccounted for. In
Afghanistan, ISIL is reported to control some training
camps and to have created a network of cells in various
Afghan cities, including Kabul. Furthermore, a close
link between the local ISIL leadership and its core in
the Syrian Arab Republic and Iraq is reported. ISIL
also carried out several high-profile attacks throughout
last year against a wide range of targets. ISIL has
continued its attempts to expand its area of activity in
Central Asia. For South-East Asia, the report observes
an increasing role being played by young people and
women in terrorist operations in the region.
Against this background of continuously evolving
challenges and the importance of the prevention of
radicalization in light of an upcoming wave of released
foreign terrorist fighters, the United Nations system
has received a framework from the Council and the
General Assembly for how to support Member States
in their efforts to effectively counter the rapidly
evolving and transnational threat from ISIL. The
report of the Secretary-General outlines work done
by the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact entities — including CTED,
the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the
United Nations Development Programme, UNESCO,
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, the International Civil Aviation Organization,
INTERPOL and others — in the fields of prosecution,

S/PV. 8460

rehabilitation and reintegration; international judicial
cooperation; countering the financing of terrorism;
border management and law enforcement; countering
terrorist narratives and engaging communities in
preventing and countering violent extremism when
conducive to terrorism. Assistant Secretary-General
Coninsx, in her intervention, will highlight some of
these activities in a more detailed manner.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
highlight the fact that the Secretary-General, in this
report, has encouraged my Office — the Office of
Counter-Terrorism — to provide a forum in which
relevant expertise and good practices can be shared
in order to strengthen coordinated action to meet the
ongoing needs of Member States. This is especially
important in the area of addressing the flow of foreign
terrorist fighters, including relocators and returnees.
These efforts will be strengthened by a clearer and more
logical United Nations counter-terrorism architecture,
put in place through the launch of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact by
the Secretary-General in December last year. That is a
major step forward in enhancing overall coordination
and coherence across the United Nations system.
My office is also working, jointly with Member
States, to implement the outcomes of the United Nations
High-level Conference of Heads of Counter-Terrorism
Agencies, held in June last year, and organizing
thematic regional events on countering and preventing
terrorism. One such event, being planned with the
Government of Switzerland, will focus on the foreign
terrorist fighters phenomenon.
The Secretary-General has stressed that despite
recent successes against ISIL/Da’esh and its affiliates,
the threat posed by returning and relocating fighters, as
well as from individuals inspired by them, remains high
and has a global reach. I would therefore emphasize that
the recent ISIL losses should not lead to complacency at
any level. The threat of terrorism is a global challenge.
It has grown in magnitude and impact over the past
several decades. It does not recognize any geographical
or perceived borders. Given that complexity, it is only
through a well-coordinated, multilateral response that
we can address this challenge. I therefore, through the
Council, request the continued support of Member
States for the United Nations counter-terrorism work.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Voronkov for his briefing.

19-035153/22

S/PV.8460

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

I now give the floor to Ms. Coninsx.
Ms. Coninsx: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to brief the Council on the eighth report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/103) on the threat posed
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) to
international peace and security and the range of
United Nations efforts in support of Member States
efforts to counter the threat. I would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Voronkov for his overview of
the report, both the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism (UNOCT) and the Analytical and Sanctions
Monitoring Team for their support and collaboration in
preparing the report.
As we have heard, despite its dwindling territorial
over territory that once provided it with resources and
a base from which to plan and launch attacks, ISIL
continues to present us with many complex challenges.
This change in circumstances has forced the ISIL core
to adapt and transform itself into a covert and more
locally focused network in Iraq. Yet, ISIL has retained
its global intent and global networks, with a presence
not just in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic, but also
in many other regions of the world. Of all international
terrorist organizations, it remains the most likely to
carry out a large-scale, complex attack. Its continued
determination to undermine stabilization efforts and
fuel sectarian tensions is also a major concern.
As the report of the Secretary-General makes clear,
Member States continue to face complex challenges in
responding to the threat posed by ISIL and its affiliates.
I wish briefly to highlight three of those challenges.
First, in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic,
ISIL’s destructive legacy remains. That legacy is
manifested not only in the millions of displaced
persons who continue to live in camps for internally
displaced persons, but also in the damage inflicted
upon buildings, infrastructure and the social fabric.
During the joint high-level bilateral consultations
held in Iraq with the Under-Secretary-General and
myself last year, I witnessed the physical and social
devastation caused by years and years of conflict. It was
apparent that reconstruction would take many years
and require significant resources, as well as restoring
and reconciling communities after so many years of
conflict. It will require comprehensive criminal justice
that abides by the rule of law. And it will succeed only
through the continued commitment and involvement of
local, national, regional and international actors.
4/22

11/02/2019

The process of restoring justice and accountability
will, of course, also require the effective collection,
preservation and use of evidence. Member States
operating in conflict and post-conflict environments
face significant challenges in obtaining admissible
evidence to prosecute and convict ISIL members for
their crimes, including crimes of sexual violence and
trafficking in persons, and to do so in accordance
with international law and fair-trial standards. Where
criminal-justice officials are unable to operate in highrisk environments, the military can play a crucial
role in the collection, preservation and lawful sharing
of evidence. Given those challenges, I welcome
the establishment and work of the United Nations
Investigative Team for Accountability of Da’esh/ISIL.
CTED stands ready to support the Investigative Team
in any way possible.
Secondly, ISIL’s territorial losses have brought
about an increase in the number of terrorist suspects
and offenders in custody, including returning and
relocating foreign terrorist fighters (FTFs) and their
family members. Many States have alerted CTED
to their difficulties in adequately assessing the risk
posed by such prisoners, including men and women,
and managing them in a manner that prevents further
radicalization to violence in prison systems. It is vital
that States continuously monitor, evaluate and review
the effectiveness of their prosecution, rehabilitation
and reintegration strategies programmes. Any
review of and oversight over those comprehensive
strategies must include appropriate protection for
international human rights, taking into consideration
age and gender sensitivities. And those strategies
must be comprehensive and mutually consistent with
rehabilitation, whether in prisons or alternative settings,
and linked to prosecution and reintegration.
Thirdly, terrorist groups, including ISIL and
its affiliates, have consistently demonstrated their
intention and ability to exploit new technologies and
seek innovative ways to circumvent obstacles to their
financial, technical and recruitment capabilities. I will
highlight a few examples in that regard.
During our assessment visits to West Africa, we
identified and flagged the increased use of mobile
payment services by terrorist groups as a potential
terrorism-financing risk. With concerns about the
possible exploitation of blockchain technology,
States are also seeking ways to address the potential
risk posed by the misuse of cryptocurrencies for
19-03515

11/02/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

malicious, criminal or terrorist purposes. States are
also increasingly concerned by the use of improvised
explosive devices (IEDs) in terrorist attacks around
the world. Access to the relevant know-how, including
through the Internet, and the ability to obtain precursor
materials allows terrorists to build IEDs with relative
ease. The gathering, preservation and sharing of
digital evidence relating to terrorists’ exploitation
of the Internet continues to play a crucial role in
the prosecution of suspected terrorists. Within the
framework of a joint global initiative implemented
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and the International Association for Prosecutors,
CTED will continue to support Member States’ efforts
in that area, while facilitating the delivery of technical
assistance and enhancing cooperation with the relevant
stakeholders, including the private sector.
We continue to face many challenges indeed in those
areas, but we must also recognize our achievements. In
that regard, I would highlight the work of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) and CTED in developing
the addendum to the Madrid Guiding Principles.
Formally adopted by the CTC on 27 December 2018,
the addendum serves as a practical tool to assist
States in addressing the FTF phenomenon, including
by addressing the challenges posed by returnees and
relocators. Its adoption followed extensive consultations
with a broad range of stakeholders, including the wider
United Nations membership, civil society, academia
and the private sector. It provides guidance to Member
States on responding effectively to the evolving FTF
phenomenon, with a focus on measures to be taken in
a number of areas including, but not limited to, border
security information-sharing, countering terrorists’
narratives, countering violent extremism conducive
to terrorism, risk-assessment and intervention
programmes, judicial measures, including prosecution,
rehabilitation and reintegration, and international
cooperation. The CTC and CTED will work closely with
Member States to promote effective use of the Guiding
Principles. The CTC will also hold an open briefing
on the addendum to raise awareness on the Guiding
Principles, facilitate open and interactive discussions
on the challenges posed by the FTF phenomenon and
promote discussion of priority capacity-building needs.
In our country assessment visits on behalf of the
CTC, CTED will continue to emphasize the need for
Member States to implement the relevant Council
resolutions and employ a comprehensive and a holistic

S/PV. 8460

response to the terrorist threat. We will also continue
to support Member States in developing comprehensive
responses to terrorism and to facilitate, in cooperation
with UNOCT, the targeted delivery of technical
assistance to States. We will continue to work with our
implementing partners to deliver as One UN. CTED’s
strategic support, UNODC’s technical expertise and key
contributions from other United Nations partners have
helped Member States in the Lake Chad basin to begin
developing comprehensive strategies to prosecute,
rehabilitate and reintegrate persons associated with
Boko Haram.
UNODC and UNOCT, in close cooperation with
CTED, are currently engaged in a joint project to
provide tailored capacity-building assistance to prison
staff and other relevant stakeholders. The project aims
to enhance prison security and safety, strengthen risk
and needs assessments and enhance rehabilitation and
reintegration. UNODC, CTED and the International
Association of Prosecutors together developed the
Practical Guide for Requesting Electronic Evidence
across Borders. And UNODC and CTED recently
deployed a United Nations consultant to support Iraq
in the development of a comprehensive and integrated
counter-terrorism strategy that will help Iraq address
the post-ISIL environment in a holistic manner.
Those are just a few examples of our collaborative
efforts to support Member States in countering the
continuing threat posed by ISIL. We will continue to
work together with our many implementing partners,
including Member States, other United Nations entities,
international and regional organizations, civil society,
academia and the private sector, to ensure a holistic and
effective approach to this grave threat to international
peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Coninsx for her briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members
wishing to make a statement.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and Executive
Director Coninsx for their briefings. We thank also
the Secretary-General; the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team of the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da’esh),
Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities; and the staff of the United

19-035155/22

S/PV.8460

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (OCT) and of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED), whose work underpins United Nations efforts
to defeat the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS).
The latest report on the threat posed by ISIS
demonstrates the hard-won progress that we have made
over the past several years. It highlights the fact that the
number of ISIS attacks decreased significantly from
2017 to 2018 and that the group has suffered significant
military setbacks across the board, notably in Iraq,
Syria and the southern Philippines. These successes are
a testament to the work of the global coalition to defeat
ISIS, which just met in Washington, D.C., last week.
Coalition operations have liberated all of the terrain
that ISIS once controlled in Iraq and more than 99 per
cent of such territory in Syria, including key cities in
both countries. The global coalition, by destroying
ISIS-controlled energy assets and removing key ISIS
commanders responsible for finance, has also severely
degraded the ability of ISIS to raise funds and finance
its operations.
The coalition is committed to preserving the
successes that we have achieved. To date, coalition
partners have pledged more than $1 billion in
stabilization programming in Iraq and more than
$325 million for stabilization assistance in Syria. These
projects are key to securing military gains and restoring
peace. The coalition is helping Iraq’s local security
forces make their cities safe for the local population.
We are helping to clear neighbourhoods of mines
and explosive remnants of war and to restore basic
municipal services. In Syria, we are working to relieve
the suffering of ISIS victims. The United States is the
largest single humanitarian donor country to the Syrian
people, having provided $9.1 billion in humanitarian
assistance since the start of the crisis for those displaced
inside Syria and throughout the region.
All that being said, much more work remains
to be done to defeat ISIS. ISIS is seeking to survive,
reconstitute and ultimately re-emerge in Iraq and Syria.
ISIS is also coordinating with affiliates to plan attacks
elsewhere, including Afghanistan, South-East Asia and
West Africa. As ISIS evolves, we must adapt to the
changing threat it poses. To do so, the United States is
working to identify and stop foreign terrorist fighter
travel and to disrupt ISIS’s global network of affiliates.
We now have information-sharing arrangements with
more than 60 countries to identify and track the travel
6/22

11/02/2019

of suspected terrorists. Approximately 70 countries
have laws to prosecute and penalize foreign terrorist
fighter activities, but we need many more on board.
These efforts complement the work taking place
more broadly at the United Nations on foreign terrorist
fighters. Thanks to CTED and the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Committee, Member States now
have comprehensive guidance on how to address
returning terrorist fighters through the recently adopted
addendum to the Madrid Guiding Principles. We urge
countries to use that guidance now.
We strongly support the OCT’s efforts as well,
including its role in providing technical assistance to
Member States as they implement obligations under
resolution 2396 (2017). The OCT’s new project on
enhancing the capacity of Member States to detect
foreign terrorist fighter travel via the use of advanced
passenger information and passenger name record
data is one that we particularly hope will make a
positive impact.
We strongly encourage the United Nations to
continue guiding and enabling Member States to
comprehensively prosecute, rehabilitate and reintegrate
foreign terrorist fighters and those associated with them,
including children. The work of the United Nations in
this area and, more broadly, on counterterrorism and on
preventing violent extremism must include civil-society
participation, and we expect the OCT to continue to
mainstream civil society into the core of its work. We
also expect CTED to continue its important work on
civil society, human rights and integrating a gender
perspective, as cross-cutting issues vital to its mandate.
Our collective success against ISIS has
demonstrated what we can accomplish when we bring
all of our tools to bear. We cannot relent in this fight.
The United States will continue to work with our
partners to pursue, degrade and, ultimately, defeat ISIS
and Al-Qaida.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We, too, would like to welcome the convening of this
meeting and the informative briefings provided by the
Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism and the Executive Director of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee, whom we thank for
their important work, carried out in close collaboration
with the Council.
19-03515

11/02/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

As has been noted, while the Islamic State has
become a covert network, particularly in Iraq, it
continues to pose a serious threat to international peace
and security. The fight against that scourge cannot be
considered as having ended. The report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/103) highlights the fact that the current
goal of ISIS is to continue to undermine Government
activities aimed at stabilization and reconstruction and
in general thwart economic progress.
At the same time, the possibility of a resurgence
cannot be discounted, in particular in the region of
the Levant. We recognize that the return or transfer
of foreign terrorist fighters and their families also
represents a serious threat. We would therefore
underscore the fact that the Counter-Terrorism
Committee adopted, on 27 December last, an
addendum to the Madrid Guiding Principles. The
addendum contains very useful guidelines on issues
ranging from enhancing the capacity to detect and
prevent travel by terrorists, to measures to strengthen
protection of critical infrastructure, including ways
of increasing the effectiveness of legal action and
international cooperation.
It is therefore necessary to develop adequate
policies for prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration
that are based on full respect for human rights.
Another related challenge is the situation of fighters
who have been freed and their necessary and proper
reintegration into society. In that context, we believe
that national criminal justice systems must play a key
role in this process, particularly in preventing prisons
from becoming terrains for greater radicalization and
recruitment, including through the use of suitable
information and communication technologies.
We also underscore the importance of the gender
perspective in the fight against terrorism, as well
as the impact of terrorism on children, particularly
those who are accompanying returning or relocating
fighters. The financing of the Islamic State is also
giving rise to serious concern. While its income has
been reduced substantially, in line with the reduction
of the territory it controls, it has been estimated that it
nevertheless has significant cash reserves in Syria, Iraq
and neighbouring countries, with the strategic goal of
financing attacks when the opportunity arises.
Against that backdrop, we reiterate the importance
of financial intelligence systems, including the
cooperation of financial intelligence units with the

S/PV. 8460

private sector, as well as the need to monitor the flow
of cash, which is the vehicle through which terrorists
mobilize that resources.
Here we would underscore the link between
organized crime and terrorism. The report reflects
this reality not only when referring to the financing of
terrorism and money laundering, but also to the threats
linked to drug trafficking and trafficking in persons
and weapons. We deem it crucial to continue to deepen
our knowledge about the nature of such a link, as set
out in the presidential statement issued by the Council
on 8 May 2018 (S/PRST/2018/9). In this context, we
also underscore the need to prevent the possibility of
terrorist groups, particularly Da’esh, benefiting from
the trafficking of cultural heritage, in keeping with
resolution 2347 (2017).
Finally, we reiterate that particular relevance
of ensuring that there is no impunity for the crimes
committed. We therefore welcome the progress made
by the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, as well as
the official launch of the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
However, we deplore the fact that to date no member
of Da’esh has been tried for sexual crimes, in spite of
it having been noted that sexual violence was used as a
terrorist tactic.
Finally, we reiterate our categorical rejection
of terrorism and our solidarity with the victims of
such heinous acts. Peru will continue to support
all multilateral efforts, including in the context
of the Council, to provide a comprehensive and
balanced response to this scourge that is in line with
international law.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Vladimir Voronkov and Ms. Michèle Coninsx,
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate, for their informative briefings. I would also
like to express my gratitude to the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate, the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team pursuant to resolutions
1526 (2004) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da’esh),
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals
and entities and the Office of Counter-Terrorism for

19-035157/22

S/PV.8460

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

the eighth report of the Secretary-General on the
threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh) to international peace
and security and the range of United Nations efforts
in support of Member States in countering the threat
(S/2019/103).
I would first like to concur with what UnderSecretary-General Voronkov said in his statement
with regard to the fact that the threat of terrorism is a
global challenge that does not recognize borders and
is complex in nature, which means that addressing it
effectively requires a collective effort on the part of
the whole international community. That is why the
Council continues to play a crucial role in this issue.
Although the numbers in the report show that the
areas in Iraq and Syria controlled by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) are shrinking, we must
not lower our guard. We must continue our efforts to
stop the expansion of Da’esh and the creation of its
affiliated cells in Central and South-East Asia, Libya,
Afghanistan, West Africa, as well as other countries
and regions. This year alone, we have witnessed
terrible terrorist attacks in Afghanistan, Kenya and
the Philippines. While there are numerous burning
issues under discussion with regard to preventing and
countering terrorism, I would like touch on three that
are of special importance to Poland.
First, we must step up our efforts to prevent and
counter the financing of terrorism. As the most recent
report of the Monitoring Team shows, ISIL remains the
richest terrorist group in history, with the potential for
continuing to carry out attacks for years. The risk that
the Secretary-General’s report identifies of abuses of
unregulated new technologies and payment modalities
for the purposes of financing terrorism is a serious threat
wherever it might occur. The terrorists’ sophisticated
adaptation strategies are forcing us to adjust our
legal and operational frameworks. Enhancing the
transparency of financial flows, information-sharing
and cooperation with the private sector is vital.
Member States should strengthen their efforts to freeze
the assets of all individuals and entities on the Da’esh
and Al-Qaida sanctions list. If implemented effectively,
targeted financial sanctions are an important way of
depriving terrorists of their money.
The second issue that we consider very important
is the need to pay special attention to women and
children associated with foreign terrorist fighters.
Those associated with such fighters who are returning
8/22

11/02/2019

from conflict zones and relocating may require special
focus and assistance, as they may have served in many
different roles. As the Secretary-General’s report
reflects, a significant number of children affiliated
with ISIL have been detained in Iraq and Syria. They
are very often held in poor conditions with a very
small chance of returning to their parents’ States of
origin. Poland encourages Member States to use the
guidance provided in the December 2018 addendum to
the Madrid Guiding Principles (S/2018/1177, annex),
which Ms. Coninsx highlighted in her briefing, and
which advises countries to put special safeguards and
legal protections in place, in full compliance with their
obligations under international law, and to ensure that the
competent authorities consider the impact of terrorism
on children and children’s rights. Poland calls on all
parties to bear in mind that children should primarily
be considered victims entitled to full protection of their
rights, and that alternatives to detention should be in
place whenever possible.
We also have to remember that human rights are not
a complementary or secondary issue in the discussion
of measures to prevent and counter terrorism. To echo
Ms. Coninsx, in our view all activities aimed at fighting
terrorists must be conducted in full compliance with
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law and must never be used as a pretext
to undermine international humanitarian and human
rights law standards.
The third issue is ensuring accountability. Too
few terrorists have been brought to justice. Given the
fact that foreign terrorist fighters and their families
are relocating, Member States must redouble their
international judicial cooperation efforts, as well
as those aimed at prosecuting, rehabilitating and
reintegrating terrorists. That means expanding the
collection, analysis, preservation and sharing of data,
including evidence, which should be conducted in full
compliance with human rights and the rule of law,
because accountability and justice depend very much
on the kind of data and evidence we manage to collect.
In that regard, Poland welcomes the commencement
of the work of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. We are
firmly convinced that its efforts to collect, preserve
and store evidence in Iraq of acts that may amount to
war crimes, crimes against humanity or genocide will
produce substantive findings.
19-03515

11/02/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
today’s briefing. We are grateful to Under-SecretaryGeneral Voronkov and Executive Director Coninsx
for their briefings. We believe firmly that productive
cooperation with their entities will guarantee progress
in the work of combating terrorism under the auspices
of the United Nations.
We share many of the views expressed in the eighth
report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed
by ISIL (Da’esh) to international peace and security
and the range of United Nations efforts in support of
Member States in countering the threat (S/2019/103).
For our part, we would like to note the following.
In our view, the reports’ central focus should
continue to be on providing information on terrorists’
resource bases and efforts to undermine them. We want
to emphasize once again that any trade or economic
relations with individuals or organizations involved
in the activities of members of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) represent a gross violation
of Security Council resolutions. All the essential
resolutions on this issue were adopted long ago. They
must be conscientiously implemented, not considered
as something meant for somebody else.
Despite significant successes in combating
terrorism in Syria and Iraq, the Middle East continues to
be a stronghold for ISIL’s leadership. Their attacks have
continued, including on civilians. As they lose ground,
they continue to attempt to establish close collaboration
with their brothers in arms — the same kind of
terrorists, still operating in the Middle East, just under
different names. The efforts to crush ISIL in Iraq and
Syria continue. We are pleased that the stabilization of
the military and political situation in both countries has
helped to shrink the channels and volume of financing
for illegal armed groups. In Syria in particular, having
lost control over enormous amounts of territory, the
terrorists have also lost a source of income in the
form of the various ways they have been extorting
the population. Russia has helped to normalize the
situation in Syria and Iraq through its cooperation on
counter-terrorism cooperation, including through the
Baghdad coordination centre. The de-escalation efforts
undertaken by the country guarantors of the Astana
process have had a positive effect in Syria. We are also
concerned about the unresolved problem of repatriating
foreign terrorist fighters who fought for ISIL and are

S/PV. 8460

still in Syria to their countries of origin and bringing
them to justice.
We would like to stress the need to invite the
representatives of the States that have suffered the most
from terrorist activity, foremost among them Syria
and Iraq, to the relevant briefings on ISIL, and the
importance of obtaining information from the conflict
zones. For that it is essential to work directly with the
Governments of those countries.
A major focus for us has been the movements of
foreign terrorist fighters seeking to continue their
terrorist activity in other conflict zones, such as
countries in Africa, particularly in the Sahara-Sahel
region, and Afghanistan. Despite the undoubted losses
it has suffered in the north, the Afghan wing of ISIL
remains one of the key destabilizing factors in the
country. Its expanding ideological, propaganda and
recruitment activities, which make intelligent use of
information and communications technologies, present
an additional danger. Its activities in Afghanistan
are fuelled by foreign terrorist fighters with combat
experience from Syria and Iraq. In our view, the
continued presence of this group in Afghanistan
represents a threat to the States that are its neighbours
in Central Asia. The high number of suicide bomber
attacks also suggests that the group possesses serious
human resources.
We have seen a certain amount of progress in
the work being done by neighbouring States to block
terrorism financing channels. For understandable
reasons, ISIL’s revenue from smuggled petroleum
products has also continued to dwindle. Last autumn,
however, fighters seized several oilfields in Deir ez-Zor
governorate, which for several months enabled them to
resell a certain amount of fuel for between $30 and $35
a barrel through intermediaries.
On the whole, since the previous report
(S/2018/770) was issued, the key areas of revenue for
the major terrorist groups in the region have not seen
significant changes. Fighters continue to take hostages
for ransom, traffic in drugs, agricultural products and
human organs, and sell looted cultural heritage objects
on the black market. They are also filling their coffers
by trading in industrial products such as sulfuric
and phosphoric acids and cement, investing in fishfarming in Iraq, speculating in stock markets, profiting
from cryptocurrencies, online-casino gambling and
e-commerce scams and supplying counterfeit medical

19-035159/22

S/PV.8460

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

products. In some cases fighters have been compelled
to sell their weapons and ammunition to support
their activities.
However, we should not assume that ISIL and
Al-Qaida’s leaders are content with the resources they
have. Together with their accomplices in organized
criminal groups they are constantly seeking new
financing sources for their activities. For example,
they have attempted to establish control over drugtrafficking and mineral-smuggling routes from Asian
countries. As I mentioned earlier, Afghanistan is of
particular interest in that regard. Illegal enterprises
mining, processing and shipping abroad iron, copper,
gold and precious and semi-precious stones have been
established in a number of Afghan provinces. In that
context, we want to once again draw the Council’s
attention to the research on ISIL-related financial flows
that since 2016 has been conducted on Russia’s initiative
within the framework of the Financial Action Task
Force (FATF) on money laundering. To date, the FATF
secretariat has received information from more than
40 jurisdictions that has enabled it to compile a broad
picture of the ISIL financial and economic machine.
Unfortunately, despite our repeated appeals, the
crucial task of cutting off supplies of military-related
products to terrorist organizations has taken a back
seat in the United Nations. It is no secret that the grey
market for arms export is frequently exploited in order
to supply militants with weapons. When the deals are
relatively transparent, terrorist groups often operate in
the guise of so-called opposition movements in order
to get access to such products. We urge all States to
pay special attention to the issues of regulating the
activity of middlemen, criminalizing illicit brokering,
developing flexible systems for risk assessment for
exports, improving information-sharing between
Governments and creating monitoring and control
mechanisms for arms transfers. For our part, we intend
to continue to play an active role in global anti-terrorism
efforts and in supporting United Nations activity in the
area, including by assisting foreign partners, and we
affirm our interest in constructive dialogue with all
interested parties.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to begin by thanking Under-SecretaryGeneral Voronkov and Executive Director Coninsx for
their briefings. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
latest report on countering the threat posed by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant to international
10/22

11/02/2019

peace and security (S/2019/103). Afghanistan, the
Philippines, Kenya and Mali have recently been hit by a
spate of terrorist attacks, resulting in enormous damage
in the affected countries.
As the Secretary-General’s report points out,
international counter-terrorism efforts have registered
major progress. However, the threat posed by terrorism
persists, and the challenges in addressing that scourge
remain daunting. Terrorism is the common enemy of
humankind and no country can cope with it alone. The
international community should embrace the concept
of a shared future for humankind, enhance resultsoriented cooperation, maintain unity and respond
collectively to terrorist threats.
First, we must seek further international consensus
and form synergies. In order to combat terrorism, all
countries should uphold a single standard and adopt a
zero-tolerance policy. International counter-terrorism
efforts should abide by the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, respect the sovereignty
of the States concerned and the ownership of Member
States, give full play to the leading role of the United
Nations and its Security Council and fully implement
the relevant Security Council resolutions and the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Secondly, we must strive to eliminate the sources
that give rise to terrorism and address both its symptoms
and root causes. The international community should
help Member States to achieve socioeconomic
development and promote the settlement of hotspot
issues by political means. We must commit to building
a new kind of international relations and to promoting
equitable dialogue and harmonious coexistence among
different civilizations and religions. Terrorism should
not be associated with any specific country, ethnicity or
religion. The international community should provide
assistance to developing countries and strengthen
Member States’ capacity-building in the area of
counter-terrorism.
Thirdly, we must take the threat posed by foreign
terrorist fighters seriously and stop terrorist organizations
from misusing the Internet and telecommunications
technologies. We should support Member States in
fully implementing the Madrid Guiding Principles
and their 2018 addendum (S/2018/1177, annex), and
strengthen border management and cooperation in
areas such as law enforcement, intelligence-sharing
and mutual legal assistance. In response to terrorism’s
19-03515

11/02/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

emerging trends and characteristics, we should focus
on enhancing international cooperation in combating
cyberterrorism, terrorist financing and the spread of
extremist ideologies.
Fourthly, we must leverage the various advantages
of specialized mechanisms such as the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism, the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism, and the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities. We should give full play to those entities’
roles in capacity-building, assessing terrorist threats
and enhancing sanctions measures. All counterterrorism mechanisms should continue to enhance their
communication with Member States, carry out their
work in strict compliance with the relevant resolutions
and rules of procedure, and maintain sanctions regimes’
authority and effectiveness in order to continue to
improve their contributions to the cause of international
counter-terrorism.
China categorically rejects terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. Over the past few years, the violent
terrorist elements of the so-called East Turkestan
Islamic Movement (ETIM) have planned and carried
out a number of terrorist attacks on Chinese territory,
and have also posed a serious threat to countries in the
Middle East and Central Asia. Fighting the ETIM’s
violent terrorist forces should be part of international
counter-terrorism efforts and should be met with
resolute measures.
As a crucial member of the international fight
against terrorism, China has been deeply involved in
international cooperation through mechanisms and
platforms such as the United Nations and the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization. We have also supported
Member States’ capacity-building in that area through
the United Nations-China Peace and Development
Trust Fund, thereby making an important contribution
to international counter-terrorism efforts. China stands
ready to work together with all countries to respond
to the threat of terrorism and maintain world peace
and tranquillity.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me start by
thanking very sincerely Under-Secretary-General
Vladimir Voronkov and Assistant Secretary-General
Michèle Coninsx for their briefings and ongoing efforts

S/PV. 8460

to work with Member States on strengthening counterterrorism. We also thank the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team for its contribution. It
is as pleasing as ever to hear from both of them how
closely they are working together. We welcome that
very much. I thought that the example that Michèle
Coninsx provided with regard to the Lake Chad basin
was comprehensive and very valuable.
The United Kingdom is proud that, as a leading
member of the Global Coalition, it has made a key
contribution to the progress made against Da’esh.
However, Da’esh is still the most significant terrorist
threat to the United Kingdom, and therefore it remains a
top counter-terrorism priority for my country. Even with
the prospect of losing all territory, Da’esh continues to
pose a threat to international peace and security around
the world. While it has transitioned into a more diffuse
and networked structure, Da’esh retains its leadership
and capacity to inspire and encourage others to do
great harm. The group’s attacks not only take innocent
lives, but threaten the safety and cohesion of all of our
communities. I echo what the Russian Ambassador
said about the importance of cutting terrorists off from
sources of finance.
We know that this is a threat that moves fast and
takes on different forms. Returning and relocating
foreign terrorist fighters, frustrated travellers and
individuals or small groups perpetrating attacks with
little centralized direction all mean that we must ensure
that our prevention measures and responses are tailored
to the current threat. No State can do that alone. We
have previously mentioned to the Council that we have
invited the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) to conduct an assessment of the
United Kingdom. That is not only because we hope
that we have a good story to tell and good practices
and experiences to share, but also because we value the
opportunity to learn from other States and engage in
dialogue. We would encourage others to do the same
and invite CTED to carry out assessments.
In the United Kingdom, we have a new counterterrorism and border-security bill going through our
system, which aims to ensure that law enforcement and
intelligence agencies have the powers that they need
to help keep the country safe from the threat posed
by terrorism and hostile State activity. We are seeing
increased concerns about violence perpetrated by groups
ascribing themselves to extreme right-wing ideologies.
In 2016, National Action became the first right-wing

19-0351511/22

S/PV.8460

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

11/02/2019

group to be proscribed in the United Kingdom. At that
time, the Home Secretary said that National Action was
a racist, anti-Semitic and homophobic organization that
stirred up hatred, glorified violence and promoted a
vile ideology. It has absolutely no place in a Britain that
works for everyone. We have also seen the disruption
that unmanned aerial systems, or drones, can cause,
and we are ramping up our efforts to ensure that our
responses and the tools we have at hand keep pace with
the evolving challenges.

to support efforts to fill those gaps. In doing so, they
should work closely with civil society, the private
sector, experts and specialized United Nations agencies
and partners, taking advantage of respective expertise
and capability. It is very important that all work closely
together. Once again, let me welcome the personal
leadership of Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and
Assistant Secretary-General Coninsx in this area. It
is also important, however, that there be no confusion
with regard to mandates in the eyes of Member States.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/103)
highlights the roles of women. We have seen in many
places women exploited to carry out attacks, taking
advantage of cultural and gender stereotypes and
operational loopholes. Women are also victims of
horrific acts of terrorism, including, infamously, sexual
violence at the hands of Da’esh. The Council has made
efforts to ensure accountability for Da’esh through
resolution 2379 (2017). At the same time, women have
also been key partners in prevention and response. We
know that many women’s organizations are on the front
line doing important work in the areas of early warning,
building resilience and rehabilitation and reintegration.

We welcome the active United Nations responses
to the threat outlined in the report and would also like
to take the opportunity to thank the Office of CounterTerrorism for its work in developing the multi-year
appeal and the comprehensive and detailed information
shared with Member States on capacity-building
activities. We all have a complicated task before us. We
have just agreed on a very interesting and substantive
programme of work and list of activities for the CounterTerrorism Committee, and we know that it is key that
we remain responsive to emerging trends and dynamics.

We were pleased to contribute to the recent report
of the United Nations Development Programme and the
International Civil Society Action Network, entitled
Invisible Women: Gendered Dimensions of Return,
Rehabilitation and Reintegration. All of that underscores
the importance of integrating gender as a cross-cutting
issue. In the United Kingdom, our national action plan
on women and peace and security includes strategic
targets pertaining to preventing violent extremism,
and we have a cross-cutting counter-terrorism gender
strategy. At the United Nations, we encourage both
CTED and the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism (UNOCT) to focus on concrete actions in
that regard, as outlined in resolution 2242 (2015), the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
CTED’s recent mandate. I just want to reiterate that
that is in response to a real threat and is therefore about
delivering real-world counter-terrorism effectiveness.
The Council’s counter-terrorism framework lays out
a carefully negotiated set of obligations and mandates
to ensure that States can most effectively prevent and
counter the threat. Member States, of course, bear
the primary responsibility to do so, and many of the
obligations fall to national actors, but where additional
capacity-building is needed, we need CTED to identify
gaps and UNOCT and other United Nations partners
12/22

Let me reiterate our support for Executive Director
Coninsx and her determination to ensure that CTED
continues to fulfil its mandate, conferred upon it by
the Council, in a comprehensive manner that takes
into account the full spectrum of counter-terrorism
issues, including prevention, human rights and gender,
for example, as well as legal, law enforcement, border
security and other such matters. As terrorism adapts,
so too must we ensure that our responses reflect
contemporary realities. Let me also express my support
for what Assistant Secretary-General Coninsx said
about not only the importance of the Madrid guiding
principles in and of themselves, but also the way in
which they were developed in an inclusive fashion
with a range of actors. Of course, that is very pertinent
to UNOCT through its strategy, as endorsed by the
General Assembly.
We have much in common. We all want to protect
our countries, peoples, communities and values, all
of which terrorists threaten. That threat requires a
multidimensional response. It requires us all to work
together, and we must use and improve all of the tools at
our disposal to meet our responsibilities and obligations.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to join others in warmly thanking Under-SecretaryGeneral Vladimir Voronkov and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Michèle Coninsx for their very informative
19-03515

11/02/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

briefings and the exemplary commitment that they and
their teams have demonstrated in our common struggle
against terrorism.

S/PV. 8460

As the eighth report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/103) on this topic underscores, despite the loss
of its territorial entrenchment Da’esh continues to pose
a serious threat to international peace and security.
The group has evolved into an underground network
relying upon dispersed cells potentially comprised of
former foreign terrorist fighters and, as we know, its
propaganda continues to attract many sympathizers.

instruments, making a collective commitment not only
to vulnerable countries but also to failing countries,
and international sanctions are all priorities on which
we must make progress. That is why, after inviting the
international community to Paris last year for the No
Money For Terror conference and after consulting with
the relevant actors, France has decided to submit a draft
resolution on the subject with a view to adopting it in
the coming weeks. We will work closely with Council
members and look forward to everyone’s commitment
and support.

In that regard, clearly now is not the time to lower
our guard or decrease pressure on Da’esh. It is therefore
necessary that the efforts of the Global Coalition
against Da’esh be pursued both in terms of its military
commitment and of civilian component in support
of the implementation of a pluralistic and inclusive
political solution in Syria and Iraq. Clearly, that is the
only lasting response to prevent the re-emergence of
Da’esh in other forms. With that in mind, the Foreign
Ministers of the Global Coalition reaffirmed their
commitment in unison on 6 February in Washington,
D.C. Similarly, accepting impunity for the crimes
committed by Da’esh is not an option. We have the
political, legal and moral responsibility to ensure that
those responsible are prosecuted and sentenced to the
fullest extent of the law.

Our second priority is managing the return of
foreign terrorist fighters. Faced with that challenge,
we must continue to strengthen measures to detect,
treat and monitor people at risk, including through
constant information-sharing. Given the variety of
profiles concerned, close coordination among civil,
military and financial intelligence services and
agencies, as well as among judicial authorities, is
essential to strengthening the interaction between
intelligence action and the criminal justice response.
The involvement of the education, social services
and justice sectors is essential to helping the families
concerned. France’s national strategy places particular
emphasis on providing care specifically for children,
in particular at the sociopsychological and educational
levels, to promote their reintegration.

Justice meted out with respect for human rights
and the rule of law is also essential to peace and
reconciliation. It requires the strengthening of judicial
systems and sound international judicial cooperation.
France particularly welcomes the contribution of the
team created by the Council — the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant — which is intended to help gather evidence
to prosecute those responsible for crimes committed by
Da’esh in Iraq. In addition, our efforts must continue
to focus on three priority areas for action, which are
clearly set out in the Secretary-General’s report.

Our third priority is preventing the use of the
Internet by terrorist groups. France intends to continue
to play a leading role in that fight. Considerable progress
has been made and Internet companies are mobilizing.
However, much remains to be done and we will pursue
our efforts, in particular in the European context,
to more effectively prevent the spread of terrorist
propaganda that fuels radicalization and to support the
development of positive counter-narratives. Combating
the financing of terrorism is also a priority for us in
other forums, in particular within the framework of the
European Union and of our presidency of the Group of
Seven this year.

Our first priority is the fight against terrorist
financing, which is a top priority for France. During the
Arria Formula meeting, which we organized with other
partners on 31 January, we noted that there are still
many challenges to be met in order to adapt our response
to the threats posed. Sharing information, combating
anonymous transactions, identifying the sources of
financing, anticipating the misuse of new financial

The United Nations has an increasingly vital,
unifying and recognized role to play in each of those
areas. We thank the Office of Counter-Terrorism
(UNOCT0 and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) for the outstanding work
they do every day. We also rely on UNOCT and CTED
to continue to address, as their respective mandates
provide, more cross-cutting issues, such as respect for

19-0351513/22

S/PV.8460

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

and the promotion of human rights or the integration
of the gender dimension in the fight against terrorism.
You may rest assured, Sir, of France’s full support
to United Nations entities in their efforts to identify
needs and the best ways to meet them and to promote
coordination among all relevant actors. Considerable
progress has been made on these various issues and it is
vital that it continue.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov and
Executive Director Michèle Coninsx for their excellent
briefings and for their leadership and demonstration of
cooperation, which we appreciate very much.
I would like to make three remarks today.
First, with regard to the situation on the ground,
countering terrorism continues to be at the top of our
international security agenda. While we have seen
broad progress in the fight against the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) in Syria and Iraq, to which
Germany is contributing substantially as part of the
Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS, it is now crucial to
remain engaged. The job is far from being done. We
need to create conditions on the ground that disallow
the continuation of ISIS as an underground network.
In spite of recent losses by ISIS, the threat it poses
remains imminent and very substantial. The military
campaign in the last areas under ISIS control in the
Middle Euphrates Valley continues. However, ISIS is
no longer in a position to levy taxes and has also lost
significant sources of revenue. The loss of territory
and decrease in resources do not mean the end of the
terrorist organization. Fighters who have dispersed are
more difficult to locate and terrorist networks, such as
ISIS and Al-Qaida, have proven time and again that they
are quick to adapt to changing circumstances. I could
not agree more with the statement by Under-SecretaryGeneral Voronkov, who said that recent Islamic State
losses must not lead to any complacency whatsoever.
I think that that is the key message. ISIS obviously
continues to pose a serious threat to international peace
and stability.
My second remark is about human rights, conflict
prevention and gender. During our campaign for a
seat on the Security Council, Germany stressed the
importance of conflict prevention, respect for human
rights and the inclusion of the gender perspective in
the work of the Council. The discussion today proves
14/22

11/02/2019

our point. The situations in northern Iraq and Syria
show that we need to remain vigilant and try to solve
conflicts before they degenerate into violence. They
show that disrespect for human rights is a factor that
can lead marginalized people to violent extremism and
into the hands of terrorist networks. They also show
that women find themselves in horrific conditions in
violent conflict situations.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/103)
highlights the role of women for good reason. I would
just like to make three very short points on that issue.
First of all, I would like to stress that Germany has
welcomed many Yazidi women, men and children from
the territory formerly controlled by ISIS in northern
Iraq. Secondly, I would like to refer to the Arria Formula
meeting held in January on the women and peace and
security agenda in the Middle East and North Africa as
a milestone. We feel that we should build on that with
a view to our future work. Against that background,
Germany intends to initiate an open debate on conflictrelated sexual violence during our upcoming presidency
in April. Thirdly and lastly, the representative of the
United Kingdom referred to resolution 2242 (2015),
which contains important language on women and on
preventing and countering violent extremism. Germany
also feels that it is essential that this very important
resolution be properly implemented.
My third and last remark is on the broader strategic
way forward. Terrorists need to be vigorously pursued
and prosecuted. However, for sustainable long-term
success in the fight against terrorism, it is crucial to
follow a holistic approach with a balance of preventive
and repressive measures. To deal with the challenges
posed by returning foreign terrorist fighters and their
families, a broad approach that includes criminal
justice and police measures, as well as deradicalization
and reintegration, is also needed.
With regard to what specifically can and should
be done, let me just mention some such measures that
are crucial from our point of view. As many previous
speakers have said this morning, we must work against
radicalization in prisons. Another point is that law
enforcement and border control agencies need to be
equipped with the necessary tools to do their job. We
should also highlight the necessity of electronically
accessible terrorist watch lists. All Member States
that are not doing so already should consider working
closely with INTERPOL and making full use of its
19-03515

11/02/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

databases, such as on lost or stolen travel documents.
We must also stress the role of biometrics and advance
passenger information systems.
In addition, let me highlight that last autumn,
our Dutch friends made their passenger name record
software available to the wider United Nations
membership. The so-called Travel Information Portal
can be used by United Nations Members free of charge.
We feel that that is a very important initiative and
we would like to encourage the widespread use of
the software.
We would also like to applaud the French initiative
to present a resolution on combating the financing of
terrorism. Drying up the financial sources of terrorism
is crucial to the overall success of counter-terrorism.
We strongly support the French commitment.
In the same vein, we are strongly committed to
supporting the work of the Financial Action Task
Force as the body for setting international standards on
anti-money-laundering and countering the financing
of terrorism. We support and implement all relevant
Security Council resolutions in that regard and will
use our membership on the Security Council to further
streamline international efforts.
We must also ensure broader respect for human rights
and the rule of law. They should be no less important
in the international fight against terrorism and are a
crucial component. Lastly, we should support the work
of Daniel Kipfer Fasciati, Ombudsperson of the ISIL
(Da’esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee, which is
vital to the credibility, fairness and effectiveness of the
sanctions regime.
To conclude on a more general note, I would like
to say that we need to uphold the level of fairness and
respect for human rights in our reactions to terrorism.
Only by upholding our values and standards will we
be able to defeat the terrorist ideology. International
cooperation remains key to our success. We must
keep prevention, foreign terrorist fighters, terrorist
financing, information sharing, terrorist use of the
Internet, aviation security and all the other issues that
many previous speakers have mentioned this morning
very high on the international agenda.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Mr. President, for holding this important meeting.
We also thank the briefers Mr. Vladimir Voronkov,
Under-Secretary-General, United Nations Office

S/PV. 8460

of Counter-Terrorism, and Ms. Michèle Coninsx,
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, for their briefings and efforts.
We underscore our full support to them.
Today, in my statement I will focus on three main
issues: first, the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham (ISIS/Da’esh); secondly, the challenges
facing the international community in fighting that
threat; and, thirdly, the international cooperation that
we all desire.
First, with regard to the threat posed by Da’esh, the
number and scale of terrorist attacks launched by it has
recently decreased due to many factors, including the
efforts of the international community, in particular the
international coalition against Da’esh. That has led to a
significant decrease in the number of its militants in Iraq
and Syria, which, according to relevant reports, is now
estimated to be between 14,000 and 18,000 militants.
However, Da’esh continues to pose a real and direct
threat. It is able to quickly adapt and transform and
to use its available capacities and financial resources,
in coordination with other terrorist groups, in order
to implement its plans whenever it can. We must take
into account that a significant number of its militants
are returning, relocating or released foreign fighters.
Hence, our responsibility now is to unite international,
regional and subregional efforts and to promote the
effective use of tools and measures to keep pace with
the rapid tactical changes made by Da’esh to implement
its agenda and plans.
We reaffirm what was stated in the joint ministerial
statement adopted at the meeting of Foreign Ministers of
the Global Coalition against Da’esh, held in Washington,
D.C., on 6 February, concerning the commitment of the
Coalition States to the guiding principles adopted in
Kuwait in 2018.
Secondly, with regard to the challenges facing
the international community in fighting that threat,
perhaps the most prominent of those challenges facing
us today is the ability of Da’esh to finance its terrorist
actions through acquired financial assets estimated
at between $50 million and $300 million, or by selffunding through illicit actions such as blackmailing,
kidnapping for ransom and transnational organized
crime, as well as the use of social media and other
kinds of media. Da’esh spreads its message through
the media in order to recruit and to announce its local
actions and news, in addition to the negative impact

19-0351515/22

S/PV.8460

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

of returnees or relocating foreign fighters and their
families. All those challenges require international and
national preventive measures within comprehensive
national strategies to address the financing of terrorism
and to counter terrorist narratives. That includes the
implementation of the provisions of resolutions 1373
(2001) and 2354 (2017), as well as the implementation
of the comprehensive international framework to
counter terrorist narratives and other relevant Security
Council resolutions.
We stress the importance for Member States to
implement resolution 2396 (2017), which calls for
reassessing the situation of individuals returning
from conflict zones and their families and applying
administrative justice by adopting special legislation
in every country that focuses on a comprehensive and
clear concept for rehabilitation, within mechanisms in
line with the Madrid Guiding Principles and in respect
for human rights.
Concerning the crimes committed by Da’esh, we
stress the need to hold the perpetrators accountable,
including for those crimes that amount to war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide. We support
the international mechanism established by resolution
2379 (2017) to support local efforts to hold Da’esh
accountable. We commend the tremendous efforts of
the sisterly Iraqi Government in fighting Da’esh and in
liberating the Iraqi territories.
Thirdly, with regard to the desired international,
regional and subregional cooperation to fight the
security challenges posed by terrorist groups to
the entire international community, that requires
the following: exchanging information, improving
protection, addressing the root causes of terrorism,
and preventing incitement to terrorism. We must also
remove the sources of revenue of terrorist groups, train
law enforcement officers, ensure support for young
people and education and sign bilateral and multilateral
agreements. The current cooperation among United
Nations agencies and bodies, regional organizations
and Member States pertaining to capacity-building and
the exchange of expertise is critical and essential and
we look forward to further promoting it.
In conclusion, we should all be aware that, while the
Global Coalition has made military advances against
Da’esh and the international community has made
tremendous efforts to eradicate Da’esh, that terrorist
group continues to pose a threat to international
16/22

11/02/2019

peace and security. It is a global group with a
centralized leadership. If we do not unite the efforts
of the international community in order to target the
financial, logistical, military, intelligence, security and
media networks of the group, it will re-emerge in crisis
and conflict hotspots and the international community
will suffer great losses.
We in the State of Kuwait renew our firm
position of condemning terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations regardless of the motivations behind
it. Terrorism is a criminal act that is unjustifiable and
must not be linked to any religion, nationality, culture
or ethnicity. Fighting terrorism requires mobilizing the
efforts of the international community to overcome this
criminal scourge by taking measures to respect human
rights, the rule of law and good governance.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened today’s briefing on
threats to international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts. We are grateful for the briefings presented
by, respectively, Mr. Voronkov and Ms. Coninsx. South
Africa believes that this meeting could have been
further enriched had the Council invited the countries
most affected to participate in the briefing. We will
hope that it will do so in future.
The threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) may have evolved and changed, but it has
not diminished in any way. Given ISIL’s global reach,
countering it requires a coherent, coordinated response
that is underpinned by strengthened cooperation at the
domestic, bilateral, regional and international levels,
including the sharing of information and experiences.
The United Nations remains key in the coordination
of the international community’s efforts in this regard,
and the importance of its support for Member States in
addressing their specific challenges in countering ISIL
cannot be underestimated. We welcome the efforts of
the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee of the Security Council
and its Executive Directorate in this respect.
South Africa has always supported a holistic
approach to countering the threat of terrorism.
Terrorism should be addressed in its totality, not only
in its individual components. Security measures alone
will not succeed in countering the terrorist threat.
Addressing what gives rise to it and its prevention are
equally important. In that connection, South Africa
supports a whole-of-Government and a whole-of19-03515

11/02/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

society approach that also addresses the role of women
and children, youth, civil society, the private sector and
communities in dealing with terrorist acts.
We welcome the Madrid Guiding Principles and
the addendum (S/2018/1177, annex) that has been
developed to complement them. In South Africa’s fight
against terrorism, we have, under our Protection of
Constitutional Democracy against Terrorist and Related
Activities Act, incorporated means of addressing
the financing of terrorism, complemented by South
Africa’s Financial Intelligence Centre, which is part of
a global network of similar centres dealing with tracing
illegal financial flows to terrorist groups, and good
cooperation with the private sector. It is also of great
importance to South Africa to emphasize that measures
taken to counter the threat of ISIL comply with our
obligations under international law, in particular
international human rights law, international refugee
law and international humanitarian law, as well as the
principle of the rule of law.
South Africa remains concerned by the presence
of terrorist groups in Africa, including in sub-Saharan
Africa, the Sahel, West and East Africa, and, recently,
in some parts of our own region, which have links with
ISIL and its evil ideology. Over the years, the African
Union (AU) has taken a number of initiatives in the
fight against terrorism. In 2002, 17 years ago, the
AU adopted a plan of action on the prevention of and
combat against terrorism. In 2011, the AU Commission
developed an African Model Law on Counter-Terrorism.
We will continue to spare no effort to ensure that this
destructive phenomenon does not take root in our
region, and we will continue to work closely with the
international community, including the United Nations,
in the fight against terrorism.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this informational
meeting on the threat that the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant poses to international peace and security as
well as on the efforts made by the United Nations to help
Member States to counter this threat. It congratulates
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General
of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism,
and Ms. Michèle Coninsx, Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
on their high-quality briefings.
Terrorism is one of the major security challenges
facing humankind today. The report of the Secretary-

S/PV. 8460

General on this scourge (S/2019/103) has prompted
my delegation to make a number of comments on the
terrorist threat, the challenges to be met and the role of
the United Nations.
Concerning the level of the threat, my delegation
notes with concern that despite the important setbacks
that Da’esh has experienced, it remains a real threat
to international peace and security owing to its
capacity to adapt, the lure of terrorist propaganda and
its considerable financial reserves. According to the
Secretary-General’s report, the organization has several
thousand combatants around the world, including
in the Middle East, Africa and Asia. My delegation
concurs with the Secretary-General’s assessment of
the danger represented by foreign terrorist fighters,
whose movements and return to their countries of
origin remain a major source of concern. It believes
that prisons are potential areas of radicalization and
supports the conclusions reached on the expansionist
tendencies of terrorism, whose ramifications affect
all regions of the world. In the face of this constantly
evolving threat, the mobilization of the international
community remains more necessary than ever.
On the challenges to be met, it is undeniable that
the fight against terrorism requires a holistic approach
on the part of the international community based on
harmonized actions that will allow us to respond to this
threat effectively. Indeed, in order to be effective, this
combat requires the full implementation by all Member
States of their obligations at the international level, in
particular with respect to monitoring and the criminal
prosecution of terrorist activities. This will also require
an updating of our measures to combat this phenomenon
and a revising of legislation aimed at strengthening the
effectiveness of counter-terrorist criminal justice.
At the national level, States must prevent
radicalization by improving coordination between
services focusing on detection and those dealing
with suppression. We also must devise strategies
to manage and control the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters. Particular attention should be paid to the
situation of women and children connected to such
fighters. The strengthening of aerial safety measures
is also essential. This will require awareness-raising as
concerns the threat and the sharing of passenger name
records, in a framework of international, regional and
subregional cooperation.

19-0351517/22

S/PV.8460

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Furthermore, the eradication of terrorism requires
that everyone be involved in the fight against the
financing of this global phenomenon. Our joint efforts
must contribute to cutting off sources of financing for
Da’esh and its affiliates. With this in mind, my delegation
calls for the creation of appropriate cooperation
mechanisms, better information-sharing, the promotion
of cooperation between the public and private sectors
and the strengthening of our legislative frameworks.
On the role of the United Nations, my delegation
welcomes the support provided by the United Nations
to Member States in the implementation of their
respective obligations. It commends in particular
the outstanding work done by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and its Executive Directorate, which led
to the adoption on 27 December 2018 of an addendum
(S/2018/1177, annex) to the Madrid Guiding Principles
of 2015 aimed at helping Member States deal with the
return and relocation of foreign terrorist fighters and
their accompanying family members.
My delegation also welcomes the launch of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact on 6 December 2018, which
is aimed at strengthening joint United Nations action
against terrorism. Côte d’Ivoire welcomes also the
support provided to Member States in the devising
of comprehensive prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration strategies in the fight against violent
extremism, as well as the assistance provided to
improve security and safety in prisons.
In conclusion, my delegation reaffirms the need
for all States to resolutely commit to the fight against
terrorism until it is eliminated. For its part, Côte
d’Ivoire will continue to support actions initiated
within the framework of multilateralism with a view to
giving a robust global response to the terrorist threat. In
that context, we welcome the forthcoming regional and
thematic events planned as part of the follow-up actions
to the High-level Conference of Heads of CounterTerrorism Agencies, held in New York on 28 June 2018.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): At the outset, we would like to thank and
congratulate the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2019/103), which highlights the latest trends in
the international terrorist threat posed by Da’esh. We
also thank Ms. Coninsx and Mr. Voronkov for their
excellent briefings. We are pleased to note that the
Security Council has the necessary tools, through the
18/22

11/02/2019

Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and the Monitoring Team, to conduct an independent
and in-depth analysis of the threat posed by Da’esh.
We commend its fruitful cooperation with the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and encourage it
to continue on that path.
We note that, although Da’esh as a territorial
entity has been virtually defeated, its negative impact
on international security remains substantial and it
continues to attract some individuals, including from
within Europe. The international community remains
deeply concerned about managing the return of
foreign terrorist fighters and their families from Syria.
Diplomatic, legal and logistical difficulties persist
in ensuring the prosecution and security of foreign
terrorist fighters held in temporary camps and those
still at large.
Belgium has opted for a holistic approach to
fighting radicalization in our country. We believe that
the same approach, focusing not only on punishment
but also on prevention and reintegration into society,
should also apply to foreign terrorist fighters and their
families returning to Belgium. Our policy takes into
account the risk to public safety but, at the same time,
the Belgian Government recognizes its international
obligations in the area of humanitarian law and respect
for human rights, including the rights of the child.
Belgium therefore gives priority to the return of terrorist
fighters that are children under 10 years who are still
in the conflict zone, and takes measures to ensure their
rehabilitation and recovery. Once minors are returned to
Belgium, they will be provided with tailored assistance
that takes into account their individual situations.
To address the global threat posed by Da’esh, and
in particular by foreign terrorist fighters, we have the
right tools at our disposal. The recently adopted 2018
addendum to the 2015 Madrid Guiding Principles,
which guides us in implementing resolution 2396
(2017), is very useful. It proposes a balanced approach
to counter-terrorism measures, while emphasizing
the importance of prevention. Let us now make its
implementation one of our main priorities.
We are very much in favour of the new draft
resolution on terrorist financing announced by France,
to which we will lend our full support. As part of its
holistic approach, promoting justice and the fight
against impunity are priorities for Belgium. The fight
against impunity is not only essential in and of itself,
19-03515

11/02/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

but also as a tool for prevention and stabilization. That is
why Belgium supports the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Those Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 and its
Investigation Team in gathering evidence of crimes
committed by Da’esh in Iraq.
However, there are still problems related to
the terrorist threat that are not being sufficiently
addressed. We take note of the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2019/103), which shows that, despite the
comprehensive documentation of acts of sexual violence
committed by Da’esh members, no prosecution of those
crimes has taken place yet. Those acts are a source of
serious concern for Belgium; they should be addressed
by establishing appropriate preventive structures,
fighting impunity and strengthening other deterrent
mechanisms, such as sanctions.
Lastly, as the report points out, the risk does
not disappear after terrorists and foreign terrorist
fighters are prosecuted and convicted. States face the
challenge of ensuring the deradicalization of prisoners
and preventing them from radicalizing their fellow
prisoners. We welcome the capacity-building efforts
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in
collaboration with the Executive Directorate, but we
also recognize that much remains to be done to fight
that phenomenon at the global level.
Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): We would like to thank you, Mr. President,
and your delegation for convening this morning’s
meeting on the strategic report (S/2019/103) of the
Secretary-General on the threat to international peace
and security posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) (Da’esh). We are also especially grateful
to Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General
of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism,
and Ms. Michèle Coninsx, Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
for their contributions on the current state of affairs.
We continue to commend their critical work.
As we have heard, ISIL continues to pose a serious
threat to international security and peace. That should
keep alive the Security Council’s concern and sense
of urgency, despite acknowledgements of the concrete
progress made in combating and eradicating that threat,
with the support and effort of all actors involved,

S/PV. 8460

including States, the international community and
civil society. The ongoing transformation of ISIL into
a covert global network, the activities of its regional
affiliates around the world, the challenge posed by the
return and relocation of foreign terrorist fighters, the
new reality that we face, the result of those terrorist
groups’ ability to adapt and the evolution of policies
and actions to fight them, call for greater collaboration
among States to strengthen joint global efforts, which
means making adjustments and undertaking new
initiatives and actions.
It is precisely ISIL’s ability to adapt and take
advantage of spaces, with or without weak, fragmented
Governments or marginalized communities, that makes
us reflect on the growing importance of addressing the
causes that give rise or fuel radicalization and violent
extremism, particularly among youth and, to an equal
extent, women. Statistics indicating that about 10 per
cent of the 40,000 people who travelled to join ISIL are
minors and that about 20 per cent of foreign fighters are
women and girls point to the need to focus on prevention
as a key element in the fight against terrorism. The
stories that recently emerged in interviews about
women under ISIL’s control being accompanied by
children and fleeing from the clutches of that terrorist
group show the level of persuasion and coercion to
which those women are exposed to join ISIL’s ranks,
which erases all human impulse of concern for the
protection and well-being of their own children.
We must recognize the challenge faced by countries
of origin, and cooperate accordingly, by the return of ISIL
foreign terrorist fighters and in developing strategies
for prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration, in
particular with regard to fighters’ family members.
Following their radicalization and traumatic violent
experiences, women and children can unfortunately
pose a future threat. In that regard, we underscore the
important work carried out by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and its Executive Directorate and the
Committee’s December 2018 adoption of the addendum
to the Madrid Guiding Principles to facilitate the work
of Member States in addressing the challenges posed
by the return and relocation of foreign terrorist fighters
and their family members, while remaining sensitive to
issues concerning gender, age and human rights.
Another issue mentioned in the report that we
would like to stress is the need to continue to deepen
international cooperation among States with regard
to both judicial processes and efforts to impede the

19-0351519/22

S/PV.8460

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

financing of terrorism. We deem close cooperation
among the relevant authorities in the collection,
management, preservation and exchange of information,
including digital information, as crucial. To that end, it
is necessary to shore up trust and cooperation among
agencies in the area of information-sharing, while
recognizing that the threat posed by ISIL and other
terrorist groups is serious, imminent and shared by
all. In order facilitate such international cooperation,
it is necessary to implement agreements and protocols
within the framework of national legislation and
relevant international law, including international
human rights law and international humanitarian
law, that would make it operational. Likewise, it is
important to complement such initiatives with training,
procedural manuals, forms and platforms, among other
concrete steps mentioned in the report. Concerning new
methods and modalities used to finance terrorist group,
including some as sophisticated as cryptocurrency
exchange platforms and those that are more common
in today’s economy, such as digital wallets and mobile
payment services, international cooperation continues
to be key to effectively combat terrorism.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Like others, I would like
to thank you, Sir, for convening this very important
meeting. I also wish to thank Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov and Assistant Secretary-General Coninsx
for their informative briefings. Let me also express
my gratitude to the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team, the Office of Counter
Terrorism and the other relevant United Nations entities
for the comprehensive report (S/2019/103) before us.
We note certain salient points in the report,
including that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS) has transformed into a covert network and
currently carries out fewer attacks. However, despite
the enhanced efforts of the international community,
the recent heinous and cowardly attack that took place
at the Jolo Cathedral in Sulu province in the Philippines
demonstrates once again that ISIS remains a serious
threat. Indonesia once again condemns terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations, no matter its origins or
motivations. No justification is good enough, and we
once again express our objection to any attempt to link
that menace to any specific religion, nationality, people
or civilization. With that in mind, this statement will
focus on three issues.
20/22

11/02/2019

First, as it relates to the threat of terror in South-East
Asia, with the defeat of ISIS in Syria we have observed
the shift to our region of, inter alia, its propaganda,
radicalization and recruitment. We also continue to be
concerned about the threat of returning, relocating or
released foreign terrorist fighters to various regions
and countries. One of the most alarming trends is the
recruitment and radicalization of women and children,
especially those who are well educated and come
from middle-class backgrounds. Another key concern
for us is the growing number of frustrated travellers
who were not able to enter the battlefield in Syria or
elsewhere. They are not only being redirected by ISIS,
as mentioned in the report, but some, of them have on
their own initiative, plotted attacks and become suicide
bombers as a means of demonstrating their existence
to ISIS leaders. It is also our assessment that terrorist
planning and logistics are shifting towards high-tech
and cyber activities, including online transactions and
fraud, social-media fundraising, crowd-funding and
donations, while not delving into the issues of easily
accessible digital wallets and other applications that
facilitate financing.
Secondly, it is important to develop adaptive
capabilities to confront increasingly dynamic and
complex challenges. Given the nature of the challenge,
we need to be not only decisive in our policies but also
innovative and practical in our approach. The pace of our
cooperation must match a wily opponent who is quick
to evolve. We should also be flexible in our strategies
and adaptive in our actions. But let us also not forget the
importance of a holistic and comprehensive approach
at every stage. We cannot undertake deradicalization
efforts that only lead back to prison, for instance. We
believe that in relevant cases those efforts must include
the post-detention phase and full integration into
society. We must avoid re-radicalization and future
re-involvement. Therefore, we urge the relevant United
Nations entities to continue to support Member States
in their efforts to develop comprehensive prosecution,
rehabilitation and reintegration strategies.
My last point concerns international cooperation.
Indonesia would like to underscore once again the
importance of international cooperation to address the
threat posed by terrorist activities. While continuing
with hard measures, including in the areas of the
exchange of intelligence and information, countering
terrorism financing, and border security, we should
invest further in soft measures to steer people away
19-03515

11/02/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

from extremism. We need to change our mindset,
not thinking only of financing terrorists but also of
how to use financial tools to curb terrorist activities.
Changing mindsets is an important point. We need to
promote dialogue and tolerance and give a voice to
moderation as the best way to confront hatred, prevent
incitement and eliminate conditions conducive to
the spread of terrorism. I would also like to take this
opportunity to formally welcome the addendum to the
Madrid Guiding Principles, which was adopted by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee in December 2018, and
the valuable guidance it provides to Member States in
addressing the challenge of returning and relocating
foreign terrorist fighters. It is of the utmost importance
that we utilize all the existing tools in our arsenal,
including making full use of our sanctions regime
to deny funding to individuals and any entities that
continue to support ISIS.
For many years, Indonesia has held that the root
causes of terrorism must be addressed, including
prolonged, unresolved conflicts, poverty and injustice.
We do not justify terrorism, but ignoring those issues
do not make them any less relevant, let alone eliminate
them. The Security Council, as mandated by the Charter
of the United Nations, should devote its attention to
addressing those unresolved conflicts.
Let me conclude by sounding a note of caution
concerning our approach. It is critical to ensure that
all measures against terrorism be taken in compliance
with international law, human rights law and the
Charter of the United Nations. In the view of Indonesia,
measures or approaches that undermine the principles
of international law and human rights, for any reason,
would not only be counterproductive but also erode
the political legitimacy necessary to sustain the global
efforts to fight terrorism. ISIS remains a scourge for
humankind. Although its members’ impact has been
hindered in conflict areas, the group continue to
have the ability to move its theatres to other parts of
the world. One bomber is enough to cause chaos and
suffering, and requires a meagre level of financing. We
need to be vigilant and resolute in our joint actions.
Only then will we succeed.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Equatorial Guinea.
Our delegation thanks the Secretary-General for
his eighth report (S/2019/103) on the threat posed by

S/PV. 8460

ISIL (Da’esh) to international peace and security and
on the range of United Nations efforts in support of
Member States in countering the threat. I also thank
Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov, Head
of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism,
and Ms. Michèle Coninsx, Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
for their informative briefings.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea categorically
condemns terrorism. We firmly believe that terrorist
acts are unjustifiable and constitute one of the most
serious threats to global peace and security. We also
believe that they remain one of the most serious
contemporary issues, at the national, regional and
global levels. No country has been spared the threat or
can face it alone.
As Mr. Voronkov and Ms. Coninsx pointed out
in their briefings, although there were fewer Da’esh
attacks in 2018, that organization remains the most
dangerous terrorist group and the one that receives the
most funding. It has a leadership structure that in based
in the Middle East and a covert global network that
includes local cells and foreign terrorist fighters and
their families in Africa, Asia and Europe. Equatorial
Guinea remains deeply concerned about issues
relating to foreign terrorist fighters and their families,
accountability and international criminal justice
cooperation systems and the strengthening of the joint
United Nations response to terrorism.
In that regard, we acknowledge and highlight the
sharing and implementation of responses adapted to
changing threats, such as the addendum to the Madrid
Guiding Principles, adopted in December last year
by the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism. As we did
during the negotiations, we encourage States to invest
in training and technical assistance so that countries in
need, especially developing countries, can implement
the 17 guiding principles, in particular those related to
border control and data-collection and maintenance.
We also welcome the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Coordination Compact, the reform of its
architecture and the work of the first United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/ISIL. Equatorial Guinea
believes that it is necessary to recognize and assist the
victims of terrorism and prosecute and convict all those
responsible for sexual-based violence, kidnapping and
trafficking so as to prevent impunity.

19-0351521/22

S/PV.8460

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

As stated by the Security Council in many of its
resolutions, and last week at the Arria Formula meeting
organized by France, the fight against the financing of
terrorism is one of the most strategic tools for putting
an end to terrorist acts. Since Da’esh is the terrorist
group that receives the most funding, it is extremely
important to strengthen cooperation among States and
other actors, such as the private sector and civil society,
in the fight against terrorism financing. In that regard,
Equatorial Guinea reiterates its full commitment to
continuing the fight against terrorism in all its aspects,
including funding. The growing nexus between Da’esh
and transnational organized crime has the potential not
only to increase its capacity to generate terrorism but
also to increase its global impact. We believe the nexus
must be further studied in order to eliminate it.
Da’esh is present in Africa mainly in the north, the
Sahel, West Africa and East Africa, where the presence
of foreign terrorist fighters and collaboration with other
terrorist groups and organized crime have also been
reported. We believe that it is necessary to identify and
neutralize the growing terrorist cells in the region and
the presence of lone-wolf actors, who pose a significant
threat to international peace and security and, at the
same time, are increasingly diverse and difficult to
predict. To that end, it is also essential that efforts to
prevent terrorist attacks and avoid radicalization and
violent extremism be accompanied by investment in
sustainable development, as such investment helps to
empower countries over the long term and prepare them
for combating cyberterrorism.
There is no doubt that many States face serious
difficulties in dealing with terrorist threats, owing

22/22

11/02/2019

to a lack of resources and capacity. We reiterate the
need to ensure technical assistance for the effective
implementation of Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions on the issue.
We also encourage the United Nations and the
international community to support the efforts of States
in order to prevent them from becoming safe havens for
foreign terrorist fighters and criminal groups. A better
collective response in Africa requires the strengthening
of the necessary international, regional and subregional
cooperation for effectively exchanging information and
best practices. Equatorial Guinea has ratified several
international counter-terrorism conventions and
complies with the regulations of the Central African
Economic and Monetary Community and the Economic
Community of Central African States in that area. We
pledge to continue to do so.
In conclusion, we congratulate and encourage
the excellent efforts of the United Nations CounterTerrorism Office, the 1373 Counter-Terrorism
Committee and its Executive Directorate, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities, and its Sanctions
Monitoring Team. We encourage the United Nations to
work with, and in support of, countries for a world free
of Da’esh and terrorism.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

19-03515
