28

General AHembly-Twenty-second Session

tained in annexes A.II.4, A.II.5, A.III.3 and A.IIl.8 of
the Final Act, 21
Bearing in mind the need for a concentration of
efforts and for close collaboration between the international organizations concerned,
Having considered paragraphs 205 to 211 of the
report of the Trade and Development Board of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development22 and the report of the Secretary-General on a
proposed UNCTAD/GATT International Trade Centre,28 as well as the views expressed in the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination and in the Economic and Social Council,
Noting that the United Nations rules governing technical co-operation projects will apply in toto to those
activities of the Centre which are to be financed from
technical co-operation funds, 24
1. Approves the accord between the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade on the establishment of the International Trade Centre, effective from
1 January 1968, to be operated jointly by the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade on a continuing basis and in equal partnership;
2. Authorizes the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to come
to an agreement with the Director-General of the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade on the detailed
administrative arrangements for 1968;
3. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to report to the General Assembly at its twenty-third session, through the Trade and Development Board, on
the functioning of the International Trade Centre.
1626th plenary meeting,
12 December 1967.
2298 (XXII), Programme of technical aSBistance
in industrial development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2152 (XXI) of 17 November
1966, by which it decided that the United Nations. Industrial Development Organization would function as
an autonomous organization within the United Nations,
Recalling further resolution 2 (I) adopted by the
Industrial Development Board on 4 May 19672 G at its
first session,
1. Decides to endorse the recommendation of the
Industrial Development Board calling for the establishment of a separate section in part V of the budget of the
United Nations to provide for the programme of technical assistance in industrial development at an appropriate level commensurate with the expanding requirements of the developing countries ;
:n See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade altd Development, vol. I, Final Act and Report (United
Nations publication, Sales No.: 64.II.B.11), pp. 31, 36 and 41.
22 Official Records of lhe General Assembly, Twenty-second
Session, Suppll!fflent No. 14 (A/6714).
28 Ibid., Twenty-second Session, Annexes, agenda item 38,
document A/6879.
2, Ibid., para. 22.
211 Jbid., Twmt1-second Sesrion, Supplemtnl No. 15 (A/6715/
Rev.I), annex VIII.

2. Decides further that the provisions of paragraph
4 of its resolution 2029 (XX) of 22 November 1965
shall not apply to the programme of technical assistance
in industrial development provided for in paragraph
1 above;
3. Requests the Industrial Development Boa1'd to
consider and approve the projects and programmes in
the field of industrial development undertaken through
the utilization of the resources thus appropriated and
to provide general policy guidance and direction with
reference to the utilization of these resources.
1626th plenary meeting,

12 December 1967.
2299 (XXII). Report of the Industrial Development Board

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2152 (XXI) of 17 November
1966 establishing the United Nations Industrial Development Organization in order to promote industrial
development in accordance with Article 1, paragraph 3,
and Articles 55 and 56 of the Charter of the United
Nations and, by encouraging the mobilization of national and international resources, to assist in, promote
and accelerate the industrialization of the developing
countries,
Having considered the report of the Industrial Development Board on its first session, 28
Taking note of Industrial Development Board resolution 1 (I) of 4 May 1967, 27 by which the Board
decided that the United Nations Industrial Development Organization would carry out its functions essentially on the basis of meeting the urgent needs of
the developing countries in accelerating their industrial
development through promotional and operational activities supported by relevant research,
Recognizing the importance to all States Members
of the United Nations and members of the specialized
agencies, irrespective of their social and political systems
and their levels of development, of mutually beneficial
co-operation in all fields of economy, and particularly
in the field of industry,
Conscious of the fact that the acceleration of industrial development in the developing countries depends largely on the broadest international co-operation,
Convinced of the need for concerted efforts in order
to intensify international industrial co-operation in the
furtherance of the purpose and functions of the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization,
Recognizing that the dissemination and effective application of new technology, especially ·that suited to
the particular physical, social and economic conditions
of developing countri~s, can better be achieved through
broad international industrial co-operation,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Industrial Development Board on its first session;
2. Endorses Industrial Development Board resolution 1 (I) on the future programme of work and activities of the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization ;
3. Invites the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, in close co-operation with the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
26/bid., Supplement No. 15 (A/6715/Rev.1).
27 Ibid.,

annex VIII.

Resolution• adopted on the reports of the Seeond Committee

the regional economic commissions, the Economic and
Social Office in Beirut, the appropriate specialized
agencies and the Interna•tional Atomic Energy Agency,
to study the possibility of intensifying international industrial co-operation in furtherance of the purpose and
functions of the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization, taking into account the existing experiences and forms of such co-operation ;
4. Requests the Executive Director of the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization to report
on the implementation of the present resolution to the
Industrial Development Board at its third session.
1626th plenary meeting,
12 December 1967.

2300 (XXII). Multilateral food aid
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2096 (XX) of 20 December
1965 and 2155 (XXI) of 22 November 1966 on the
programme of studies on multilateral food aid, and
also the recommendation contained in annex A.11.6 of
the Final Act adopted by the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development at its first session, 28
Noting with appreciation the progress report of the
Secretary-General, 29
Taking note of the Food Aid Convention, which
forms part of the International Grains Arrangement
1967 and embodies, inter alia, the principle that food
aid benefits food-exporting developing countries as
well as food-deficit developing countries,
Stre;sing the need for ensuring the effective coordination of all food aid programmes while duly safeguarding the trade interests of the food-exporting and
food-importing countries, especially the developing
countries, and domestic agriculture in recipient countries,
1. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the Director-General of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, in consultation
with the executive heads of other interested international agencies and programmes, and bearing in mind
the need to safeguard duly the trade interests of the
food-exporting and food-importing countries, especially
the developing countries, and domestic agriculture in
recipient countries :
(a) To continue the programme of studies on multilateral food aid called for in General Assembly resolution 2096 ( XX) , in the light of the views concerning
the world food problem expressed at the fourteenth
session of the Conference of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, at the twentysecond session of the General Assembly and at the
second session of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development;
( b) To give particular attention, in the next phase
of the study, to the problems of the co-ordinatioa of all
food aid programmes and to review and assess the
adequacy of existing multilateral institutional arrangements for handling, in case of need, a substantially increased volume of food aid, including the possibility of
modifying such arrangements;
28 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, vol. I, Final Act and Report (United
Nations publication, Sales No.: 64.II.B.11), p. 32.
21 Official Records of the Economi, aNd s,,cial COffflcil, Forty-

third Stssion, Annezts, agenda items 2 and 13, documents
E/4352 and Add.I.

19

2. Invites the Governments concerned to make use
of multilateral facilities in implementing the Food Aid
Convention ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to include information on the implementation of the present resolution in the final report to ·be submitted by him in
pursuance of resolution 2096 (XX).
1626th plenary M1etmg,
12 DeceMb1r 1967.

2301 (XXll). Food produetlon
The General Assembly,
Stressing the need to combat effectively the world
food shortage through the intensification of food production in the developing countries by means of multilateral and national action with a view to solving their
immediate and long-term food problems,
Noting the recent progress achieved in the production of a:bundant rice yields through the ·scientific application of the latest technology in increasing rice production, including the advances made in this regaTd
during the International Rice Year,
Realizing that through the application of the latest
technology the production of rice as the staple food
cereal of many of the developing countries could be
increased to a large extent to meet their basic food
needs and to alleviate the world food crisis in the
future,
l. Invites Member States, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, other United
Nations bodies, and the governmental and non-governmental agencies concerned with agricultural production
and food aid to intensify their efforts to increase production of the staple food cereals, particularly rice,
through the aforementioned application of· the latest
technology, taking into account the trade interests of
the food-exporting and food-importing countries, especially the developing countries ;
2. Invites the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations to submit a report to the Economic and Social Council on the progress made in
this field.
1626th plenary num,sg,
12 December 1967.

2305 (XXll). United Nadou Development
Decade
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2218 (XXI) of 19 December 1966 on the United Nations Development Decade,
Recalling also its resolqtion 2087 (XX) of 20 December 1965 on the financing of economic development,
Recalling further its resolution 2158 (XXI) of
25 November 1966 on permanent sovereignty over
natural resources, .
Endorsing Economic and Social Council resolution
1260 (XLIII) of 3 August 1967, in which the Council noted with satisfaction that the Committee for
Development Planning had given preliminary thought
to the preparation· of guidelines and proposals for the
next decade,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1261 (XLIII) of 3 August 1967 on a review of
past experience and of possibilities for future action in
the field of economic development, .
