S/2016/592

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 July 2016
Original: English

Fourth report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 7 of resolution 2233 (2015)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2233
(2015), in which I was requested to report every three months on progress made
toward fulfilling the mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI). The report covers key developments related to Iraq and provides an
update on the activities of the United Nations in Iraq since the issuance of my report
dated 27 April 2016 (S/2016/396).

II. Summary of key political developments pertaining to Iraq
A.

Political situation
2.
Negotiations to overcome the political deadlock and split in the Council of
Representatives persisted during the reporting period. At the same time, the Iraqi
people continued their calls for tangible progress on Government reforms and the
implementation of anti-corruption measures. Supporters of Muqtada al-Sadr, staged
large protests in coordination with pro-reform and anti-corruption civil society
protesters, mainly on Fridays. The dissenting members of Parliament coalesced into
a new entity, named the Reform Front, which saw increased steps towards the
consolidation of the group as a new political force. Reform Front members filed an
appeal with the Federal Supreme Court, challenging the legality of the
parliamentary session on 26 April.
3.
On 20 May, thousands of protesters, including many supporters of al -Sadr,
moved from Baghdad’s Tahrir Square towards the Green Zone and forced their way
into the Council of Ministers’ secretariat building and the Office of the Prime
Minister. Iraqi security forces used crowd control measures, including rubber
bullets, tear gas and water cannons inside and outside the Green Zone. Live
ammunition was reportedly fired into the air in an effort to disperse the crowds.
UNAMI received reports of the death of four protesters and of many other
casualties, including some members of the security forces.
4.
The incident on 20 May was the second major breach of the Green Zone ’s
security since 30 April, after heightened security measures had been put in place.
Muqtada al-Sadr strongly criticized the Government for using force against

16-10863 (E)

080716

*1610863*

S/2016/592

protesters. The same day, the Prime Minister, Haider al-Abadi, stated in a televised
address that the breach of the Green Zone, like recent suicide attacks in the Baghdad
area, was the work of “Baathist infiltrators” and “criminals” belonging to Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), to undermine the Iraqi security forces. The
statement was strongly rejected by the protesters and by al-Sadr.
5.
On 21 May, in Baghdad, protesters supporting Muqtada al -Sadr and a protest
group called the Civil Trend side formed a joint higher coordination committee to
organize their activities. Al-Sadr, who had announced that he would be outside the
country as of 30 April for religious seclusion, issued statements calling for the
continuation of peaceful protests and for government reforms.
6.
During the second week of June, several attacks occurred on the offices of
major established Shi’a political parties in southern governorates and Baghdad,
which were allegedly carried out by splinter elements of the protesters (many
calling themselves “revolutionist youth”). Those elements forced the temporary
closure of Daʻwah, Badr, Islamic Supreme Council of Iraq and Fadila party offices,
claiming that those parties were impediments to reforms. After coming under
mounting criticism, on 10 June, al-Sadr called on his supporters to cease
demonstrations during Ramadan, refrain from using viole nce and prepare for a
“peaceful, popular million-man demonstration” at the end of Ramadan.
7.
On 10 May, the Council of Representatives announced the resumption of its
work at the committee level. The plenary, however, was deferred owing to the
continued split within the Council and, in turn, the lack of a quorum. After over a
month of extensive mediation efforts to bring back those sections of the Members of
Parliament who had boycotted or suspended their participation for various reasons,
the plenary of the Council reconvened on 29 May to express support for the
Government’s recent launch of an operation to retake Fallujah. Notably, the session
included members of the Council of Representatives from the Kurdistan Region of
Iraq.
8.
In his address to the session, the Prime Minister stated that the differences
between political blocs over the parliamentary impasse were minimal, that the
Council of Representatives had an important oversight role to play and that
nominations would be accepted for the leadership positions of independent
commissions, ministerial undersecretaries and military leadership, as a next step.
Subsequent efforts to hold a session of the Council with a full agenda failed and on
31 May, the Speaker of Parliament, Salim al-Juburi, announced that the legislative
break for the Council would commence on 1 June. Since the swearing in of the new
ministers of trade, oil and transport did not take place, those ministries are currently
headed by acting ministers.
9.
In May, and again in early June, the Federal Supreme Court indicated that it
would rule on the legality of the contested 14 and 26 April sessions of the Council
of Representatives only after its expert panels had examined the matter further. The
appeals filed by the three ministers who were voted out of their posts during the
session of the Council on 26 April remain pending.
10. Political efforts to mediate the disagreements in the Council of
Representatives included those of a six-member group of parliamentary leaders
whose affiliations cross party lines. The group, led by a Member of Parliament from
the State of Law Coalition, Ali al-Allaq, shuttled between various political blocs in

2/16

16-10863

S/2016/592

Baghdad and Irbil. The President, Fuad Masum, also held regular meetings with key
leaders and representatives of the Reform Front. The Speaker of Parliament made
repeated visits to the Kurdistan Region of Iraq to address the concerns of the
Members of Parliament from the Kurdistan Alliance regarding their return to
Baghdad, and the Prime Minister met the Alliance on 28 May. On 29 May, the
majority of the members of Parliament from the Alliance participated in the
parliamentary session. The political stalemate and protests dominated the national
debate, and there was no significant progress on national reconciliation.
11. Iraq’s economic crisis continued to adversely affect its people, notwithstanding
the marginal recovery in global oil prices. On 19 May, the International Monetary
Fund (IMF) announced that it had reached an agreement with the Govern ment of
Iraq on a request for a 36-month standby arrangement. Subject to the approval of the
Executive Board of IMF, it would provide Iraq with access to IMF credit amounting
to approximately $5.4 billion. The funds would be made available subject to
changes being effected to bring the country’s economic and financial policies in line
with the lower level of oil prices and ensure debt sustainability. Iraq is also expected
to receive at least $3 billion from the World Bank over the course of three years,
with the first tranche of $1 billion due to be disbursed in December 2016.
12. In May, the Kurdistan Regional Government officially launched a three -year
reform plan, entitled “Reforming the economy for shared prosperity and protecting
the vulnerable”. The plan, which was drawn up with the assistance of the World
Bank Group, is comprised of several pillars, such as fiscal consolidation, structural
reforms for sustainable private sector-led growth, social sector reforms and
mitigation measures and accountability. The conference to launch the plan, hosted
by the Ministry of Planning of the Kurdistan Regional Government, was attended by
the President of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, Masoud Barzani, and senior
Kurdistan Regional Government officials, as well as representatives of the
international community, including the United Nations.
13. During a meeting on 28 May with members of Parliament from the Kurdish
parties on outstanding issues between Baghdad and Irbil, the Prime Minister
requested that the Kurdistan Regional Government and Kurdish political parties
send their respective delegations to Baghdad to resume negotiations on outstanding
issues. On 7 June, all Kurdish cabinet ministers returned to Baghdad to attend
meetings of the Council of Ministers.
14. On 17 May, the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan and the Gorran Movement signed
a political agreement ending the split between the two organizations. Although the
agreement does not stipulate a merger of the two parties, it provides for them
contesting elections at the national, regional and governorate levels as a single list.
Both parties also affirmed their preference for a parliamentary system of
government in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, with the President of the Region
elected by the Regional Parliament. On 18 May, the Kurdistan Democratic Party
issued a statement noting that the agreement would worsen the political situation in
Kurdistan. It also criticized the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan for entering into the
agreement without prior notification to the Kurdistan Democratic Party, given an
earlier strategic agreement between the two parties. Political dialogue to address the
outstanding differences between the Kurdistan Democratic Party and the Patriotic
Union of Kurdistan continued.

16-10863

3/16

S/2016/592

B.

Security
15. During the reporting period, the Iraqi security forces, the Peshmerga, the
popular mobilization forces and local fighters, with support from the international
counter-ISIL coalition, continued to make progress in retaking areas from ISIL.
Steady momentum in military operations was maintained, most notably in Anbar
governorate, which resulted in the retaking of Hit city, Rutbah city and the recovery
of territory in western Anbar, near the Walid border crossing with the Syrian Arab
Republic and the Turaybil border crossing with Jordan.
16. On 22 May, the Prime Minister announced the launch of a large -scale
operation to retake Fallujah from ISIL, involving all major components of Iraq ’s
security apparatus, including the popular mobilization forces. At the t ime of writing,
the operation had made progress despite heavy resistance from ISIL. In the
boundary area between Irbil and Ninawa governorates, the Peshmerga expanded
control in Makhmur district and heavy fighting is taking place south of Mosul.
17. The security situation has remained volatile across Iraq. While ISIL sustained
consistent losses in resources and territory, the group increasingly resorted to
asymmetric tactics, such as suicide attacks and raids on pro -Government forces’
positions, as well as attacks against soft civilian targets, infrastructure and cultural
heritage sites. On 3 June, ISIL damaged the Nabu Temple in Nimrud (Iraq) which
was founded more than 3,300 years ago.
18. In Baghdad, which was the area most affected by terrorist inciden ts, there were
indications of deployment by ISIL of more substantial resources to execute
operations, with the use of high-yield explosive devices and complex and suicide
attacks. On 11, 17 and 30 May, a series of suicide attacks were carried out in
Baghdad, resulting in a large number of civilian casualties. The attacks on 11 May
in Sadr city, Karak and Kazimiyah areas reportedly killed over 92 civilians and
wounded over 150; the attacks on 17 May in the Shaʻb, Habibiyah and Jamilah areas
of Baghdad reportedly killed 53 civilians and wounded 130, and the attacks on
30 May were carried out in Tarmiyah, Shaʻb and Sadr city and left 24 civilians dead
and 44 wounded. On 15 May, ISIL carried out a complex suicide attack against a
cooking gas factory in northern Baghdad, reportedly causing 35 casualties among
Iraqi security force personnel protecting the facility and substantial damage to
storage tanks. On 7 June, a car bomb attack claimed by ISIL in the Muwazzafin
district of Karbala governorate reportedly killed eight civilians and wounded 18.

C.

Regional and international developments
19. Iraq continued to engage its regional neighbours as well as the broader
international community on security, political and economic issues. In addition,
developments related to the popular demonstrations, the terrorist attacks that
targeted Sadr city and other areas on 11 May and the start of the military operation
to retake Fallujah prompted public expressions of support and solidarity for the
Government and the people of Iraq. Public statements by Qatar, the United States of
America, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, the European Union,
the League of Arab States and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, among
others, highlighted concern about recent developments and called for unity, peaceful
dialogue and other solutions to the various challenges faced by Iraq. In most cases,

4/16

16-10863

S/2016/592

the statements reflected pledges of various forms of support to the Government,
including to the Iraqi security forces.
20. Senior-level visits to Iraq sought to underscore the regional neighbours ’
ongoing support to the Government of Iraq. The Minister for Security of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Mahmoud Alavi, visited Iraq in May. He met senior government,
political, security and religious representatives in Baghdad, Najaf and Irbil, and
reportedly discussed the fight against ISIL. In relation to the Fallujah operation and
other operations, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Iran
made statements expressing Tehran’s readiness to provide additional support. In
response to media attention to the presence of regional military advisers involved in
the Fallujah operation, on 4 June the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Iraq stated that
only the Government of Iraq would decide on the nationality of military advisers
supporting its campaign against ISIL.
21. In June, the Government of Iraq dispatched three senior delegations to enhance
its outreach to neighbouring States, with the aim of providing briefings on th e
Fallujah operation. The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ibrahim al -Jaʻafari, and the
head of the Sunni Endowment, Abdullatif al-Humayim, visited Egypt, Jordan and
Lebanon. The second delegation, headed by the Minister for Planning, Salman al Jumaili, and National Security Adviser, Falah Fayyad, visited Saudi Arabia, Oman
and Bahrain, while a third delegation, headed by the Minister for Defence, Khaled
al-Obeidi, went to the United Arab Emirates, Qatar and Kuwait.
22. Reflecting the progress made by the Iraqi security forces in retaking Anbar
territory from ISIL, Iraqi federal and governorate officials issued statements
welcoming the prospect of reopening the Iraqi-Jordanian border crossing at
Turaybil, as well as the completion of the Amman -Baghdad highway, which would
help facilitate the transfer of people and goods in both directions.
23. On the economic front, on 15 May the heads of the National Iranian Gas
Company and the Central Bank of the Islamic Republic of Iran visited Iraq to finalize
the financial details of an agreement on gas exports. The Islamic Republic of Iran
undertook to re-initiate its exports of natural gas to the Kurdistan region of Iraq,
pending the operationalization of the agreement. On 19 May, Iraq’s Ministry of
Electricity announced that the Government had agreed to issue a sovereign guarantee
to cover Iraq’s dues to the Ministry of Electricity of the Islamic Republic of Iran,
amounting to approximately $700 million. The goal was to facilitate the renewal of
the contract to supply up to 1,300 MW of electricity, interrupted several months
earlier, which was approved by the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
24. On 27 May, the Group of Seven countries held a summit in Ise -Shima, Japan,
during which it committed continued support for the unity of Iraq and the
Government of Iraq’s efforts to accelerate political and economic reforms and
enhance national reconciliation. It also supported Iraq ’s discussions with IMF and
underscored the need for all parts of Iraq, including the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, to
have access to that support. The Group of Seven also pledged over $3.6 billion in
bilateral assistance and other financial support to complement support from the
international financial institutions.
25. Turkish air strikes against Kurdish Workers Party (PKK) targets in the
Kurdistan region of Iraq continued. The strikes targeted districts in Dahuk, Irbil and
Sulaymaniyah governorates. At the time of reporting, Iraq and Turkey had not found

16-10863

5/16

S/2016/592

a mutually acceptable solution to the Turkish military presence in Bashiqa camp in
northern Iraq, in spite of some efforts.

III. Update on the activities of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq and the United Nations country team
A.

Political activities
26. My Special Representative and the Deputy Special Representative for Political
Affairs continued to meet with Government officials, political, security, religious and
community leaders, Members of Parliament, members of the coordination committee
of the protesters and civil society representatives in an effort to help de -escalate and
overcome the ongoing political stalemate. My Special Representative called on the
Prime Minister and other leaders to hold inclusive consultations with all parties,
including in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, in search of political solutions based on
the Constitution, laws and principles of democracy. He further encouraged Iraqi
leaders to resume the work of a unified Council of Representatives and to confirm
without delay a reformed Government that is able and willing to promote reforms,
answering to the people who have been requesting them through peaceful protests
since August 2015.
27. Additionally, my Special Representative, while supporting peaceful
demonstrations held in accordance with the law, condemned the use of violence
during the recent demonstrations. He urged for calm, restraint and respect for Iraq’s
constitutional institutions and law and further urged the protest organizers and the
security forces to safeguard the peaceful nature of the demonstrations. My Special
Representative also held several meetings with the political leaders of the Kurdistan
Region of Iraq in Irbil and Sulaymaniyah, encouraging them to re -engage with the
federal Government to overcome the political impasse and restart the work of the
Parliament and Government. In addition, my Special Representative called for
progress on outstanding issues between Baghdad and Irbil and for a solution to the
ongoing political stalemate in the Kurdistan region.
28. My Special Representative had several meetings with the Marjaʻiya in Najaf.
He met with Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani on 30 May. The Marjaʻiya expressed its
discontent over the political stalemate and ongoing lack of progress on reforms and
improvement in the lives of Iraqis. The Marjaʻiya stated that he had urged the
political forces to unite and find a solution to the political, economic and social
crises, while continuing to fight ISIL. On 4 and 5 June, my Special Representative
visited Amman and met with Government officials, during which he encouraged
them to continue to support Iraq in its fight against ISIL and the national
reconciliation efforts and to work on opening the border crossing at Turaybil.
29. In response to the security situation and terrorist attacks on civilians,
particularly in May, my Special Representative engaged Gove rnment representatives
and security and religious leaders, urging them, together with all segments of Iraqi
society, to reject the terrorist acts of ISIL and its objective to sow discord, disunity
and sectarian strife. Further, my Special Representative so ught to impress on the
Government the need to provide and guarantee law and order and security to all
citizens and to take immediate and more effective measures to prevent acts of terror
and protect the Iraqi people.

6/16

16-10863

S/2016/592

30. The United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq also publicly expressed
concern about the decision by the Iraqi Communications and Media Commission to
order the closure of the offices of Al Jazeera satellite news network in Baghdad and
in doing so emphasized that, at times of crisis, a free media becomes even more
essential to safeguarding the public interest and protecting democracy.

B.

Electoral assistance
31. The United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq continued to support the
Independent High Electoral Commission on preparations for the 2017 Provincial
Council elections, while taking note of calls from some political forces for thorough
electoral reform, and even for early elections, with more direct United Nations
involvement. UNAMI maintained regular consultations with the Board of
Commissioners of the Independent High Electoral Commission regarding orderly
electoral preparations, including on United Nations support and political
developments in Iraq relevant to the work of the Commission. UNAMI helped the
Commission follow up with potential donors on the project proposals previously
submitted for international funding, with several donors expressing interest in
supporting projects relating to gender issues, information technology and work on
ensuring the electoral participation of voters displaced by conflict.
32. UNAMI continued to provide technical advice as the Commission commenced
its analysis of voters’ biometric data and to define mechanisms for cleaning the
voter registry, including the addition of new voters to, an d the removal of deceased
persons from, the list of voters. UNAMI projects that the biometric data of up to
5.6 million voters will be collected by the close of the registration process, on
30 June. The Commission also expanded its ongoing biometric regist ration of
internally displaced voters, with 113 mobile teams deployed in 16 governorates, not
including Anbar and Ninawa. UNAMI is also supporting the Commission on ways
to improve its election results management systems and has encouraged the
Commission to weigh viable options in adopting new procedures and technologies
for speeding up processes to count and transmit election results.
33. Following renewed requests from the Kurdistan Regional Government for
United Nations electoral support, UNAMI encouraged the Independent High Electoral
Commission and the Kurdistan Region’s Independent High Electoral Commission to
secure parliamentary endorsement of their signed joint memorandum of cooperation.
Both the Legal Committee in the Council of Representatives and the Kurdistan
Regional Parliament have now approved the joint memorandum that provides the
necessary legal standing to strengthen cooperation and support, particularly in
organizing regional elections and on potential areas of international e lectoral
technical assistance.

C.

Human rights developments and activities
34. Armed conflicts, acts of violence and terrorism continued to take a grave toll
on the population of Iraq. From 6 May to 14 June 2016, UNAMI recorded a
minimum of 1,953 civilian casualties (607 killed and 1,346 wounded), bringing the
total number of civilian casualties in Iraq since the beginning of the armed conflict
in January 2014 to at least 66,181 (22,339 killed and 43,842 wounded).

16-10863

7/16

S/2016/592

35. The reporting period was characterized by several attacks, most of them
claimed by ISIL. UNAMI is not in a position to independently verify the accuracy
of those claims. For example, on 9 May, a suicide car bomb attack in Baʻqubah city,
Diyala governorate, reportedly killed 14 civilians and wounde d 38. On 11 May, a
car bomb attack in Baghdad reportedly killed 28 persons and wounded 74. On
21 May, an attack by a suicide bomber driving a motorcycle in Dujayl district, Salah
al-Din governorate, reportedly killed 12 persons and wounded 33.
36. UNAMI received numerous reports alleging serious violations of international
human rights and humanitarian law perpetrated against civilians, in particular by
ISIL. Members of diverse ethnic and religious communities, women, children,
people with disabilities and the elderly remain especially vulnerable.
37. UNAMI continued to receive reports of abductions, killings and persecution by
ISIL of those opposed to its ideology or rule. For example, on 12 May, in Mosul, a
group of ISIL supporters shot and killed five men accused of cooperating with the
Iraqi security forces. On 14 May, also in Mosul, ISIL publicly stoned to death 18 men
and one woman for alleged adultery, following a decision by a self -appointed court
of ISIL. Civilians continued to die or were killed by ISIL for trying to flee areas
controlled by the group. For example, on 16 May, five civilians from one family,
including three children, reportedly died from dehydration in the Hamrin Mountains
while attempting to escape ISIL-controlled Hawijah, Kirkuk governorate, towards
Salah al-Din governorate.
38. Further reports have been received that ISIL may have used weaponized
chemical agents in its attacks. On 8 May, ISIL once again launched rockets toward
Bashir village, south of Kirkuk city, resulting in breathing difficulty and nausea, as
well as skin irritation, being suffered by those in the area. On 14 May, ISIL
reportedly carried out an attack against Peshmerga forces in Makhmur district, Irbil
Governorate, after which 14 Peshmerga fighters indicated they had breathing
difficulty, sore eyes and headaches. UNAMI could not verify whether weaponized
chemical agents were used.
39. On 9 June, the Governor of Anbar and the Provincial Council of Anbar formed
a committee to investigate alleged human rights violations against civilians fleeing
the hostilities in Fallujah. The committee examined the events that took place from
2 to 4 June near the Albu Akkash cemetery (Saqlawiyah city, northwest of Fallujah
city) and Mazraʻah (east of Fallujah city). On 12 June, the committee reported that
it had found that 49 people were killed and 634 men were missing after handing
themselves over to the custody of popular mobilization forces. The committee
further found that those detained suffered widespread torture. The committee called
on the President of Iraq, the Prime Minister and the Speaker of Parliament to
investigate further, and for the Prime Minister and the head of the Popular
Mobilization Commission to terminate the work of the popular mobilization forces
in areas where violations have taken place.
40. UNAMI received separate reports stating that men leaving Fallujah were
detained for security screening and were subjected to serious ill -treatment. UNAMI
received reports that on 5 or 6 June, up to 613 men were released from detention
after undergoing security screening over an unspecified period of time in
Saqlawiyah. The men claimed to have been seriously ill-treated. UNAMI received
reports that between four and nine men were killed while in detention. Up to
4,000 men who fled Fallujah have reportedly been detained for security screening.

8/16

16-10863

S/2016/592

41. Reports continued to be received by UNAMI of human rights violations
perpetrated by armed groups reportedly associated with the popular mobilization
forces. On 10 May, an affiliated armed group allegedly stopped three trucks carrying
commercial goods in an area south of Baʻqubah, Diyala governorate. The drivers
were reportedly killed and the vehicles with cargo left behind. On 22 May, armed
men reportedly shot and killed a civilian in Miqdadiyah district, Diyala governorate.
42. Air strikes and shelling continued to cause civilian casualties. However,
UNAMI was unable to verify their numbers and their authors. For example, on
13, 16 and 18 May, shelling reportedly caused civilian casualties in Khalidiyah, Anbar
governorate. Several reports were also received of shelling reportedly killing and
wounding civilians in Fallujah, Anbar governorate during the reporting period. On
19 May, an air strike reportedly hit a residential area in Fallujah, killing eight
civilians (including four women and three children) and wounding nine others.
43. The Government of Iraq continued to impose the death penalty. On 23 May,
the Ministry of Justice announced on its website that 22 individuals had been
executed in the previous month. They had reportedly been convicted of terrorism related crimes and other crimes. The United Nations has repeatedly called on the
Government of Iraq to impose a moratorium on all death sentences and executions,
particularly given the weaknesses of the Iraqi criminal justice system and the risk of
non-compliance with international standards of due process and fair trial.
44. The Task Force on Children and Armed Conflict, co-chaired by UNAMI and
the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), received reports of 47 incidents of
violations against children in the reporting period, affecting 220 children. The
majority of those incidents were reported to have taken place in Baghdad, as well as
in Anbar and Ninawa governorates, in the course of military operations. Only 38 of
those incidents, affecting 75 children, could be verified at the time of writing, as a
result of ongoing military operations.
45. Killing and maiming continued to be one of the most reported violations, with
55 children confirmed killed and 16 maimed. The number of killed and injured
children is believed to be much higher as a result of the bomb attacks in Baghdad.
The Task Force has also received reports of the recruitment of children by ISIL,
notably in Anbar governorate, including cases of child suicide bombers, which
could not be verified due to lack of access and sensitivity of cases. The Task Force
received information about four incidents of attacks on schools and three attacks on
hospitals during the reporting period. In addition, access to basic services, such as
education and health care, continued to be severely hampered by military operations
in conflict-affected areas, notably in Anbar.
46. On 24 May, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) launched an online awareness-building and
mobilization campaign called “We are here”. Its aim is to inspire women activists
from Iraq and the region to share their stories with the world and document their
roles in building their countries. The social media campaign seeks inspirational
stories in the form of tweets, captions, photos and videos of women from across the
region as they participate in building and furthering the political and social fabric of
their nations.

16-10863

9/16

S/2016/592

D.

Camp Hurriya
47. The United Nations continued to monitor the humanitarian situation of the
residents of Camp Hurriya throughout the reporting period. The total departures as
at 14 June 2016 stood at 1,493 and the total number of registere d residents remaining
in the temporary transit location stood at 1,578. Following an international agreement,
funds have been mobilized to relocate the remaining residents. The Department of
Political Affairs, the Office of the United Nations High Commissi oner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and other stakeholders are working closely together to relocate all
individuals outside Iraq within 2016. In the time period of the present report,
approximately 40 residents of the camp departed per week. An increase in weekly
departures is anticipated at the end of June.

E.

Humanitarian assistance, reconstruction and development
48. The humanitarian operation remains one of the largest and most complex in
the world. Humanitarian partners estimate that over 10 million Iraq is currently require
some form of humanitarian assistance, including over 3.3 million internally displaced
persons, 726,000 returnees, 250,000 Syrian refugees and the 3 million people believed
to be living under ISIL control. In the months ahead, as the mi litary campaign
intensifies, humanitarian needs are projected to increase significantly. More than
470,000 people living in areas along the Anbar corridor and 830,000 along the
Mosul corridor are likely to require assistance; more than 1 million people are
expected to be affected by military operations in Mosul city.
49. The United Nations is deeply worried about the safety of the thousands of
women, men, girls and boys who are still trapped in Fallujah. Since the beginning of
the military operations to retake the city, more than 43,000 civilians have managed
to flee the city. Most people have fled to outlying areas. The United Nations does
not know how many civilians are still in the city, but as many as 40,000 to 50,000
could be at extreme risk from artillery and cross-fire and could be suffering from
widespread food shortages, lack of medicine and limited supplies of safe drinking
water. Humanitarian partners have had no access to Fallujah since early 2014, when
the city fell to ISIL. Support for families displaced from the city is being provided at
several locations, where life-saving supplies have been pre-positioned and where the
Government has established camps. Such assistance included ready-to-eat food, safe
drinking water and hygiene kits in Fallujah district, benefiting about 5,500 people.
In Amiriyat al-Fallujah, where most displaced people from Fallujah arrived, United
Nations partners provided 3,000 people with immediate response rations, each of
which feeds a family of 5 for three days.
50. There is grave concern about the close to 30,000 people who are estimated to
be living between the current military front line and the eastern bank of the Tigris
River and the hundreds of thousands of civilians who remain trapped in areas
effectively under siege, who lack access to regular humanitarian assistance. At least
620 people, including 250 children, have been stranded between military front lines
east of Mount Sinjar in Ninawa governorate since November 2015.
51. During the reporting period, humanitarian partners have continued to provide
life-saving assistance, reaching more than 2 million highly vulnerable people each
month. New humanitarian operations have been launched in several hard -to-reach

10/16

16-10863

S/2016/592

areas, including Ramadi, Hit and Mahkmur district. The rapid response mechanism,
managed by UNICEF and the World Food Programme (WFP), in collaboration with
the United Nations Population Fund and a consortium of non-governmental
organization partners, has distributed thousands of ready -to-eat food rations, bottled
water and hygiene kits. The World Health Organization, UNICEF and the Iraqi
Ministry of Health have reached more than 5.5 million children under the age of
five through nationwide polio campaigns.
52. As the mine action subcluster lead, the United Nations Mine Action Service
coordinated activities to raise awareness about improvised explosive devices and
unexploded ordnance, in areas with large concentrations of displaced families and
returnees originating from Anbar. In June, mine action partners la unched risk
awareness campaigns with local media and training of trainer initiatives with
schoolteachers and community focal points within camps for internally displaced
persons.
53. The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) and other education partners have scaled-up temporary learning spaces
to support children outside the formal education system. Hundreds of thousands of
displaced Iraqis and Syrian refugees have received water and sanitation services.
New camps were built by UNHCR and prefabricated shelters built by the United
Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) are supporting internally
displaced persons in Baghdad, Dahuk and Karbala governorates.
54. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United N ations distributed
vegetable seeds and peat moss to thousands of crisis-affected farmers in Anbar and
Salah al-Din governorates, to help communities minimize negative coping
mechanisms. During the reporting period, partners worked alongside WFP to assist
270,000 internally displaced persons with food vouchers and targeted over 800,000
internally displaced persons with in-kind assistance. In addition, close to 50,000 foodinsecure Syrian refugees in the Kurdistan region of Iraq received cash and vouchers.
55. In support of the contingency plan for the Anbar and Mosul corridors and for
Mosul city, the humanitarian pooled fund for Iraq has given priority to partners
operating in hard-to-reach and underserved areas. Operational preparedness planning
for a potential failure of Mosul Dam has also accelerated, in coordination between
UNAMI and the Government of Iraq. A four-member United Nations Disaster
Assessment and Coordination Team was deployed to Iraq and has drafted a range of
protocols on issues related to tax exemptions for the import of humanitarian goods,
visas for humanitarian workers, the rapid registration of non -governmental
organizations and the facilitation of access for foreign medical teams.
56. According to data collected by the International Organization for Migration,
more than 726,000 displaced people have returned to their areas of origin. More
than 40 per cent returned to Salah al-Din governorate, in part because of the
stability corridor from Dawr to Tikrit created with the support of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) Funding Facility for Immediate Stabilization. A
total of 18 per cent of returnees have returned to Ninawa, 18 per cent to Diyala and
16 per cent to Anbar, including an estimated 100,000 returnees to Ramadi.
57. With more areas retaken from ISIL, the demand for stabilization assistance
increased significantly. The Steering Committee for the Funding Facility for
Immediate Stabilization, currently supported by 20 donors, approved support for

16-10863

11/16

S/2016/592

17 Iraqi cities. The Funding Facility concluded activities in Tikrit, Dawr, Mukayshifah
and Rabiah and it is currently operational in Saʻdiyah, Ramadi, Sinuni and Sinjar.
Once security clearances are granted, it will launch activities in Baji, Hit, Haditha,
Rutbah and Garma and, once they have been retaken, will launch similar activities
in Fallujah, Sharqat, Hadar and Qayyarah.
58. In anticipation of operations to retake Mosul, the Funding Facility for
Immediate Stabilization has been prepositioning equipment to help ensure the
timely provision of stabilization assistance once conditions permit. A preliminary
list of high priority projects has been identified for a new expanded stabilization
channel, which will generate a large number of jobs and consolidate corridors
between stabilized cities. The international counter-ISIL coalition held the quarterly
meeting of its stabilization working group in Berlin on 27 May, co-chaired by the
United Arab Emirates and Germany. The objective of the meeting was to discuss
strategic developments and the direction of stabilization efforts in newly-liberated
areas. Representing the United Nations in Iraq, my Deputy Special Representative
and Humanitarian and Resident Coordinator provided an update on the status of the
Funding Facility and the expanded facility, and stressed the critical need to increase
funding for humanitarian operations, stabilization and clearance of unexploded
ordnance. Working Group members reflected on progress in newly -liberated areas
but expressed concern that military gains might be at risk if stabilization does not
keep pace.
59. Stabilization efforts in Ramadi have been affected by severe unexploded
ordnance and improvised explosive devices contamination. Clearance operations
were accelerated in the city with support from the Mine Action Service. The latter ’s
assistance also included an impact assessment to identify improvised explosive
devices threats and training on explosive hazard threat mitigation. During the
reporting period, the security conditions in Sinjar district and Saʻdiya town
improved, allowing the Funding Facility for Immediate Stabilization to commence
stabilization activities.
60. The United Nations country team continued to support the Government ’s
reform agenda. UNDP deployed technical experts to Baghdad in April and May to
assist the Government with its planned reform of customs and strengthening of
anti-corruption institutions. UNESCO assisted the Government with its reform of
the technical and vocational education and training sector. At the time of writing,
over 600,000 young people had enrolled in technical and vocational education and
training institutions.
61. Building on the innovative Vision 2020 Joint Programme Facility Fund, a new
funding facility for reform was developed to support the Kurdistan Regional
Government reform agenda. The funding facility is for the mobilization of
international expertise to help accelerate the implementation of the Kurdistan
Regional Government-World Bank reform plan, which was launched in May (see
para. 12). UN-Habitat has assisted the Kurdistan Regional Government in developing
legislation to regularize informal settlements. It also assisted the Regional
Government in developing new building codes and advised the Regional Government
on simplifying building permit procedures, so as to help ensure new constructions
meet international standards on climate change mitigation and environmental
protection.

12/16

16-10863

S/2016/592

F.

Security and operational issues
62. United Nations personnel in Iraq continued to work in a high-risk security
environment and implement programmes and activities based on programme
criticality. The demands on the United Nations for stabilization and humanitarian
assistance continued to increase as areas were retaken from ISIL control. ISIL has
also increasingly employed asymmetrical warfare by attacking civilian targets
across Iraq, including Baghdad. The United Nations personnel ’s vulnerability and
risk exposure while implementing its programmes remained high.
63. Some of the demonstrations described earlier in the present report took place
in close proximity to UNAMI compounds in Baghdad. The Green Zone was
breached by a large number of protesters, for the second time, on 20 May, with
violent confrontations between the protesters and Iraqi security forc es. The United
Nations security management system continued to cooperate with relevant Iraqi
Government security agencies as part of the ongoing efforts to mitigate the risk
implied by such events for staff safety and security.
64. Over a decade after the Mission deployed, the dialogue between the
Government of Iraq and the United Nations to conclude a status -of-mission
agreement is still ongoing. In February 2016, the Government sent new proposals to
the United Nations to resolve outstanding issues, to which the Organization has
responded. The United Nations looks forward to resolving the issue.
65. Safe and secure accommodation in Baghdad for international United Nations
staff continues to be limited. In addition to the existing 185 accommodation units i n
the D-2 compound, 99 more units are planned for construction in the upcoming
year. Ten units were completed by mid-June 2016, 10 are projected to be completed
by September 2016 and the remaining 79 by the end of June 2017. Another
37 accommodation units are being built in the old Tamimi compound and will be
completed by the end of October, to address the immediate needs of the country
team. Additional accommodation is required as stabilization assistance activities
expand. Due to the deterioration in the security situation, a helicopter was deployed
to Baghdad on 12 May to provide capacity to evacuate staff from the Green Zone to
Baghdad International Airport for onward evacuation, if necessary.

VI. Observations
66. I call on all Iraqi political forces to come together and end the ongoing
political deadlock, which negatively affects the work of the Government and the
Parliament, at a time when multiplying challenges threaten the nation and its people,
who so valiantly fight ISIL. It is essential to resume the work of the unified Council
of Representatives soon after Ramadan, based on inclusive consultations, including
between Baghdad and Irbil. A reformed Government that is able and willing to
proceed with genuine political, economic and social refor ms, as called for by the
Iraqi people, should be established soon. In order to succeed, inclusive
representation on the basis of equal rights and justice for all Iraq ’s diverse
components, including women, youth and minority communities, is essential.
67. The continued efforts of the Prime Minister to pursue much -needed reforms in
Iraq, in full consultation and cooperation with all political forces, civil society and
protesters, are commendable. All elements of Iraq’s political and civil society

16-10863

13/16

S/2016/592

spectrum should feel that their contribution is heard and factored into such
initiatives. It is important that the Government and all political actors be open to
hearing the legitimate demands of the Iraqi people for meaningful and genuine
reforms, protect their right to freedom of expression and peaceful assembly, and
ensure their safety in the exercise of those rights. At the same time, the
demonstrators have the responsibility of abiding by the law and maintaining the
peaceful character of the protests as a means of legitimate democratic expression.
Any destructive or violent behaviour merely undermines the interests of the people
and diverts attention and resources away from the fight against ISIL.
68. I reiterate my call upon political leaders in the Kurdistan R egion of Iraq to
reconcile their differences through dialogue and agree to resolve the political
stalemate and normalize the function of the Kurdistan Regional Parliament
expeditiously, as the Regional Parliament has not convened sessions since October
2015. The regional legislative institution is an embodiment of multiparty democracy
in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq. There is a pressing need for the federal Government
and the Kurdistan Regional Government to constructively reengage in order to reach
an understanding on oil exports and revenue-sharing, on Peshmerga salaries and on
other outstanding issues, and to effectively work together to confront the shared
challenges of today and tomorrow, once all areas have been retaken from ISIL.
69. National and local leaders should foster relations within and across their
communities to find ways to ensure Iraq’s lasting stability. The foundations of such
stability require reconciliation at the political, communal and tribal levels. In the
wake of successes in the joint fight against ISIL, it is time to take serious steps
towards national reconciliation and historic compromise. The United Nations stands
ready to assist.
70. I condemn in the strongest possible terms the heinous terrorist attacks on
civilians and on public places and the destruction of cultural heritage sites
committed by ISIL. Such acts of terrorist violence are contrary to all principles of
decency and humanity. These barbaric attacks are cowardly attempts to stoke
retaliatory acts, and I call on all Iraqis to resist such manipulation and avoid falling
into the trap of ISIL terrorists. The continued killings, kidnappings, rape and torture
of Iraqis, notably of minorities, by ISIL cannot be allowed to continue. These acts
may constitute crimes against humanity, war crimes and even genocide.
71. Guaranteeing law and order and security to all citizens must be a top priority
of State institutions and must remain their prerogative. This is notably a concern in
areas with mixed ethnic and religious communities and other areas retaken from
ISIL, as is the security and well-being of the population in those areas. That
population includes the many internally displaced persons, who are eager to return
to their places of origin voluntarily, in safety and dignity, but who have not been
able or allowed to do so. The relevant authorities must do their utmost to ensure and
guarantee conditions for such returns and to bring the perpetrators of acts that stand
in the way of such returns, including killing, hostage -taking, extortion and other
criminal acts. to justice. I congratulate the Iraqi security forces, the Peshmerga, the
popular mobilization forces and local volunteers on their continuous military
momentum and victories against ISIL, most notably in Anbar and Nina wa
governorates. That momentum demonstrates that terrorism can be defeated through
coordination and collaboration in the pursuit of shared goals.

14/16

16-10863

S/2016/592

72. The military operation, along with the participation of local volunteers and
tribes to retake Fallujah, could unite the people in the hope that the flames of
sectarianism are put out. The realization of that goal would require that the people and
Iraqi political forces work together towards achieving a much -needed national
reconciliation. Only then will the ground be sown for a truly sustainable, unified Iraq.
73. All parties involved in military operations are strongly urged to make every
possible effort to protect the lives of civilians and preserve infrastructure in
accordance with the relevant principles of international human rights and
humanitarian law. I call on all parties to ensure that civilians, including those in
Fallujah, are permitted to leave areas where fighting is taking place, in dignity and
safety. In that regard, the recent directives of the Prime Minister, the Ministry of
Defence and the Popular Mobilization Commission, and in particular the statement
of the spiritual leader Ali al-Sistani, which all emphasize the need to ensure the
protection of civilians and property from the effects of armed conflict and violence,
are commendable.
74. The Government should thoroughly investigate reports of alleged human rights
violations against civilians in Fallujah and hold those found to be responsible to
account. The people of Fallujah have already suffered immensely under ISIL; they
should not be subjected to further suffering and intimidation. The noble cause of
ridding Fallujah of ISIL terrorists should not be tarnished by violations of human
rights and people’s dignity, including on sectarian or criminal grounds. It is therefore
important that the Government has command and control of all fighters and
weapons. It is also the responsibility of national, regional and international media to
ensure that a balanced and true picture of the complex situation in Iraq be presented
and to prevent reporting from being instrumentalized to foment sectarian tension.
75. The international community must also ensure the accountability of members
of ISIL for the crimes they have perpetrated against the Iraqi people. I continue to
have grave fears for the safety of women and children, mostly from the Yazidi
community (as reflected in previous reports), who are being held in captivity by
ISIL, and all civilians who remain subject to ISIL control. Ongoing allegations of
the use of weaponized chemicals by ISIL in attacks on ci vilians and security force
personnel also remain a source of great concern.
76. The humanitarian aid effort continues to be hampered by limited funding. The
United Nations highly prioritized appeal for 2016 has received only 30 per cent of
the $861 million needed to assist 7.3 million people. Already more than 30 health
programmes have had to be closed, owing to lack of funding. Humanitarian partners
estimate that $300 million is needed by July in order to continue first -line emergency
response. An additional $65 million is needed for the Fallujah operation and at least
$250 million is required to prepare for the humanitarian operation in Mosul.
77. Additional focus and funding is required for civilian activities that are critical to
secure the gains of the military campaign against ISIL. As the campaign progresses,
it creates additional humanitarian need. Areas retaken from ISIL will frequently
require a stabilization response following an operation and in that regard, the Funding
Facility for Immediate Stabilization has been authorized for use in 17 different areas
across four governorates. Furthermore, both humanitarian and stabilization activities
increasingly require initiatives to address remnant improvised explosive devices and
other explosive remnants of war where they are present, which is increasingly the
case. The United Nations in Iraq is facing funding constraints on all of these fronts.

16-10863

15/16

S/2016/592

If resources are not marshalled for all the above -mentioned efforts, the gains of the
military campaign could be imperilled by a lack of capacity to address the needs of
civilians, created by and in the aftermath of the campaign. Finally, while
acknowledging the importance of these urgent and immediate matters, the United
Nations in Iraq continues to work in parallel with partners to focus on longer-term
challenges.
78. I wish to extend my appreciation to my Special Representative, Ján Kubiš, and
to the staff of the United Nations in Iraq for their tireless efforts to assist the
Government and people of Iraq. I trust that international partners, including Iraq’s
neighbours in the region, will continue to support my Special Representative in the
implementation of his mandate.

16/16

16-10863
