United Nations

S/PV.6390

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6390th meeting
Monday, 27 September 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Davutoğlu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Turkey)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Spindelegger
Mr. Barbalić
Mr. Amorim
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Toungui
Mr. Nishida
Mr. Salam
Mr. Heller
Mr. Ajumogobia
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Kutesa
Mr. Hague
Ms. Rodham Clinton

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Letter dated 1 September 2010 from the Permanent Representative of Turkey
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2010/462)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-55136 (E)

*1055136*

S/PV.6390

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts
Letter dated 1 September 2010 from the
Permanent Representative of Turkey to
the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2010/462)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General, ministers and other representatives
present in the Security Council Chamber. Their
presence is an affirmation of the importance of the
subject matter to be addressed.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. I wish to draw
Council members’ attention to document S/2010/462,
containing a letter from the Permanent Representative
of Turkey addressed to the Secretary-General,
transmitting a concept paper on the item under
consideration.
Before I give the floor to the Secretary-General
for his briefing, allow me to say a few words on the
reasons that led us to organize this meeting.
Almost a decade has passed since 11 September
2001, when terrorists attacked the twin towers of the
World Trade Center in New York, only a few blocks
from where we are now. The adoption of resolution
1373 (2001) following that heinous and cowardly
attack on innocent civilians constituted a milestone in
the fight against terrorism. Indeed, the resolution had
meaning far beyond a sincere and natural outpouring of
solidarity all around the world, providing as it did a
sound and practical framework for the individual and
collective measures necessary to combat the scourge of
terrorism.
Today, that resolution remains a point of
reference and guidance for our campaign against
terrorism. However, despite the many positive steps
taken since then, terrorism continues to pose a serious
threat to international peace and security. In some parts
of the world, we are even witnessing an increase in the
activities of various terrorist groups. In other words,
terrorists have proved to be extremely resilient in their
ability to adapt to changing circumstances and to

2

exploit every gap or loophole they find in our common
stance.
That is why we have to be equally committed and
resilient in our fight against this threat. We must never
be complacent about our achievements, and we must
always try to do better. Moreover, considering that no
country is immune to the perils of terrorism, we have
to act collectively and in full solidarity with one
another. And there is no better place than the United
Nations for combining our strengths and displaying a
strong and united position. Indeed, the United Nations
has always held a central place in advancing the global
fight against terrorism, be it in terms of setting norms,
capacity-building or monitoring implementation.
Given its primary responsibility for maintaining
peace and security, the Security Council in particular
must continue to play a leading role in ensuring that we
are sufficiently equipped and prepared to combat
terrorism. This is precisely why we decided to organize
this meeting, with the following particular objectives in
mind: to undertake a true stock-taking of the past 10
years; to conduct an honest review of the effectiveness
of the steps we have taken so far; to make a candid
assessment of the current threat posed by terrorism;
and to lay out a bold and forward-looking strategy for
our future actions. We hope that such a frank and
focused exchange will help to re-energize the
international community’s campaign against terrorism,
and highlight the priority areas that require continued
and concerted attention and action.
We would, of course, have preferred to have the
non-Council Members of the United Nations
participate in this meeting too. This would only have
helped to further reinforce our message against
terrorism. However, given the high-level meeting of
the General Assembly, we had to opt for this format
today, considering that there will be other occasions
before the end of the year at which all Members of the
United Nations will be able to participate and join in
the debate.
Furthermore, as the Chair of the CounterTerrorism Committee, Turkey has also worked
diligently since the beginning of the year to emphasize
the importance of close cooperation and coordination
among Member States. We are guided by the principles
of transparency, interaction and partnership, which we
believe will not only raise common awareness at the
international, regional and national levels, but will also

10-55136

S/PV.6390

streamline our efforts against the constantly evolving
threat of terrorism. We will continue to work in the
same spirit in the coming months.

Thirdly, we must do more to better understand the
reasons people are drawn to violence so that we can do
more to prevent others from following that path.

I now invite the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to take the floor. I am
grateful to him for joining us today. His strong
personal conviction and dedication to advancing the
cause of counter-terrorism since he took the helm of
our Organization have been most commendable. I
could therefore have not have thought of a better
introduction on this occasion.

Fourthly, we need to continue strengthening the
legal regime, building on existing international
counter-terrorism instruments and relevant resolutions
of the Security Council. The value of these measures
and of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy lies in their consistent and equal
implementation.

The Secretary-General: I thank you, Sir, for
your very kind, warm words. I also thank the Turkish
presidency of the Security Council for its initiative in
convening this debate, and I extend a warm welcome to
His Excellency Foreign Minister Davutoğlu. I also
warmly welcome the other ministers who are
participating in this very important meeting of the
Council.
Terrorism poses a grave threat to international
peace and security. Many of the countries represented
around this table have first-hand experience of this
menace. There have been so many attacks, lives lost
and families destroyed. The United Nations has been
targeted, too, from Iraq to Pakistan and Algeria to
Afghanistan.
Terrorism may be a gathering storm, but the
international response is gathering steam. Over the past
five years, the United Nations has expanded its
counter-terrorism activities, increased inter-agency
coordination and enhanced partnerships with a wide
range of international and regional organizations. Joint
initiatives with Member States in many regions —
including the Sahel, the Horn of Africa, the Middle
East and South and Central Asia — have shown that
there is much we can do.
Countering terrorism demands a broad approach.
First, we must continue our efforts in the fields of
security and law enforcement. That includes measures
to further deprive terrorists of financial resources and
mobility, and to prevent them from acquiring and using
weapons of mass destruction.
Secondly, other areas deserve more attention.
Education, development, intercultural dialogue and
conflict prevention all have growing relevance in
addressing conditions conducive to the spread of
terrorism.

10-55136

Fifthly, we must improve the way we share
information and best practices. That means establishing
national focal points and regional networks and
mobilizing civil society, the private sector and the
media.
No counter-terrorism approach would be
complete without a full commitment to human rights
and the rule of law. Both the Security Council and the
General Assembly have consistently endorsed the
protection of human rights as an integral component of
any effective counter-terrorism policy, and I welcome
the attention the Council has devoted to this topic.
Several States — including those that have been
victimized by terrorism — are eager to implement their
obligations under the counter-terrorism frameworks but
lack the resources and other capacities to do so.
Capacity-building is therefore a priority for the United
Nations.
Considering the gravity of the situation in the
Sahel-Maghreb region, I am committed to working
with the region’s leaders on strengthening State
capacity for counter-terrorism. In Central Asia, the
United Nations is already working on capacity-building
in the areas of law enforcement, criminal justice and
international cooperation.
I would also like to stress the importance of
supporting victims of terrorism. It will be recalled that
two years ago we held a very moving seminar here at
Headquarters at which many victims of terrorism spoke
about their experiences. On 8 October, again here at
the United Nations, we will screen “Killing in the
Name”, a documentary that not only highlights the
plight of terrorism’s victims but also, we hope, will
help empower them and others towards greater levels
of engagement in bringing an end to such crimes.
With respect to the Security Council itself, I
welcome the enhanced coordination between the

3

S/PV.6390

Council’s subsidiary organs and partner entities in the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force. All of
us should broaden engagement with bodies that deal
with measures listed under pillar 1 of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, such as the
Alliance of Civilizations. The Alliance is a central part
of the United Nations response to extremism and
intolerance, and a necessary voice of moderation to
counter the incitement and hatred that are such
prominent parts of terrorism’s playbook.
No cause or grievance can justify terrorism. Let
me stress again the determination of the United
Nations to rise to a global, cross-border challenge that
seeks to do such harm to us all.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
Before giving the floor to members of the
Council, I should like to recognize the achievements of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
Associated Individuals and Entities in recent years,
under the able chairmanship of Austria, and the
valuable contributions of the Monitoring Team,
including the successful conduct of the review of the
consolidated list.
I now invite His Excellency Mr. Michael
Spindelegger, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Austria, to take the floor.
Mr. Spindelegger (Austria): Horrible acts of
terrorism occur almost every day. Hardly any part of
the world is spared. Terrorism knows no borders. No
country is immune. No country, how big or small, can
succeed unilaterally. Terrorism can be combated
effectively only in a global multilateral framework.
The United Nations must be at the centre of our joint
efforts to counter terrorism.
I would like to thank Turkey and you personally,
Mr. President, for presiding over today’s meeting. I
also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
Austria fully supports the draft presidential statement
to be adopted today, which sends a strong message of
the Council’s determination to combat the scourge of
terrorism.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy provides the first universally agreed strategic
framework for combating terrorism in a holistic and
integrated manner. The success of the Strategy will

4

depend on its implementation through concrete
measures. A few weeks ago, the General Assembly
completed the second review of the implementation of
the Strategy. Some progress has been achieved, but
much more needs to be done to make the Strategy more
widely known and to implement it worldwide. In order
to better link the efforts of Member States in this regard,
in October 2009, together with Switzerland, Turkey,
Norway and other partners, Austria co-sponsored the first
International Workshop of National Counter-Terrorism
Focal Points in Vienna.
Coordination and cooperation are key to the
success of our counter-terrorism efforts. Member
States; United Nations organs and entities, including
the Security Council and the General Assembly; other
international, regional and subregional organizations;
as well as civil society and the private sector must all
work together in a coordinated manner. We encourage
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force to continue its efforts to ensure overall
coordination and coherence in the counter-terrorism
efforts of the United Nations system.
Austria calls upon the Security Council and its
three committees and expert groups dealing with
counter-terrorism to look at ways in which to better
support the work of the Task Force, incorporate the
Strategy into their work, and coordinate their activities
in a transparent and effective manner.
It is Austria’s firm belief that respect for human
rights and the rule of law is a fundamental basis of all
efforts to combat terrorism. We all must ensure that
any measures taken to combat terrorism comply with
our obligations under international law, in particular
human rights law, refugee law and international
humanitarian law. The development of an effective and
rule of law-based national system of law enforcement
and criminal justice is an essential element to prevent
terrorist acts and to bring terrorists to justice. In this
context, we commend the work of the Terrorism
Prevention Branch of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, which provides technical assistance
in legal and related aspects of counter-terrorism.
Austria is also committed to promoting the rule
of law in the daily work of the Council and its
subsidiary bodies. In particular, as chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
Associated Individuals and Entities, Austria has

10-55136

S/PV.6390

worked intensively to enhance due process and fair and
clear procedures. This year, the Committee concluded
the two-year review of its consolidated list. Of the 488
list entries examined, hundreds were updated and
almost 10 per cent removed.
The recent appointment of Ms. Kimberly Prost as
first Ombudsperson to receive de-listing requests in
accordance with resolution 1904 (2009) constitutes
another major step forward. These steps will contribute
to promoting the fairness and effectiveness of the work
of the Al-Qaida/Taliban Committee. However, further
efforts will be necessary to improve fair and clear
procedures, in particular with regard to other sanctions
regimes.
Austria commends the progress of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) in addressing human
rights issues of relevance to resolution 1373 (2001).
However, there are still serious challenges to
implementing effective counter-terrorism measures
within a rule of law framework. In this regard, we call
for the development of best practices and guidelines to
ensure that all States adopt consistent approaches in the
field of human rights and counter-terrorism. A pro-active
approach of the CTC in this field is key to its
credibility and long-term success. The upcoming
renewal of the mandate of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) will provide
an opportunity to affirm this commitment.
In the context of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), at the
comprehensive review in October 2009 Austria
spearheaded an initiative to raise awareness of the need
for strict respect of the rule of law, due process
standards and the protection of human rights in the
implementation and enforcement of resolution 1540
(2004). Austria also plans to host a meeting with
international and regional organizations relevant to
resolution 1540 (2004) in Vienna on 15 and
16 December this year.
It is our firm conviction that we will be
successful only in combating terrorism in the long term
if we address the conditions conducive to the spread of
terrorism. We must win the hearts of the people
through dialogue and mutual trust. In this regard, we
highly commend the role of the Alliance of
Civilizations, led by Turkey and Spain. Austria is
proud to host the Fifth Annual Forum, given our long
tradition as a platform for dialogue, cooperation and

10-55136

peace. As part of our dialogue initiatives to promote
trust and understanding among people of different
religions and cultures, in November 2010 Austria will
launch the first Arab-European Young Leaders Forum,
which will bring together emerging leaders from
politics, civil society, business and the environmental
sector in the European Union, Turkey and the Arab
world to discuss ways to implement responsible
leadership.
In conclusion, Austria once again welcomes
today’s meeting, which underlines the United Nations
central role in countering terrorism and sends a strong
message that we all stand united to overcome the
global threat of terrorism.
The President: I now invite the Honourable
Hillary Rodham Clinton, Secretary of State of the
United States of America, to take the floor.
Ms. Rodham Clinton (United States of
America): I thank you, Sir, for the leadership that you
and Turkey have shown this year as Chair of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee. I also thank you for
bringing us here today to focus on what is a shared
mission to combat terrorism and violent extremism. We
are called to this mission as individual nations and as a
community of nations to protect our citizens,
strengthen our security, foster stability in unstable
places and help to create the conditions for long-term
progress.
I want to thank the Secretary-General and his
staff here at the United Nations, because after all the
United Nations is our premier forum and is valuable
for sharing best practices and helping nations that
struggle with terrorism to build their capacity to
respond to threats. The United Nations has recently
taken steps to advance these goals by integrating
counter-terrorism throughout its work to address peace
and security challenges worldwide, while at the same
time
promoting
transparency
and
improving
coordination within the United Nations system and
with the national counter-terrorism teams on the
ground in communities around the world.
I want to speak briefly about the progress made
with one critical counter-terrorism tool — the sanctions
list of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
Associated Individuals and Entities. This list must
evolve as the threat posed by these groups evolves, so
we are pleased that the 1267 Committee actively

5

S/PV.6390

updates the list. So far this year, 45 names have been
removed and 17 have been added. We commend the
Committee for creating the post of Ombudsperson to
receive petitions for individuals and entities that want
to be de-listed. We applaud the inclusion of Al-Qaida
in the Arabian Peninsula and its leaders on the list, and
we encourage Member States to provide regular
updates to the Committee to ensure that the list remains
accurate.
This regime, as with all of our joint efforts, is
only as strong as our shared commitment. Today, let
me emphasize that the United States is committed to
working through multilateral institutions, including the
United Nations, to confront the threats posed. We are
also committed to strengthening this multilateral
architecture. We believe that it can do better, so
although we are very supportive we want to work with
all here to improve it, since we also believe that
countering terrorism is not a task that any country
achieves on its own. It is a global challenge. It calls for
all nations to be vigilant and creative, as well as
receptive to new ideas, willing to set aside failed
strategies, and be open with each other about the
threats we face and how we are addressing them. We
are far more likely to succeed in thwarting terrorist
networks like Al-Qaida and its syndicate of
organizations if we work together to track their actions,
share intelligence, disrupt their schemes, and put their
leaders out of action.
These groups have a global view, and we must
have one too. That begins with a shared understanding
of the big picture. Counter-terrorism demands a
comprehensive approach, as reflected in the draft
presidential statement that will be adopted at the
conclusion of today’s meeting. Therefore, we need
intelligence operations capable of discovering terror
plots, military and law enforcement officers trained
and ready to stop them, border control officials who
can spot potential dangers, justice systems that can
fairly and effectively prosecute criminals, and
corrections systems that can then detain those who
have been arrest and/or convicted. We have to do more
to develop these institutions and capacities and help
each other by mobilizing expertise and resources.
But, at the same time, and beyond these
measures, we have to realize that countering terrorism
means more than stopping terrorists. It means stopping
people from becoming terrorists in the first place. That
requires addressing the political, economic and social

6

conditions that make people vulnerable to exploitation
by extremists. For people whose lives are characterized
by frustration or desperation, and for people who
believe that their Governments are unresponsive or
repressive, Al-Qaida and other groups may offer an
appealing view, but it is a view rooted in destruction
and we have to provide an alternative view that is
rooted in hope, opportunity and possibility.
That means enacting policies that create new
opportunities for people to build a better future for
themselves, strengthening our commitment to core
values, particularly human rights and the rule of law.
We cannot sacrifice those values in our zeal to stop
terrorists. Our values are what make us different from
those who are trying to tear down so much of the progress
that has been made over the course of history — and I
have to add, especially for women and girls.
So as we work to defeat terrorists worldwide, we
cannot abandon our values; we must defend them. Each
of our countries represented around the Security
Council table today has felt the impact of terrorism or
violent extremism. Our citizens have been attacked and
our cities threatened, and those threats will,
unfortunately, continue. However, our determination to
protect our people and our common humanity are
greater than those who seek to harm us. I think that if
we are smart and thorough in our approach and
continue our work together, we can reduce and
eventually end the threat of terrorism.
I again thank both the Secretary-General, and in
particular you, Mr. President, for pulling us together to
talk about this today.
The President: I now invite the Minister of
External Relations of Brazil, His Excellency
Ambassador Celso Luiz Nunes Amorim, to take the
floor.
Mr. Amorim (Brazil): I would like to commend
you, Minister Davutoğlu, and the Turkish presidency
for convening this important debate on terrorism. I also
want to thank the Secretary-General, with whose wise
ideas we agree. I am also glad to see that there is a
broad commonality of views on such an important
topic.
Terrorism is a scourge that haunts our time. There
are no excuses for terrorist acts, which inflict suffering
and fear indiscriminately. Brazil has always
condemned terrorism in all its forms and

10-55136

S/PV.6390

manifestations. Our Constitution enshrines the
repudiation of terrorism as a fundamental principle of
our international relations. Brazil is a party to all
relevant international conventions and protocols
against terrorism.
As a serious global threat, terrorism must be
addressed with a holistic approach and full
consideration of the complexity of its root causes.
Violence and intolerance take root in an environment
of long-standing social, political, economic and
cultural injustices, to which reference has also been
made today. Social and economic development,
accompanied by an atmosphere of respect for the other,
is the best antidote to terrorism.
In combating terrorism, Brazil has a strong
preference for truly multilateral agreements and
arrangements. It is important to reinforce the capacity
of the United Nations in this field. We fully support the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We
appreciate the fact that the Strategy is inspired by a
comprehensive perspective.
We must guard against dangerous rhetoric and
postures that fuel xenophobia and prejudice. Tolerance
is key to avoiding violent polarization and extremism.
Initiatives such as the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations can have a role in this regard. Our draft
presidential statement appropriately refers to that.
At a 2003 conference on combating terrorism
held here in New York, President Lula stressed that the
terrorists’ motivations cannot be countered only by
repression, important as repression may be. Diplomatic
initiatives based on international law are also essential.
Brazil emphasizes the urgent need to conclude the
negotiations of a United Nations comprehensive
counter-terrorism convention, with special attention
given to the relationship between organized crime and
the financing of terrorism.
There is also growing concern that terrorists
might have access to weapons of mass destruction,
especially nuclear weapons. At the Nuclear Security
Summit in Washington D.C. in April, President Lula
reaffirmed that, without prejudice to the indispensable
security measures that need to be taken, the most
effective way to reduce the risks of nuclear devices
falling into the wrong hands is the total and irreversible
elimination of all nuclear arsenals.

10-55136

The Council has a unique role both in responding
to and in preventing terrorism. Our strongest
contribution to fighting terrorism would be to attain
just and sustainable solutions to long-standing agenda
items. Peacebuilding efforts can also help to avert the
spread of radicalism in countries already affected by
conflicts and social strife. Cooperation and capacitybuilding in relation to security measures, as well as
broader information sharing, are very important.
I reiterate Brazil’s full support of the initiatives
undertaken by the Security Council’s committees to
facilitate technical assistance to countries that request
it. Brazil is ready to cooperate with other countries in
this regard. It is our common duty to prevent and
combat terrorism. Counter-terrorism strategies must be
predicated on the rule of law and the full protection of
the human rights of all involved.
The full realization of universal human rights,
including the right to development, must be an integral
part of all efforts to combat the terrorist threat. For all
these reasons, Brazil is fully committed to a
coordinated and multidimensional response to all the
challenges posed by terrorism. The United Nations
should be at the forefront of this endeavour.
The President: I now invite the Secretary of
State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
His Excellency the Right Honourable Mr. William
Hague, to take the floor.
Mr. Hague (United Kingdom): I am very grateful
to you, Mr. President, for organizing this important
debate today and to the Secretary-General for being
here with us.
Terrorism remains one of the greatest challenges
to international peace, stability and security, and
therefore also to the development and prosperity of
nations. The threat posed by international terrorism is
evolving and becoming more diffuse, and our response
to it as an international community must therefore
evolve. We must stand together, building on the
successful cooperation of the past to protect our own
citizens and assist those of other regions where
terrorism has found a foothold.
While the United Nations efforts have been
improving and should be commended, there is still
scope, in our view, for better coordination among the
various United Nations counter-terrorism bodies, and

7

S/PV.6390

between the other parts of the United Nations system
and Member States, to help Governments develop and
implement their own counter-terrorism strategies.
United Nations programmes to build the counterterrorism capacity of Member States should
complement bilateral efforts between Member States.
The United Nations has a role to play in filling gaps
that could otherwise be exploited by terrorists, their
financiers and supporters. The fiscal constraints
common to most countries in the wake of the financial
crisis make it all the more important that we focus
resources on assistance to the most vulnerable
countries.
In that regard, the threat emanating from the
Afghan-Pakistan border remains our greatest long-term
concern. The current situation could be exacerbated by
the consequences of the devastating recent floods. We
must therefore reinforce international support to the
Government of Pakistan so that the instability and
human misery of today do not become the recruiting
sergeants of tomorrow.
Terrorists will try to exploit disasters, instability,
alienation and conflict wherever they can, seeking to
harness poverty or political grievances to violent ends,
and trying to justify the unjustifiable with specious
social, economic and political arguments. So our
efforts to alleviate suffering, reduce poverty, prevent
conflict, keep and build peace, which are essential in
and of themselves, also help undermine the ideology of
violent extremism and deplete the ranks of Al-Qaida
and other terrorist groups.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, unanimously reaffirmed by the General
Assembly earlier this month, recognizes the
importance of addressing conditions conducive to
terrorism. To that end, United Nations agencies, such
as the United Nations Development Fund and
UNESCO, must play full and active roles as members
of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force.
We have seen growth in the capability and ambition
of Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula, Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb, and Al-Qaida-aligned extremists
operating in East Africa. We must work with
Governments and a range of partners in those regions
to disrupt, contain and reduce the threat. Terrorists are
adapting and becoming more opportunistic.

8

The growing trend in kidnapping for ransom is
one example of this. The United Kingdom Government
believes that we must act to prevent kidnapping
ransoms from becoming a significant source of terrorist
finance. From our own experience of hostage
situations, we understand how difficult kidnapping
cases are, but it is dangerous to regard ransoms as a
necessary evil or legitimate tool for resolving
kidnappings. They encourage more kidnappings and
fund murder. Major attacks can be mounted for only
tens of thousands of dollars, so million-dollar ransoms
can mean dozens of attacks. Resolution 1904 (2009),
adopted last December, explicitly confirmed that it is
illegal to pay ransoms to those whom this Council has
sanctioned because of their connection to Al-Qaida or
the Taliban, and we look to all countries to respect this
resolution.
We are here in part because of the terrible
atrocities committed not far from this building just
over nine years ago. Hardly any country in the world
has been untouched by terrorism. The most lasting and
devastating impact of terrorism is, of course, on
victims, their families and communities. I am reminded
of this each day; outside the Foreign and
Commonwealth Office in London stands a memorial to
the 202 victims of the Bali bombings, including 28
British people who died that day.
The United Nations can provide a platform for
victims of terrorism from all over the world, to give
them a voice and help others derive strength and
inspiration from their courage. Their stories remind us
that terrorism is an assault on all humanity. They are
the most effective antidote to the peddlers of violent
ideology and a spur to Governments around the world
to make common cause against terrorism in all its
forms. The United Kingdom will continue to stand
absolutely firm in this endeavour.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Paul Toungui, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
International Cooperation and La Francophonie of the
Gabonese Republic, to take the floor.
Mr. Toungui (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
initiative in organizing this important debate on
counter-terrorism. We are aware of your commitment
and that of your country in fighting this phenomenon.
We welcome among us the presence of the SecretaryGeneral, and I reaffirm the support of my country for

10-55136

S/PV.6390

his ongoing work for peace and security throughout the
world. We endorse the draft presidential statement to
be adopted at the end of the meeting.
Terrorism is not only an attack on the life and
dignity of the human being; it is also and above all a
negation of civilization and can therefore never be
justified. No cause, ideology or religion can serve as a
pretext for the atrocities perpetrated throughout the
world, including in Somalia, Uganda, India, Russia,
Afghanistan, Iraq and the Sahel, to list only a few of
the most recent examples.
The tentacular structure of terrorism requires a
strong and unified response from the international
community. Since the adoption of resolutions 1373
(2001), 1267 (1999) and 1540 (2004), the United
Nations has assumed its full responsibility to help
Member States to effectively fight terrorism. I
welcome the outstanding role played by Turkey,
Austria and Mexico in guiding the work of the counterterrorism committees.
In adopting the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy in September 2006, States Members
of our Organization reaffirmed their commitment to
fighting international terrorism. This momentum
should lead us to consolidate the legal framework and
means for fighting this phenomenon. Hence, we must
do our utmost to overcome the differences in
approaches that stand in the way of the finalization of a
comprehensive convention against international
terrorism.
Given that terrorism is a global threat, no nation
small or large is safe from this scourge. At the same
time, we see a distinct asymmetry between the methods
of engagement and the global nature of the threat. In
addition to the costs of the fight, the terrorists
themselves are also engaged in increasingly
sophisticated operations. I therefore call for a
strengthening of the capacities of the developing
countries, taking into account the specific needs and
identified threats, especially in African countries.
My country welcomed the Central African
workshop organized in Libreville in June by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. The workshop
allowed us to learn about the international legal
provisions applicable to illegal actions against the
security of shipping and offshore oil rigs. Gabon has
also adopted major security, financial and customsexcise measures, in synergy with the States of the

10-55136

subregion, to enhance preventive actions against the
financing of terrorism.
I will end by saying that our common action
against terrorism must be in step with our
commitments to respecting human rights and fighting
poverty. Since counter-terrorism is a collective
responsibility, my country reaffirms its commitment to
contributing to the global effort to fight this odious
international phenomenon.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Henry Odein Ajumogobia, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, to take the
floor.
Mr. Ajumogobia (Nigeria): Mr. President, let me,
too, begin by commending your initiative in convening
this important and timely debate. Our conversation this
morning no doubt builds on the meeting of 17 June
2010 held in Istanbul, which your Government also
convened. I welcome the presence of the SecretaryGeneral at this meeting and thank him for his
illuminating statement.
We welcome the significant progress that has
been made in the global fight against terrorism since
the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001), and we note in
particular the commendable efforts of the Council’s
three
counter-terrorism
committees
established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004) in ensuring the full implementation of the
relevant resolutions and improving their working
methods and interactions with Member States.
The most recent terrorist bombings in
Mogadishu, in Vladikavkaz in Russia, in Zahedan in
Iran and Kampala in Uganda, not to mention the scores
of attacks in Iraq and Afghanistan, are stark reminders
of the currency and enormity of the challenges of
terrorism. We know now that the absence of effective
counter-terrorism measures, compounded by weak
legislative and financial controls and inadequate
policing of lengthy maritime and porous land borders,
provide a platform for terrorist activities. Indeed,
countries with weak institutional capacity are the most
vulnerable to infiltration by terrorism networks.
In West Africa, the illicit but extensive trade in
small arms and light weapons imported into the region
by non-State actors, in collaboration with unscrupulous
foreign arms producers and suppliers, facilitates
terrorist activities. We therefore wish to reiterate our

9

S/PV.6390

call for an effective international response, including
the elaboration of an arms trade treaty to complement
the Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), as well as the activities of the ECOWAS
Small Arms Unit.
To support the implementation of international
counter-terrorism resolutions, States would need to
develop national legislative and institutional measures
anchored in human rights, due process and the rule of
law. Pursuant to this goal, the Nigerian Parliament is
considering a bill on the prevention of terrorism that
addresses these issues. We have also established a
national focal point that comprises four counterterrorism centres to strengthen our efforts to combat
terrorism. We welcome in this context the efforts of the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, through
the Integrated Assistance for Countering Terrorism
initiative, to support counter-terrorism activities in
Nigeria. We commend the efforts of the CounterTerrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) in facilitating
the trilateral contacts among donors, international
technical assistance providers and countries requiring
such assistance.
We support the continued collaboration and
coordination of CTED with other United Nations
agencies, within the framework of the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force. CTED should
explore additional means through which States and
regional organizations could be assisted to deliver
more on border controls, information exchanges and
intelligence-led policing. We also commend the
efforts of technical assistance providers that have
collaborated with the countries of the West Africa
subregion to combat terrorism.
The fight against terrorism cannot be left to one
country or region. It requires collective, concerted and
coordinated global action for maximum effectiveness.
Such an approach will require the Council to take into
account measures to enhance the implementation of
several counter-terrorism resolutions. Greater regional
and international cooperation, as well as better
coordination among relevant actors, should be
promoted. The establishment of country-specific
regional hubs as centres of focus is also a necessity.
Needless to emphasize is the importance of crosscutting institutions and self-sustaining transfers of
knowledge aimed at bridging existing knowledge gaps.

10

Of crucial importance is the need to address the
capacity challenges of States and their institutions in an
integrated manner, including measures to address the
economic, social and political conditions conducive to
the existence and spread of terrorism. The adoption of
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy by the General
Assembly was a positive development in that regard.
We urge the Council not only to consider a similar
approach, but also to support the elaboration of a
comprehensive international convention on terrorism.
The strong support provided by African
Governments to global anti-terror campaigns needs to
be strengthened by enhanced collaboration at both the
bilateral and multilateral levels, in particular in the
extradition and apprehension of African terrorists.
I would like to conclude by reiterating our
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. I urge the international community to
muster the necessary political will to confront the
challenge, as nothing can justify the murder of
innocents. We support the draft presidential statement
that will be adopted at the end of this debate.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Sam Kutesa, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Uganda, to take the floor.
Mr. Kutesa (Uganda): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important debate. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his insightful
briefing.
The dreadful terrorist attacks around the world
have continued to highlight the need for collective and
resolute action to counter and eliminate this evolving
threat to international peace and security. We have
witnessed the indiscriminate impact of callous acts of
terrorism on victims and their families in various
countries. Terrorism is therefore a global threat.
Uganda strongly condemns terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. We reaffirm that all terrorist
acts are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their
motivation and whoever may commit them. On 11 July,
Uganda was the target of a cowardly attack by
Al-Shabaab terrorists, which resulted in the death and
injury of many people. That attack was a reminder of
the need to stand up against terrorism even more
firmly.
The United Nations has made an important
contribution to counter-terrorism efforts. It was

10-55136

S/PV.6390

significant that, in September 2006, the General
Assembly adopted the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy to enhance national, regional and international
efforts to counter terrorism. It was significant because
that was the first time that States Members of the
United Nations agreed to a common strategic approach
to fighting terrorism.
We consider the activities of the three counterterrorism Committees valuable to the work of the
Security Council. In particular, we commend them for
their work in developing common strategies to advance
the global fight against terrorism.
In recent times, we have seen an increase in the
sophistication of terrorist networks through their
ability to exploit the benefits of information and
communication technology, as well as linkages with
the transnational criminal networks that finance their
operations. Part of the emerging sophistication
manifests itself in a symbiotic overlap of terrorist
activities with such international criminal activities as
money-laundering, human trafficking and drug
trafficking.
Our collective efforts should fundamentally aim
at denying terrorists any haven, eradicating sources of
terrorist financing, reducing State vulnerability and
enhancing emergency preparedness and response
capabilities. It is in so doing that we can preserve the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of States and
ensure the safety of our citizens.
As terrorism and transnational criminal activities
thrive on the same vulnerabilities and utilize very
similar actors, it is necessary for the United Nations to
support the implementation of counter-terrorism
measures that sever the mutually reinforcing and
symbiotic relationships that exist or may emerge.
We are convinced that appropriately crafted
counter-terrorism measures that deal with fundamental
vulnerabilities, such as economic distress and weak
State structures, can effectively deprive terrorists of
havens and recruiting grounds and strengthen the
ability of States to effectively counter terrorist threats.
It is also important to give priority attention to
prevention in the fight against terrorism. We need to
ensure that our collective approach places emphasis on
building national and regional capacities and
facilitating cooperation among States. It is essential to
put greater emphasis on fostering better information-

10-55136

sharing, operational planning and initiatives that
strengthen regional counter-terrorism capabilities and
cooperation.
Uganda underscores the importance of closer
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in counter-terrorism activities. We are
convinced that such cooperation is an essential and a
necessary approach to developing more effective
counter-terrorism measures.
In their collective resolve and determination to
deal with this common threat, African countries have
adopted instruments and decisions towards creating a
common framework for preventing and combating
terrorism. Members of the African Union (AU) acceded
to the provisions of the 1999 Algiers Convention as a
guiding principle in the collective quest to prevent and
combat terrorism. The AU summit held in Kampala in
July this year underscored the need for renewed efforts
and increased mobilization on the continent to combat
the scourge of terrorism. It also called on member
States to implement enhanced measures for cooperation
and coordination to boost the continent’s collective
action against terrorism.
Finally, countering terrorism is in the interest of
all of us. We are convinced that by working together
we can deal with the threat of terrorism. However, in
our counter-terrorism efforts, we should demonstrate
our individual and collective resolve to decisively
prevent and combat terrorism for the peace and
security of us all.
The President: I invite His Excellency
Mr. Gérard Araud, Permanent Representative of
France, to take the floor.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
of course like to thank the Turkish presidency of the
Security Council for having organized this debate. We
have all been or could be affected by terrorism, as
France found several days ago with the kidnapping of
five of its citizens in Niger.
France would therefore like to see the United
Nations play a greater role in combating terrorism.
Much has already been done in that regard. Since 1963,
we have adopted 16 international instruments on the
subject. In the early 1990s, the Security Council began
to address this issue, which poses a serious threat to
international peace and security. A sanctions regime
was imposed on Al-Qaida and the Taliban. Thanks to

11

S/PV.6390

the willingness of Member States, we now have the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, for which the
General Assembly has just reaffirmed its support.
However, the character and aspects of the threat
continue to change, given its complex roots specific to
each regional situation. We refer here to roots and not
to causes, much less to justifications. However, the
international community should make no mistake about
the fact that terrorism is inexcusable in every instance
and circumstance. That principled position should not
inhibit us from seeking to understand the roots of the
phenomenon of terrorism so as to better adapt the tools
we have developed to confront it.
In that regard, I feel it important to underscore
one of the most significant developments in terrorist
networks that we have seen in some years — their
tendency towards regionalization. Rather than a
decentralized, amorphous grouping, we are now seeing
movements that are independent of one another, each
with its own recruitment methods, logistical and
financial resources, political aims and raison d’être,
which require particular and appropriate responses.
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Mahgreb, a group representing
a regional destabilization strategy through cross-border
activities, is one of the clearest examples of that
evolution. We need to come up with a response that
takes such an evolution into account.
We have recorded success against terrorist
networks, but more must be done. All States must
ratify and implement the 16 relevant international legal
instruments. Negotiations on the comprehensive
counter-terrorism convention, a potential cornerstone
of international cooperation, must be concluded. The
fight against terrorism led by the security forces and
the judicial authorities must be pursued in respect for
human rights and the relevant international
instruments. That is a condition for the legitimacy and
effectiveness of the fight against terrorism.
Technical assistance must underpin the joint
activities of intelligence services, police authorities and
judicial bodies. It should help all States to meet their
commitments. Poverty and the lack of development
prospects are the breeding ground for terrorism. United
Nations programmes must continue to take that
element into account.
We must promote genuine regional strategies in
response to the destabilization efforts of terrorist
networks. The increase in transnational organized

12

crime, which the Council has already debated, is a
significant factor in spreading terrorism in that it
weakens the capacity of States to respond. Our
Organization must remain mobilized against that
scourge. In that regard, I would cite the example of
drug trafficking as proof of that, whether in Central
Asia or West Africa.
Lastly, we must give our full support to the
Counter-Terrorism
Implementation
Task
Force
entrusted with coordinating all the Organization’s
counter-terrorism work. We must also support the work
of the Group of Experts set up to support the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), which is responsible for keeping the
consolidated list of individuals and entities linked to
Al-Qaida and the Taliban up to date.
That is our vision — giving the international
community the means to address, in strict respect for
democratic principles and human rights, a threat that
all States face today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, allow me to thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this Security
Council meeting on the very important topic of
counter-terrorism.
Brutal terrorist attacks on our territory and many
other States bear witness to the extent of the threat and
remind us of our common responsibility to eliminate
terrorism and the need to strengthen measures to
counter and prevent terrorism. Russia reaffirms its
principled position of unconditional condemnation of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. We
believe that, owing to its universality, the United
Nations must continue to provide political and moral
leadership and to coordinate international counterterrorism efforts, in accordance with its Charter and
other norms of international law.
The Security Council’s resolutions on counterterrorism remain topical and important. Their full
implementation by United Nations Members is an
essential elements of the wide range of counterterrorism measures to which States have committed
themselves under the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.

10-55136

S/PV.6390

Russia is prepared to continue to actively support
the counter-terrorism work of the Security Council and
its specialized subsidiary committees, and to seek to
bolster the effectiveness of measures taken by the
Council. We believe that the further strengthening of
dialogue between the Security Council and Member
States on implementing the relevant resolutions to be
crucial to achieving those objectives.
On a practical level, suppressing the financing of
and other support to terrorists, ensuring that borders
are monitored for terrorist activity, and severing the
links between terrorism and organized crime, including
drug trafficking, remain pressing issues. A clear
example of such dangerous links is Afghanistan, where
terrorism and drug production continue to fuel each
other. According to our assessment, Afghan drug
production has increased to such an extent that it
threatens international peace and stability. The link
between piracy and terrorism is increasingly evident.
In certain regions of the world, pirate groups share
their revenue with terrorists.
It is also very important to take effective steps to
ensure that terrorist acts are punished. Here, the
effectiveness of international preventive cooperation,
including mutual legal assistance, must be
strengthened. The principle of extradition or trial must
prevail. Legal loopholes, safe havens and other ways to
escape accountability must be eliminated. In that
context, it is appropriate to recall Russia’s proposal to
develop a global convention on extradition and mutual
legal assistance, including in counter-terrorism.
The overall strengthening of the international
legal basis to fight terrorism is a pressing matter. The
issue of defining terrorism must be resolved in a
comprehensive counter-terrorism convention. The need
to further regulate cyberspace, including preventing its
use for terrorist purposes, is increasingly evident. I
reaffirm that Russia supports the establishment of a
comprehensive convention on cybercrime.
We should also recall the existing international
counter-terrorism conventions. Efforts to increase the
number of signatories should be pursued in order to
promote their full implementation. We note the
important role in that process of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, whose services are
increasingly in demand.
Time has shown that counter-terrorism law
enforcement measures must be complemented by wide-

10-55136

ranging efforts to prevent terrorism, including steps to
eliminate the conditions that fuel it, to further dialogue
among civilizations and faiths, to counter the ideology
of violence and militant extremism, and to address the
radicalization of societies.
In that regard, we note the significance of
resolution 1624 (2005), which seeks to counter
incitement to terrorism and to enhance intercultural
dialogue and preventive measures. Russia does not
accept the theory of a clash of civilizations and
cultures. It categorically rejects the equation of any
religion with terrorism. In that regard, we see potential
for the Turkish-Spanish Alliance of Civilizations
initiative, which calls for projects to be implemented
under the Alliance to further counter the ideological
spread of terrorism.
Counter-terrorist efforts will be significantly
more effective if States, civil societies and business
work together in the context of an equal and reciprocal
partnership. We are pleased to note that Russia’s 2006
initiative for a public-private counter-terrorism
partnership has taken shape, gained the necessary
momentum and become a concrete part of practical
measures, programmes and projects throughout the
world. We will continue to contribute to that work both
nationally and in line with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, the United Nations
Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute and
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force.
The adoption of today’s draft presidential
statement will reaffirm the Council’s resolve and unity
in countering the unrelenting threat of terrorism. It
appropriately reflects the Council’s increasing efforts
to counter terrorism and to address that scourge.
In conclusion, I wish to affirm that the Russian
Federation is ready, in close cooperation with other
States, to pursue its vigorous efforts to strengthen the
international community and to bolster the potential of
the United Nations to resolve pressing issues related to
counter-terrorism security.
The President: I invite the Permanent
Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina, His
Excellency Mr. Ivan Barbalić, to take the floor.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to express our appreciation to you, Mr. President,
and to the Government of the Republic of Turkey for
having convened this meeting, and I would like

13

S/PV.6390

especially to welcome your leadership in today’s
debate. We appreciate every opportunity to consolidate
our common efforts and we reiterate our determination
to fight terrorism in all its aspects as the threat it
represents is ever present and will remain so for the
foreseeable future.
Due to its various forms, methods and
manifestations, terrorism poses challenges to the
modern world and our societies and endangers
international peace and security. It is therefore our
common responsibility to collectively prevent and
confront this global plague with both national and
coordinated international action. In that context, the
United Nations, as a universal Organization, and the
Security Council, as the body with primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, bear the greatest burden of
responsibility for improving the effectiveness of
counter-terrorism policies and developing the
international legal standards and norms necessary to
that end. Concluding the negotiations on and adopting
the comprehensive convention on international
terrorism as a specific international law enforcement
instrument as soon as possible would provide the
international community and Member States with an
effective tool for strengthening cooperation and
coordination in their joint counter-terrorism action.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy remains a central international framework for
the concrete and efficient efforts of the international
community. We therefore call for its full
implementation, welcoming the recent unanimous
adoption of General Assembly resolution 64/297
during the second biennial review of the Strategy.
While
the
primary
responsibility
for
implementing the Strategy lies with Member States, the
leading role of the United Nations in coordinating
counter-terrorism activities through the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force and subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council continues to be highly
important. On the other hand, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and Associated
Individuals and Entities, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) remain core tools in the global
counter-terrorism campaign. I would like to reiterate
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s strong support for every step

14

that further strengthens these mechanisms
therefore the campaign in its entirety.

and

The promotion and protection of human rights
and the rule of law should remain a priority, as they
constitute the fundamental values enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. Any measures
undertaken by States to combat terrorism, including the
prosecution and conviction of perpetrators of terrorist
acts and the protection of and provision of reparations
to victims, must be anchored in the rule of law and
comply with State obligations under the provisions of
international law, in particular international human
rights, refugee and humanitarian law.
Since the Security Council debate on terrorism in
December 2008 (see S/PV.6034), we have witnessed
significant improvements in respect for fundamental
rights and freedoms in the international sanctions
regimes. The adoption of resolution 1904 (2009) and
the recent appointment of the Ombudsperson reconfirm
the commitment of the international community to
advancing clear and fair listing and de-listing
procedures for the 1267 Committee, thus contributing
to greater transparency in that Committee’s work, as
well as to the credibility of the overall counterterrorism regime.
The increasing correlation among terrorism,
transnational organized crime, drugs and arms
smuggling, and money-laundering, as well as the
frequent use of new information technologies by
terrorists, requires an integrated global approach and
close cooperation among relevant State institutions and
elements of civil society at the national level, as well
as cooperation and coordination with subregional,
regional and international organizations.
While every State has the primary responsibility
to formulate and implement appropriate policies and
measures, the role of the United Nations in helping
build Member States’ capacity to prevent and combat
terrorism is of the utmost importance. Cooperation at
the regional and international levels, including
continuous exchange of information, intelligence and
best practices, and technical assistance for countries
that need it, will enable countries to fulfil their
obligations
and
requirements
under
relevant
international instruments and Security Council
resolutions.

10-55136

S/PV.6390

Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the
draft presidential statement on terrorism before the
Council today and reiterates its strong commitment to
combating terrorism in all its forms at both the national
and international levels.
The President: I now invite the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon, His Excellency Mr. Nawaf
Salam, to take the floor.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome Minister Davutoğlu
and to thank the Turkish presidency for having
organized this important and substantive meeting, as
the United Nations has a central role to play in fighting
terrorism. I should also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his valuable briefing. We support the draft
presidential statement before the Council for adoption
at this meeting.
Lebanon strongly condemns all acts of terrorism
in all its forms and considers them to be a dangerous
threat to international peace and security and basic
human rights, especially the right to life. Modern
history has seen several forms of terrorism, to which
innocent people of different religions, nationalities and
cultures have fallen victim. The attacks of
11 September 2001 in New York were among its worst
examples, as noted by the Lebanese President before
this Council last Thursday (see S/PV.6389).
Terrorism has afflicted many parts of the globe
quite indiscriminately — from Japan and Sri Lanka to
Egypt, Jordan and Saudi Arabia, and from India,
Pakistan, Uganda and Kenya to Britain, Russia, Spain
and other countries. While we have endeavoured for
years to define a unified concept of terrorism, innocent
people fall victim every day, many of them present by
coincidence at the moment terrorists strike.
Condemning terrorism, killing and destruction is no
longer sufficient, as it does not change the situation or
protect the innocent.
Lebanon strongly rejects conflating terrorism
with any religion, especially Islam. Islam is not a
religion of extremism. The Koran says “And thus We
have made you a just nation” (The Holy Koran, II:143).
Islam is a religion of dialogue. The Koran also says
“and have disputations with them in the best manner”
(ibid., XVI:125).
Terrorism has not spared Muslims or Islam. Many
Muslims fell victim to the horrific attacks of

10-55136

11 September 2001. Today, many Muslims continue to
fall victim to bombings in Iraq, Afghanistan, Yemen
and Somalia — some even in mosques. There are
consistent attempts to distort this divine religion, which
calls for tolerance and acceptance of others. A campaign
is afoot — a culture of intellectual terrorism — to spread
a horrifying image of Islam, which has led to
Islamophobia. We would like to sound a note of
caution that taking these provocative acts lightly — the
desecration of religious sites and ignoring the feelings
of believers — may be extremely dangerous. While we
completely respect the freedom of expression, such
acts do not fall within the purview of freedom; they are
nothing more than provocations that undoubtedly fan
the flames of terrorism.
Lebanon distinguishes between terrorism and the
legitimate right of people to resist foreign occupation,
which has been enshrined in all international
resolutions, instruments and norms. The best example
of this is that no one applied the label of “terrorism” to
the resistance mounted by the French against the Nazi
occupation during the Second World War. You,
Mr. President, are the best person to confirm that
Mustafa Kemal Atatürk became a symbol of Turkish
independence when he led the resistance to the foreign
presence in Turkey.
Lebanon appreciates the efforts of the United
Nations and all its organs and agencies to combat
terrorism. We reaffirm our resolve to cooperate with all
of them, including the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004).
We encourage assistance to States to strengthen
their institutions and legal capacities to combat
terrorism. In that context, we call for respect for human
rights and the rule of law in all measures to combat
terrorism. We have to pay attention to the relationship
between all the tools of terrorism, such as
transboundary organized crime, trafficking in persons,
weapons and drugs, and money-laundering.
Lebanon believes that terrorism cannot be
combated by military means, exchange of intelligence,
financing or borders alone. It should be done by
dealing with the root causes of terrorism and removing
the factors that feed it, through the elimination of
hotbeds of tension, renunciation of double standards in
the implementation of international resolutions,
accepting others and respecting rather than eliminating

15

S/PV.6390

the specificities of each country or distorting its image.
We should also end foreign occupation, injustice,
poverty and the trampling of human rights and dignity.
We must also stress the role of dialogue among
cultures and civilizations. Lebanon advocated that
theme during its presidency of the Council last May.
The initiative of an alliance among civilizations
launched by Turkey and Spain plays a desirable role.
As we emphasize the importance of dealing with
the root causes of terrorism, we do not have to recall
that Al-Qaida tries to exploit the suffering of the
Palestinian people as one of the means for recruiting
terrorists. That alone is a reminder that we should
affirm the need for the international community to
accelerate the achievement of a comprehensive, just
peace in the Middle East.
Lebanon — which has signed most of the
international conventions on combating terrorism —
has also suffered from terrorist bombings that have
claimed the lives of a number of politicians, foremost
among whom was President Rafik Hariri, plus many
journalists and many innocent people killed in the past
five years. Lebanese forces have fought terrorist
groups and still are fighting them. The army was able
to eliminate one of the most dangerous of them —
Fatah al-Islam, in Nahr al-Barid in northern Lebanon.
That movement had nothing to do with the national
Palestinian liberation movement Fatah or with Islam.
In addition, Lebanon has suffered from Israeli
State terrorism over the decades. I will recall that Israel
bombed civilian installations, including electrical,
water and oil installations, the airport, bridges,
commercial planes, even hospitals and Red Cross Red
Crescent ambulances, as well as the United Nations
headquarters in Qana — which was supposed to be a
refuge for the elderly, women and children, who
thought that the Blue Flag could protect them.
The General Assembly has reached by consensus
a unified counter-terrorism strategy. Lebanon hopes it
will be reflected in a comprehensive convention that
will deal with terrorism in a unified way. That is
possible if we decide to deal with this phenomenon
objectively and in a manner in consonance with the
rules and provisions of international law.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): On behalf of the Japanese
Government, I wish to express my gratitude,
Mr. President, for your organizing this thematic debate

16

to promote a fruitful discussion on counter-terrorism. I
also wish to extend my appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his informative and comprehensive
briefing.
Terrorism continues to be one of the biggest
threats to international peace and security. Despite the
fact that the international community, led by the United
Nations, has made progress in counter-terrorism, the
threats posed by terrorist organizations and individuals
remain very high. Al-Qaida and other terrorist
organizations and local extremists are still active, and
many areas in the world face a threat from such groups.
Last year the attempted bombing of a United States
commercial aircraft reminded us once again that
terrorism continues to be a global threat. Deep-seated
problems surrounding terrorism, such as radicalization
and safe havens, need to be addressed in an appropriate
manner.
To eradicate terrorism, multifaceted approaches
by all stakeholders are vital. The Japanese Government
will continue to participate proactively in international
efforts led by the United Nations to combat terrorism.
In that regard, a recent review of the implementation of
the Global Counter-Terrorist Strategy gave us an
important opportunity to renew our determination to
fight terrorism.
We expect that United Nations efforts in the field
of counter-terrorism will be strengthened by
coordination by the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force, avoiding overlaps and duplication of its
work.
To combat terrorism, Security Council leadership
is crucial. The Council has set out various effective
measures, including through activities by the three
counter-terrorism-related committees: those established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004). We recognize that resolution 1904 (2009)
has contributed to ensuring a fair and transparent
procedure for the terrorist sanction regimes. We also
welcome the recent successful review of the
consolidated list of the Council’s Al-Qaida and Taliban
sanctions Committee.
Although we have taken positive steps for further
counter-terrorism measures, there are still capacity
gaps among Member States. From that standpoint, we
believe that country visits and the preliminary
implementation assessments conducted by the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)

10-55136

S/PV.6390

play a vital role in determining the needs for support
and in coordinating capacity-building activities. We
hope that the Counter-Terrorism Committee and CTED
will carry out further efforts to enhance counterterrorism capacity of all Member States by facilitating
technical assistance.

complementary and mutually reinforcing relationship
contributes to a better understanding of the scourge of
terrorism and of the appropriate methods to fight it and
in that way to effectively combat it. As we have
pointed out on various occasions, legitimacy and
effectiveness go hand in hand.

Counter-terrorism is one of the most important
national security agenda issues for the Japanese
Government. I wish to reiterate our strong
determination to continue to take an active role in the
international community’s fight against terrorism.

In this context, it appears to us to be fundamental
to stress the progress made under the sanctions regime
set up by resolution 1267 (1999) on Al-Qaida and the
Taliban. Resolutions 1822 (2008) and 1904 (2009)
have
made
significant
contributions
towards
transparency and due process under this regime. That
progress has been seen in practice, as evident in the
recently concluded revision of the Consolidated List
and the establishment of the Office of the
Ombudsperson.

The President: Before I give the floor to
Mr. Heller, I would like to express our appreciation for
his able leadership of the 1540 Committee.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Thank
you, Mr. President, for those kind words. And I wish to
thank you, Minister Davutoğlu, and your delegation for
the initiative of holding this important debate. I also
wish to thank the Secretary-General for the information
he has provided to the Council.
Numerous attacks and recent failed attempts in
various parts of the world have shown that, lamentably,
this scourge continues to represent a serious threat to
international peace and security. In light of that reality,
the delegation of Mexico reiterates its most energetic
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, irrespective of where it comes from
and by whom and for whatever purposes it is
committed. Our commitment to the international
counter-terrorism fight is steadfast. The current debate
not only gives us an opportunity to reaffirm this
commitment, but also to identify the progress made
and the outstanding challenges in this sphere.
Mexico has been a fervent and constant promoter
of complete respect for human rights in the fight
against terrorism. It is a priority matter for us, which
we have championed in various forums of the United
Nations system, including the Security Council, as well
as at the inter-American level. The obligations arising
from the Council’s counter-terrorism regime are
consistent with other obligations of international law,
particularly those pertaining to human rights and
humanitarian and refugee law.
It was the Council itself that confirmed and
consolidated this relationship in a number of
resolutions and statements, including the one that we
will be adopting today. The consolidation of this

10-55136

We cannot fail to insist, however, that fair and
clear procedures will not be achieved until we have an
effective remedy for listing and de-listing. That is one
of the most significant challenges that the Security
Council’s counter-terrorism and sanctions regimes are
currently facing, in the light of the rule of law at the
international level.
We share the approach of seeing the threat of
terrorism from a multidimensional perspective that
deals with the underlying causes for its spread. In
particular, Mexico believes that areas where there is
exclusion, marginalization, ignorance and poverty are
in some cases support for the spread of this threat. That
is why we need to strengthen the holistic approach in
our initiatives to reduce poverty, exclusion and
frustration in the face of the lack of legitimate political
hopes of peoples, groups and individuals, according to
their regional contexts.
The comprehensive approach of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, with its
four pillars, is on the right track. The review of the
Strategy that the General Assembly has just concluded
and Assembly resolution 64/297 show that the
international community is united with regard to this
approach. The international community has a solid
international legal framework that covers a very broad
panoply of terrorism actions. That legal regime and
institutional framework designed as part of the Global
Strategy is an ideal forum for cooperation.
Like other delegations, the delegation of Mexico
would like to stress the importance of having a general
counter-terrorism convention that could complement

17

S/PV.6390

that legal framework. Negotiations to that end have
taken too long, and we call once again for their prompt
conclusion. We already have a number of special legal
instruments for fighting terrorism, but despite that we
have not been able define the phenomenon.
The effectiveness of international norms,
including the relevant resolutions of the Council,
depends in large measure on implementation at the
national level. We thus consider it indispensable to
redouble efforts to provide more proactive technical
assistance by specialized bodies and agencies such as
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. We
also recall the importance of taking into account
realities and needs at the local level. In the light of the
proliferation in global counter-terrorism regulation, it
is also indispensable to strengthen an integrative
approach within the framework of the strengthening of
the rule of law.
The advantages offered by a globalized world
through borders open to the flow of people and
commercial goods cannot be used as a window of
opportunity for terrorists to move around freely,
engage in unbridled arms trafficking or to mobilize
resources unchecked. Mexico reaffirms its commitment
to progress towards the strengthening of practical
measures to strengthen border controls.
Close coordination between the three subsidiary
bodies of the Council is another fundamental aspect
where significant progress has been made and must
continue to be intensified. As Chairman of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), Mexico would like to reiterate its commitment
to such coordination. The threat arising from weapons
of mass destruction in the hands of non-State actors,
particularly for terrorist purposes, is one of the most
serious to international peace and security. Based on
the broad examination concluded last January, we have
engaged in intensive consultations as part of a
thorough reflection on the 1540 Committee and its
future role in order to prevent, through the
consolidation of international cooperation, the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction in the
hands of non-State actors.
Allow me to conclude, Mr. President, by
congratulating you and your delegation for the
excellent work that you have done in leading the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC). Under the
leadership of Turkey, the CTC has acquired new

18

momentum that has begun to show significant results.
The streamlining of the working methods, the thematic
debates and the more frequent reports to the
membership of the United Nations are just a few
examples. Initiatives such as the Ankara meeting last
June and the meeting of public prosecutors on the topic
of counter-terrorism planned for the end of this year
are crucial in order to better project the work of the
Committee and to promote understanding and
cooperation among capitals, which are indispensable
requirements for ensuring that our common efforts
against this scourge are more successful.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Turkey for taking the initiative to
organize this debate on counter-terrorism. I would also
like to thank Foreign Minister Davutoğlu for his
presence in presiding over today’s meeting. The
Chinese delegation would also like to take this
opportunity to express its appreciation for the effective
work carried out by Turkey as chair of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC).
Terrorism is a common threat faced by the entire
international community. The Chinese Government has
always supported decisive combat against all forms of
terrorism.
In this regard, counter-terrorism efforts should
adhere to one standard. The international community
should decisively combat terrorist activities, wherever
or whenever they occur. International cooperation in
fighting terrorism should reject double standards;
otherwise, such efforts will be off-track, run counter to
the original intent to fight terrorism or even give rise to
impunity for it. Counter-terrorism efforts should be
based on international cooperation with strengthened
coordination synergy, and the United Nations and the
Security Council should play the central coordinating
role.
During the past few years, the Security Council
has adopted a series of counter-terrorism resolutions
and the General Assembly has adopted the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which have provided the
necessary guidance for international counter-terrorism
cooperation. Counter-terrorism efforts should adhere to
the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter and fully respect the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States. Countries
throughout the world should strengthen their domestic
counter-terrorism legislation, law enforcement and

10-55136

S/PV.6390

cooperation in the areas of early warning mechanisms,
the fight against terrorism, terrorism financing, travel
restrictions, border control and intelligence exchange,
among others.
China supports a larger role for the CTC in
helping countries to build their capacity and in
providing more counter-terrorism assistance to
developing countries. Counter-terrorism efforts should
aim to address both the phenomenon and its root
causes in an integrated manner. Terrorism has a very
complex political, social and economic background.
Efforts to counter terrorism should pay attention to
eradicating poverty and social injustices and to
properly settling regional conflicts and preventing
separatism, radicalism, hatred and intolerance in order
to eliminate the breeding grounds for terrorism.
If we neglect such integrated efforts and rely
merely on military and law enforcement methods, we
may end up in a situation that breeds even more
terrorism after such measures are adopted. Counterterrorism efforts should also advocate dialogue and
exchange among civilizations, religions and racial and
ethnic groups to enhance mutual understanding and
tolerance. Counter-terrorism efforts should not
emphasize ideological elements. China is opposed to
linking terrorism with a particular State, race or
religion.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Turkey.
Turkey has long-standing, direct experience with
terrorism. I would like to take this opportunity to
express our solidarity with all victims of terrorism
around the world and our sincere condolences to the
families of those who have lost their lives at the hands
of terrorists.
This unfortunate and painful experience has
taught us, among other things, the indispensable nature
of international cooperation in combating this scourge.
Indeed, terrorists operate across borders, exploit
opportunities and use every available technology
presented to them in today’s globalized world. Efforts
to counter this threat therefore need to be firm,
coherent and adaptive.
The United Nations has a central role to play in
laying the groundwork to make that possible. Indeed,
through the adoption of a number of conventions,

10-55136

protocols and resolutions the United Nations has
provided the international community with a sound
legal structure on counter-terrorism. Through those
instruments we have identified the relevant norms and
necessary measures to prevent and suppress terrorist
acts and to bring their perpetrators and facilitators to
justice.
However, there is still a regrettable and
significant gap between the objectives behind those
measures and the stark reality. It is therefore incumbent
upon us as members of the Council to make a candid
assessment of the nature of the ongoing shortcomings
and to search for remedies. That would constitute a
vital first step to re-energize international counterterrorism efforts. Let me cite a few areas of
shortcoming as we see them.
Criminal justice is one crucial case in point.
Victims of terrorism need to see that those who are
engaged in terrorist acts are punished. Terrorists, for
their part, should have no false expectation of
immunity from justice. However, terrorists are still
able to exploit loopholes in legal mechanisms, and at
times they manage to escape criminal justice before
our very eyes. For instance, the granting of asylum to
perpetrators or supporters of terrorism remains a
stumbling block to extradition. Therefore, while
upholding the rule of law, we need to remedy these
loopholes.
Terrorist financing is another important area
where much more needs to be done. Despite the
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism and Council resolution 1373
(2001), this critical problem continues. It is particularly
in this area that terrorist organizations most exploit the
lack of a harmonized, coherent international approach.
The methods employed, such as extortion, fundraising
through front organizations and transfer of funds by
couriers, are well known. Against such activities, the
international community must have a uniform and
consistent approach that is effective and resultoriented.
Another issue that merits particular attention is
the phenomenon of incitement to terrorism. Council
resolution 1624 (2005) calls on all States to prohibit by
law incitement to terrorist acts. However, there is an
increasing trend of terrorism-related propaganda.
Terrorist organizations benefit from freedoms inherent
in our societies and exploit them for their own

19

S/PV.6390

purposes, namely, to terrorize audiences and breed
radicalization and thus facilitate recruitment and
support. In fact, there are even examples of terrorist
organizations running television stations under
pseudonyms. We cannot allow basic democratic rights,
most notably the right to freedom of expression, to be
exploited for motives linked to the aims and purposes
of terrorist organizations. It is our shared responsibility
to prevent that and to do so without exception.
Having mentioned some implementation gaps, I
would now like to examine the underlying reasons for
our failure to close those loopholes that have persisted
for too long.
Let me start with the notion of political will. Let
us be candid: at times the lack of political
determination is where the problem lies. That cannot
be allowed. Our stance must not waver either in
rhetoric or action.
Lack of counter-terrorism capacity, particularly
lack of expertise and resources, is another big
challenge for many countries. Countries that have the
will but for one reason or other lack the capacity to
fight terrorism deserve our support. Turkey has
security agreements with over 70 countries with a view
to sharing experiences and building capacity. We will
continue our efforts in this vein and encourage others
to do the same.
As a key forum for developing global counterterrorism norms, the United Nations also plays an
important role in assisting the countries that should
implement these norms. We strongly commend and
support the capacity-building efforts of the relevant
United Nations bodies. I wish to mention in particular
the importance of the focused and regional approach
pursued by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate. We also appreciate the valuable
contributions of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime.
In fact, there is a growing need for enhanced
capacity-building and cross-regional cooperation to
strengthen the international counter-terrorism structure.
Such efforts should also be better coordinated among
the United Nations bodies and with other multilateral
stakeholders such as the World Bank, civil society and
the private sector. That is why we strongly support
strengthening the role of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force in this field.

20

Last but not the least, counter-terrorism activities
need to be conducted on a legitimate basis. Respect for
human rights and the rule of law are indispensable
elements of a successful counter-terrorism campaign.
We are pleased to note that United Nations bodies have
made concrete progress in this direction. In this
context, I should particularly mention Council
resolution 1904 (2009), which established the post of
an ombudsperson. However, the Council continues to
face criticism in this area. Therefore, it is the Council’s
duty to underline time and again that security and
freedom are not conflicting objectives and that this is
not a zero-sum game.
The challenge before us is not limited to
remedying deficiencies in the present global counterterrorism framework. We should also proactively
debate emerging threats such as the increasing link
between terrorist groups and organized crime, the
advent of cyberterrorism and the spread of radical
ideologies. In doing so, we should also consider the
necessary steps to counter such challenges.
At this point I would also like to share my
conviction that the United Nations, particularly the
Security Council, needs to ensure that its focus goes
beyond combating terrorism. It should be more
comprehensive and focus on efforts geared towards
preventing terrorism as well. In doing so, the Council
can work closely with the General Assembly in
addressing conditions conducive to the spread of
terrorism. In any case, the United Nations is the most
appropriate forum in which to develop ways and means
to address the comprehensive nature of these
challenges.
My remarks may imply daunting tasks for the
United Nations: asking it to bring various stakeholders
into play in counter-terrorism efforts, to provide
knowledge and expertise to Member States, to develop
global norms to address the evolving nature of
terrorism in a comprehensive manner, and to monitor
the implementation of these measures. Naturally, while
expressing such expectations for the United Nations, it
is also my duty to affirm my country’s determination to
support those endeavours. The shared determination of
United Nations Member States leads me to be more
optimistic that success is possible and that terrorism
can and will be defeated.
I believe that the draft presidential statement to
be adopted at today’s meeting will duly reflect our

10-55136

S/PV.6390

resolve to retain counter-terrorism as a priority on the
agenda of the international community and to shed
light on particular aspects of counter-terrorism that
require more attention and new approaches.
Before concluding, I would like to thank the
members of the Security Council for their cooperation
and contributions to the preparation of this thematic
meeting and the presidential statement.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The representative of the United States has asked
for the floor to make a further statement.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): The
Security Council’s role should be to collectively
advance efforts to counter terrorism and to use
meetings such as this to discuss the topic productively.
We do not believe that other grievances should be part
of this discussion.

10-55136

The President: The Council has before it the text
of a statement by the President on behalf of the
Council on the subject of today’s meeting. I thank
Council members for their valuable contributions to the
statement. In accordance with the understanding
reached among the members of the Council, I shall
take it that members agree to the statement, which will
be issued as a document of the Security Council under
the symbol S/PRST/2010/19.
It is so decided.
I wish to thank all the Ministers and Permanent
Representatives and the Secretary-General for their
contributions to this important meeting.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

21
