A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/139
10 February 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 88
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/51/595)]
51/139.

Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories transmitted under Article 73 e
of the Charter of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the
information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e
of the Charter of the United Nations1 and the action taken by the Special
Committee in respect of that information,
Having also examined the report of the Secretary-General on the item,2
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, in which it
requested the Special Committee to study the information transmitted to the
Secretary-General in accordance with Article 73 e of the Charter and to take
such information fully into account in examining the situation with regard to
the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14
December 1960,
Recalling also its resolution 50/32 of 6 December 1995, in which it
requested the Special Committee to continue to discharge the functions
entrusted to it under resolution 1970 (XVIII),

1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first Session,
Supplement No. 23 (A/51/23), chap. VIII.
2

A/51/316 and Add.1.

97-76513

/...

A/RES/51/139
Page 2

Stressing the importance of timely transmission by the administering
Powers of adequate information under Article 73 e of the Charter, in
particular in relation to the preparation by the Secretariat of the working
papers on the Territories concerned,
1.
Approves the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the
Charter of the United Nations;1
2.
Reaffirms that, in the absence of a decision by the General
Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing Territory has attained a full
measure of self-government in terms of Chapter XI of the Charter, the
administering Power concerned should continue to transmit information under
Article 73 e of the Charter with respect to that Territory;
3.
Requests the administering Powers concerned to transmit or
continue to transmit to the Secretary-General the information prescribed in
Article 73 e of the Charter, as well as the fullest possible information on
political and constitutional developments in the Territories concerned, within
a maximum period of six months following the expiration of the administrative
year in those Territories;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that adequate
information is drawn from all available published sources in connection with
the preparation of the working papers relating to the Territories concerned;
5.
Requests the Special Committee to continue to discharge the
functions entrusted to it under resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with
established procedures, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
fifty-second session.
83rd plenary meeting
13 December 1996
