S/PV.8457

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8457th meeting

Tuesday, 5 February 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Esono Angue. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Equatorial Guinea)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Nkosi
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Transnational organized crime at sea as a threat to international peace and security
Letter dated 31 January 2019 from the Permanent Representative of Equatorial
Guinea to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2019/98)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-02803 (E)
*1902803*

S/PV.8457

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Transnational organized crime at sea as a
threat to international peace and security
Letter dated 31 January 2019 from the
Permanent Representative of Equatorial
Guinea to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2019/98)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Italy, Japan,
Norway, the Philippines, Senegal, Sri Lanka and
Trinidad and Tobago to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, and Mrs. Florentina
Adenike Ukonga, Executive Secretary of the Gulf of
Guinea Commission.
Mr. Fedotov and Mrs. Ukonga are joining today’s
meeting via video-teleconference from Vienna and
Luanda, respectively.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/2019/98, which contains
the text of a letter dated 31 January 2019 from the
Permanent Representative of Equatorial Guinea
to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, transmitting a concept note on the item
under consideration.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fedotov.
Mr. Fedotov: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to address the Security Council on the
growing threat of transnational organized crime at sea.
Two thirds of the world’s surface is ocean, nearly
all of it beyond any State’s territorial waters and largely
not subject to a single State’s criminal jurisdiction. The
high seas are open for vessels of all countries, both
coastal and landlocked, to support international trade
2/29

05/02/2019

and economic cooperation, contact among peoples
and the responsible use of natural resources. However,
in recent years the freedom of navigation has been
exploited by criminal groups. Transnational maritime
crime is increasingly sophisticated, and it is expanding
both in terms of size and types of criminal activities.
Even as I speak, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) has staff in the field
working with Member States to counter the smuggling
of migrants and terrorist materials and attacks on
shipping in the Gulf of Aden; cocaine trafficking in
the Atlantic; heroin trafficking in the Indian Ocean;
piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea;
kidnap for ransom in the Sulu and Celebes Seas;
illegal fishing in the Atlantic, Indian and Pacific
oceans; and migrant smuggling in the Mediterranean.
Those crimes pose an immediate danger to people’s
lives and safety, undermine human rights, hinder
sustainable development and, as the Council has
recognized, threaten international peace and security.
I am therefore grateful to the presidency of Equatorial
Guinea for bringing this global issue to the Council to
strengthen international responses and protect our seas
from criminals.
We have a solid international legal framework
in place to tackle transnational maritime crime. The
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
settled nearly 40 years ago, addresses only piracy in
detail. But global action is reinforced by the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and its protocols, as well as by the 1988
United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, the
1988 Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts
against the Safety of Maritime Navigation, the global
counter-terrorism instruments, and more. That is the
basis for the technical assistance and capacity-building
that UNODC provides through its country, regional and
global programmes.
By its very nature, maritime crime involves
vessels, cargoes, crews, victims and illicit money flows
from many regions. UNODC’s Global Maritime Crime
Programme operates out of Colombo, which puts our
experts close to some of the world’s busiest shipping
routes. I believe that its annual report, which we just
published, could be of interest to the Council, as it
contains detailed information on, and analysis of, our
activities in different parts of the world. Our methods,
based on long-term mentoring and hands-on training,
19-02803

05/02/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

are innovative, efficient and effective and include work
at sea as well as in coast guard offices, courtrooms
and prisons. Our work on maritime crime grew out of
our successful counter-piracy programme off the coast
of Somalia.
UNODC continues to support trials in Kenya
and Seychelles, as well as the humane and secure
imprisonment of convicted pirates. In that regard, I am
pleased to report that we have completed the first phase
of the Mogadishu Prison and Court Complex, which
will be handed over shortly to the Somali Government
and will provide a secure environment for trying those
suspected of maritime crime and terrorism.
We implement those activities with European
Union naval forces and other international naval forces,
including INTERPOL, the International Maritime
Organization and partners in the commercial maritime
sector. We have further advanced that model of publicprivate cooperation through the Indian Ocean Forum
on Maritime Crime, which coordinates the response to
heroin and charcoal smuggling that is funding terrorist
groups, and the Contact Group on Maritime Crime
in the Sulu and Celebes Seas. UNODC also supports
interregional cooperation against criminal activities
at sea through the so-called Yaoundé maritime
security architecture.
Moreover, we are working to secure the container
trade supply chain through another global programme,
the joint UNODC-World Customs Organization
Container Control Programme, as well as through our
programmes to counter terrorism, human trafficking
and migrant smuggling, wildlife and fisheries crime,
firearms trafficking and emerging crimes. All our work
at sea — where jurisdiction is complex, crime is often
committed unseen and enforcement is difficult — builds
on UNODC’s long experience and research expertise
in addressing all forms of organized crime, terrorism
and corruption.
Going forward, we would welcome the Council’s
support in, first, urging all Member States to facilitate
mutual legal assistance and other forms of cooperation
to address the expansion of transnational organized
crime at sea, through the ratification and effective use
of the international legal framework; and, secondly,
encouraging Member States to enhance technical
assistance so we can continue operationalizing
cooperation through platforms such as the Indian
Ocean Forum on Maritime Crime and through the

S/PV. 8457

exchange of liaison magistrates and regional networks
of prosecutors and central authorities. Such action can
help to ensure that those responsible — the criminal
kingpins — are brought to justice.
Finally, we would welcome the Council’s continued
engagement with this topic, including by encouraging
discussion to identify options for enhancing
coordination, as well as recommendations to better
prevent and counter transnational maritime crime.
UNODC is here to support the Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Fedotov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Ukonga.
Mrs. Ukonga: It is indeed an honour for me
personally, and for the Gulf of Guinea Commission
(GGC), to have been invited to participate in this very
important debate on transnational organized crime at
sea as a threat to international peace and security.
The whole world knows that the primary
responsibility of the Security Council is the maintenance
of international peace and security, and therefore to
deal with any situation or incident in the world that
may constitute a threat to world peace and security.
That threat can come by way of war among or within
nations, but it can also be caused by religious, tribal,
economic or political differences among antagonists. It
can also be caused by criminal activities carried out
across national boundaries, threatening the economic
well-being and sustainable development of the victims
of such acts. As my contribution to this very important
debate, I would like to focus on transnational organized
crime at sea in the Gulf of Guinea region as a threat to
world peace and security.
Several countries of the region established the
GGC on 3 July 2001 to ensure that such threats to the
economic well-being, peace and security of the region
are reduced to the barest minimum, if not completely
eliminated. The region’s rich endowment in hydrocarbon
and living marine resources, along with its importance
as a key route for maritime transport between America,
Europe and Africa and onwards to Asia, also makes it a
very attractive environment for criminals who want to
engage in their nefarious activities. A Gulf of Guinea
that is well patrolled and supervised, as well as better
served socially, would reduce incidents of criminal
activities in its maritime domain.

19-028033/29

S/PV.8457

Maintenance of international peace and security

However, this, unfortunately, is not yet the case.
We in the region are therefore faced with a situation of
increasing criminality in the maritime domain of the
Gulf of Guinea, which is destabilizing the whole region
and constitutes a threat to international peace and
security. The Gulf of Guinea region comprises some 13
countries, from Liberia to Angola, in an area with some
6,000 kilometres of coastline. It is a wide expanse of
land and water that no single country of the region can
successfully patrol. None of the countries of the region
has either the capacity or the capability to even attempt
to undertake that important assignment.
Hence, the countries of the region came together
to form the Gulf of Guinea Commission as a forum to
identify the common problems, compare notes, solve
these problems, adopt best practices and encourage each
member State to take on the primary responsibility for
securing its maritime borders and, in case of need, to
assist neighbours in doing the same by pooling resources
through the establishment of maritime operations
centres in each member State and multinational
coordination centres with neighbouring States. We
now have working multinational coordination centres
in Douala and Cotonou, and regional maritime security
coordination centres in two economic communities of
the Gulf of Guinea region: the Economic Community
of Central African States, with its Regional Center
for African Maritime Security, in Pointe Noire; and
the Economic Community of West African States,
with its West Africa Maritime Regional Safety Center
in Abidjan.
The Gulf of Guinea Commission has pursued
the objectives of its establishment by organizing
specialized committees to deal collectively with
common issues of the region. In that vein, in 2018 the
GGC organized two seminars to bring together experts
of international organizations and member States to
inform and brainstorm on happenings in the region and
member States with a view to adopting best practices.
The two seminars were organized on the following
themes: “The governance of the Atlantic Ocean in the
interest of peace, security and sustainable development
in the Gulf of Guinea” and “The blue economy in the
interest of food security in the Gulf of Guinea region”.
Our next seminar will be on regional maritime strategy
and unregulated migration in the Gulf of Guinea region.
It is scheduled to be held in March in Accra.
Transnational organized crime at sea, as a threat
to international peace and security, is not peculiar to
4/29

05/02/2019

the Gulf of Guinea region. Other regions are equally
being plagued by that scourge. While an international
naval intervention from outside the Gulf of Aden has
succeeded in reducing such incidents in that region,
that may not be feasible in West and Central Africa, the
main reason being that no country in West or Central
Africa is a failed State, as was the case with Somalia.
Also, the States of the region have taken and are taking
measures to patrol their waters. From our own studies
and analyses, we know that transnational organized
crime at sea in our Gulf of Guinea region can be reduced
with a better and more coordinated intervention at the
national, regional and international levels.
At the national level, we must resolve national
disagreements to discourage cooperation with
perpetrators of transnational crime at sea; restore
degraded environment caused by the exploitation of
hydrocarbon resources at sea; and create social, political
and economic conditions that can encourage youth
employment and curb youth restiveness, especially in
those countries engaged in the exploitation of natural
resources such as hydrocarbons and living marine
resources. In multiracial and multitribal societies, we
must ensure the political inclusion of the population,
especially in the coastal parts of the country. The
Governments of the States of the region must commit
to a serious, aggressive and sustained campaign to
create real jobs at home instead of perpetuating illegal
immigration abroad, as the grass is not always greener
on the other side. We must improve the capacity and
capability of national navies to undertake effective
patrolling of the maritime domain. We must ensure
the domestication and implementation of agreements
signed on the suppression of criminal activities at sea
in the Gulf of Guinea region, such as the Yaoundé
Code of Conduct on the prevention and repression of
acts of piracy, armed robbery against vessels, and illicit
activities in the West and Central African maritime
domain, of 25 June 2013.
At the regional level, we must promote cooperation
with neighbouring States to share information on
suspicious movements in the maritime domain;
undertake joint patrols and surveillance of the maritime
domain; collaborate in the operationalization of
agreed maritime strategy; mutualize maritime assets
for better coordination and implementation of agreed
strategies and policies; ensure the effective functioning
of the multinational coordination centres in Douala
and Cotonou and of the Regional Center for African
19-02803

05/02/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

Maritime Security, in Pointe Noire, and the West Africa
Maritime Regional Safety Center, in Abidjan; ensure the
effective functioning of the Interregional Coordination
Center in Yaoundé, established subsequent to the
adoption of resolution 2018 (2011), of 31 October 2011,
and resolution 2039 (2012), of 29 February 2012.
At the international level, we must promote the
assistance and collaboration of international parties and
other stakeholders with countries of the region in order
to enable them to carry out their agreed programmes
and projects for the reduction and eradication of
poverty; encourage direct investment in facilities and
infrastructure to benefit the population; take action to
discourage illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing
in the region and to compel transnational companies to
use best practices in their exploitation activities in order
to avoid sea pollution and environmental degradation in
the region; move to establish mechanisms to criminalize
the purchase of stolen crude oil and to discourage the
commission of such crimes by entities outside the
region; ensure that the proceeds of such crimes are
forfeited to the Governments of the States from which
such resources are stolen; and establish international
mechanisms to control the dumping of toxic residues
in the territorial waters of the region and international
waters adjacent to the region.
With this three-pronged approach, the threat of
transnational organized crime at sea to international
peace and security will be greatly reduced, if not
completely eradicated, in the Gulf of Guinea region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mrs. Ukonga for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
Equatorial Guinea.
As His Excellency Mr. Obiang Nguema Mbasogo,
Head of State of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, did
here in this Chamber yesterday, I would like to start by
expressing the enormous satisfaction and honour that
I feel being here today presiding over this meeting. I
would also like to welcome this debate on “Maintenance
of international peace and security: Transnational
organized crime at sea as a threat to international peace
and security”.
Not only do the oceans unite the nations; natural
resources are paramount and among the most important
vehicles for the progress of humankind. In Africa,

S/PV. 8457

the rise of international organized crime in our seas
and oceans, its growing relationship with terrorist
groups and armed groups in the region, and the
consequences of climate change are posing a growing
threat to the consolidation of development in recent
decades, especially the sustainable development of the
blue economy.
Illegal activities in the African maritime
space — maritime terrorism, money-laundering,
dumping of toxic waste and crude oil, robbery of
crude oil and natural gas, arms and drug trafficking,
human and refugee trafficking, piracy and armed
robbery, illegal fishing, overfishing and environmental
crimes — lead to loss of life and economic losses on a
scale that is devastating for our continent.
As on the African continent, more than 90 per cent of
world trade is carried out by sea. Maritime insecurity in
the region has an impact on the industrial and economic
development of countries. It is for that reason that the
African Union’s Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development highlight the importance
of investment for the sustainable development of seas,
oceans and marine resources.
Through its 2050 Africa Integrated Maritime
Strategy, launched in 2010, the African Union is
working to promote the development of a prosperous and
sustainable blue economy in a safe and environmentally
sustainable manner. The Strategy’s first stage, which
ends this year, has focused on the active promotion of
information exchange, communication, collaboration,
cooperation, capacity-building and coordination within
and among the subregions of the continent.
The countries of the Central and West African
subregions, including the Republic of Equatorial Guinea,
share one maritime space, the Gulf of Guinea — one of
the largest and most populated geopolitical spaces on
the African continent, with an area of 5.6 million square
kilometres and a population of about 260 million people.
In order to defend common interests and promote peace
and socioeconomic development in the countries of
this maritime domain, the Gulf of Guinea Commission
was established in 2001 as a permanent institutional
framework for cooperation made up of eight member
countries, including the Republic of Equatorial Guinea.
My country is firmly committed to contributing
to the sustainable development of Africa and the world
and, as we have demonstrated on many occasions,
to supporting global and regional efforts in the fight

19-028035/29

S/PV.8457

Maintenance of international peace and security

against organized maritime crime in all its forms
and against terrorism. Equatorial Guinea participates
very actively in all initiatives seeking to normalize
the security situation in the Gulf of Guinea, such as
the Obangame Express military exercises, conducted
jointly with the United States and the other countries of
the Gulf of Guinea.
Most of the threats to our security come from the
Gulf of Guinea, as do the resources that sustain our
economy and have enabled us to develop our country in
recent years. That area is therefore of vital importance
for the subsistence of my country, and some of our
efforts to resolve disputes with neighbouring countries
in the Gulf of Guinea have met with success — we
recently signed a security agreement with our sister
Federal Republic of Nigeria to better protect our
mutual interests.
The Gulf of Guinea Commission has also
demonstrated its commitment through the Luanda
Declaration on Peace and Security in the Gulf of Guinea
Region of 2012 and the Declaration of the Heads of State
and Government of Central and West African States
on Maritime Safety and Security in their Common
Maritime Domain, adopted in 2013 in Yaoundé.
Those Declarations established guidelines for
promoting and implementing a permanent mechanism
to enforce and monitor peace and security in the region
and for ensuring development both at sea and on land,
with the participation of a number of subregional
organizations, such as the Economic Community of
Central African States, the Economic Community of
West African States and the Maritime Organization
of West and Central Africa, and in close collaboration
with the African Union, the South Atlantic Peace and
Cooperation Zone and the United Nations.
Those efforts have achieved the strategic result of
the adoption of the Code of Conduct Concerning the
Repression of Piracy, Armed Robbery against Ships,
and Illicit Maritime Activity in West and Central Africa,
also signed in Yaoundé in 2013, a key instrument for
ensuring accountability with regard to maritime peace
and stability in the region, whose implementation is
currently undergoing initial technical evaluations.
In September 2014, the Gulf of Guinea Commission
established the Interregional Coordination Centre for
Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea in
Yaoundé to ensure the implementation of the Code of
Conduct and other strategies related to maritime safety
6/29

05/02/2019

and protection in West and Central Africa. Since then,
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea has contributed to
the implementation of the Commission’s instruments
and strategies. One of its major contributions was the
establishment, financing and maintenance of a naval
military vocational school in the city of Bata, where
officers and junior officers from 20 African States have
been trained to date.
Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea in the past decade
accounted for 30 per cent of all attacks in African
waters. There are three main reasons for that. First,
there has been progress in the fight against piracy off
the East African coast. Secondly, there has been some
success in the containment of drug and arms trafficking
by land routes in Africa and other continents. Thirdly,
there is a need to strengthen the capacity to develop
and enforce regional and national legal frameworks to
combat maritime crime, as the perceived low risk of
breaking the law attracts criminals to engage in illegal
fishing, among other things.
What is happening in the Gulf of Guinea is important
to all of us here. The Gulf of Guinea is an important
shipping route for commercial shipments from Europe
and America to West, Central and Southern Africa. It is
key to the global energy supply because of its proximity
to Europe and North America. And it is an important
source of natural resources for the United States, China,
Japan, the Republic of Korea and European countries.
The Gulf of Guinea is also rich in animal and mineral
resources for the sustainable economic development
of its member countries and Africa, where the diet of
40 per cent of the population is based on fish products.
The Heads of State of the Gulf of Guinea
Commission, with particular reference to the
Declarations I referred to, requested that the African
Union Commission, the United Nations and the other
strategic partners represented in this Chamber support
the efforts that they are making to ensure maritime
peace and security, combat terrorism and piracy and
achieve the sustainable development of the countries
of the region, some of which are among the most in
need in the world and are at the same time faced with
conflict situations and large populations of refugees
and displaced persons.
Resolutions 2018 (2011), 2316 (2016) and 2383
(2017) and presidential statement S/PRST/2016/4,
among other documents, recognize the need for
collective action. The only way to ensure maritime
19-02803

05/02/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8457

security is to work together — if we do so, we will be
able to reap the immense benefits that the sea has to
offer. With regard to Central Africa, it is fair to say
that the level of interest, research and investment by
the United Nations in the region is far lower than that
shown in other regions of Africa. Turning a blind eye to
the maritime importance of Central Africa undermines
continental and global efforts to establish the true
value of the region’s marine resources and to achieve
the sustainable development of our oceans through fair
trade and the development and the implementation of
relevant legal frameworks.

at sea poses to individuals, States and businesses.
Moreover, some criminal groups know how to take
advantage of maritime insecurity in order to engage
in other forms of trafficking, including trafficking in
migrants, as we have seen in the Mediterranean Sea.
Drug trafficking on the high seas, whether of heroin
from Afghanistan or cocaine produced in South
America, fuels terrorist groups and destabilizes entire
economies by fostering corruption. The plundering
of fisheries resources is another harsh reality that
destabilizes coastal regions and inflicts harmful
environmental and socioeconomic consequences.

In conclusion, I appeal to all those present that we
do everything possible to remedy the situation so that we
can build on and strengthen progress and our collective
efforts in the fight against terrorism and transnational
organized crime, with the goal of consolidating peace
and security in our world.

Secondly, the alarming observation I just made
makes it all the more necessary to act robustly at the
international and regional levels to contain the threats
identified. France is fully committed to combating
maritime insecurity in many regions, in particular
in the Gulf of Guinea, the Mediterranean and the
Caribbean. In our national capacity, to give just one
example, we have maintained a presence in the Gulf
of Guinea for 25 years through Mission Corymbe and
related cooperation activities in the areas of security
and defence. We rely on a permanent network of
partners to help partner countries strengthen their
coastal surveillance and response capacities and, since
2015, we have been training experts at the Interregional
Institute for Maritime Security in Abidjan. We are also
participating in European Union activities in the Gulf
of Aden under Operation Atalanta, which has played
a key role in reducing the number of acts of piracy
in the region and is currently conducting numerous
programmes to strengthen the capacity of States.
Operation Atalanta therefore represents a true success
story that has made a significant contribution on the
ground, for which the European Union and the States
concerned should be commended.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to other Council members
who wish to make a statement.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Equatorial Guinea for taking the initiative of organizing
this meeting on transnational organized crime at sea,
and I welcome the presence of the country’s Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation. I also thank
Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), and
Mrs. Florentina Adenike Ukonga, Executive Secretary
of the Gulf of Guinea Commission, for their especially
informative briefings. I wish to make three points.
First, maritime insecurity caused by transnational
crime at sea represents an even greater security threat
given the significance of the related economic and social
challenges. The following statistics suffice to illustrate
the risks posed by maritime insecurity: 90 per cent of
world trade is maritime. As previously mentioned, the
Gulf of Guinea is one of the largest offshore oil fields in
the world, with estimated reserves of 24 billion barrels,
or 5 per cent of the world’s total reserves, while almost
40 per cent of world’s maritime traffic passes through
the Strait of Bab Al-Mandab. Transnational organized
crime therefore has found a natural if not ideal milieu
at sea, while the threats posed to maritime security are
anything but theoretical. Maritime piracy in the Gulf of
Aden and acts of robbery in the Gulf of Guinea perfectly
illustrate the threat that transnational organized crime

In the Gulf of Guinea, the States of the Economic
Community of West African States, the Economic
Community of Central African States and the Gulf of
Guinea Commission have been particularly active since
2013. Through the Group of Seven Group of Friends
of the Gulf of Guinea, France has robustly supported
the establishment of an interregional maritime security
architecture as part of the Yaoundé process. The
establishment of the Interregional Coordination Centre
for Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea,
which is a unique mechanism for the implementation and
monitoring of the regional strategy to combat maritime
insecurity, represents a major step in that direction.

19-028037/29

S/PV.8457

Maintenance of international peace and security

Thirdly, and in conclusion, I would like to make
three priority recommendations to strengthen our
commitment to combating maritime insecurity. The
first recommendation is to strengthen the capacities
of vulnerable States, which is crucial for preventing
and combating the full spectrum of maritime
crime — piracy, trafficking in drugs, oil and human
beings and the smuggling of migrants. In that regard, it
is necessary to focus on the development of a judicial
and prison system that is capable of addressing those
phenomena within the framework of the rule of law;
UNODC clearly has a central role to play in that area.
The second recommendation is to promote better
cooperation among all State actors and regional and
international organizations, in particular to step up
information-sharing. Close cooperation with economic
and non-governmental actors, beginning with the
maritime industry, is obviously necessary in that regard.
The third recommendation, as a broader priority, is
to ensure that coastal populations are provided with
alternatives by pursuing ambitious development
policies. The combination of those three lines of action
will make it possible to effectively combat transnational
crime at sea.
Rest assured of France’s commitment to continue
to spare no effort in that regard.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): We thank Equatorial Guinea for organizing
this important and timely debate on maritime security.
We also thank Mr. Fedotov and Mrs. Ukonga for
their briefings.
As you mentioned, Mr. President, 90 per cent of
world trade is maritime, and Belgium has always been
a hub of international maritime trade. Several Belgian
shipping and dredging companies are active worldwide
and are particularly exposed to maritime crime. The
port of Antwerp is the most important maritime hub for
trade transactions between the European Union and the
African continent and has established close links with
several ports in the Gulf of Guinea, including Dakar,
San Pedro, Cotonou and Kribi. We are concerned about
the increase in piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. Since
2013, Belgium has joined the Group of Seven Group of
Friends of the Gulf of Guinea to support the Yaoundé
interregional process. As a member of the European
Union’s task force for maritime safety in the Gulf of
Guinea, Belgium provides concrete assistance to the
European Union Action Plan 2015-2020 in support
of the efforts of the Economic Community of West
8/29

05/02/2019

African States, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the Gulf of Guinea Commission.
Transnational maritime crime is a complex and
multifaceted issue that makes use of legal and security
gaps in international waters, the difficulties of ensuring
full control of all maritime coasts and of inadequate
regional cooperation, and the deep-seated roots of
organized crime and terrorism. A comprehensive
and integrated approach is needed to meet this
multidimensional challenge, and measures must be
taken in many areas, including defence, security
and justice.
First, on the defence and security front, Belgium has
engaged in several important international efforts. We
are participating in Operation Atalanta, which combats
maritime piracy in the Horn of Africa, the Red Sea, the
Gulf of Aden and the Gulf of Oman. We have deployed a
frigate to the Operation for four periods of three months
each and have also taken part in the command of the
Operation. Belgium also helped to create the Maritime
Security Centre-Horn of Africa, in which marine forces
and commercial shipping cooperate closely. Finally,
every year since 2013, our navy has sent a ship to the
Gulf of Guinea to support the countries of the region in
strengthening their maritime capacities.
On the policing and judicial front, Belgium has
taken a number of important steps. First, thanks to
international legal cooperation, new legislation and
the proactive efforts of our police and justice services,
several notorious pirates have been convicted in
Belgium. The best-known case is probably the 2013
conviction of Mohamed Abdi Hassan, who was behind
the 2009 attack on the Belgian dredging ship Pompeii.
Secondly, based on the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), Belgium has adopted
a very progressive law that provides flexible options
for interviewing, arresting and detaining pirates’
accomplices and involves close cooperation between
judicial, police and naval personnel. Belgium has also
developed a legal framework for deploying private
armed guards to protect merchant ships. We have also
taken a strong stand on the issue of maritime drug
trafficking. At the port of Antwerp, in one of the first
arrangements of this kind in the world, local and federal
police, the social inspectorate, customs authorities
and the public prosecutor’s office are working under
a single administration to promote exchanges and
increase efficiency.
19-02803

05/02/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

Our national efforts are therefore important, and
we believe that the most vulnerable States deserve
to be supported, because we are all affected. The
support provided by the United Nations and a number
of its entities, particularly the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, is extremely useful and should
be increased. However, we all know that our national
efforts will be in vain if they are not accompanied by
genuine regional and international cooperation. Here,
too, we can and must do better, because crime thrives
when our efforts are fragmented.
Lastly, we cannot properly understand the
phenomenon of maritime crime without examining
its deep roots, including deteriorating economic
conditions for large sections of a population and a lack
of future prospects.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome you, Sir, as President of the
Security Council, and we thank you for taking the
initiative to convene today’s meeting. We also thank
Mr. Fedotov and Mrs. Ukonga for their briefings.
We share the concerns about the expansion of
international criminal groups’ activities, including
on the high seas. Sadly, we have failed to halt the
worsening spiral of illegal migration, while the scale
of the illicit trade in arms and drugs has grown and
human trafficking continues. We are encountering
threats of piracy and robbery at sea in many regions
today. The Russian Federation is especially concerned
about recent robberies of commercial vessels involving
hostage-taking of Russian crew members.
Establishing a systematic approach to preventing
and eliminating complex criminal activity is not an easy
task. We welcome the efforts in that regard of a number
of United Nations mechanisms that have frequently
proved effective, including the regular sessions of
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice, based in Vienna. The General Assembly and its
Third Committee continue to focus on various aspects
of countering illegal activity. There is also successful
cooperation in regional formats, particularly those
such as the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia, the Gulf of Guinea Commission, the Maritime
Forum of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
and the East Asia Summit on Maritime Security and
Cooperation. The United Nations Office on Drugs and

S/PV. 8457

Crime is actively involved, primarily by providing
interested States with specialized technical assistance
at their request. We welcome and support such efforts.
The Russian Federation has traditionally advocated
strengthening the central coordinating role of the
United Nations in fighting crime, and we believe it is
essential to establish under the auspices of the United
Nations a universal, intergovernmental coordination
mechanism with a mandate for broad functions and
geographic scope that is independent of the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia and other
regional forums that combat maritime piracy and crime.
Establishing such a specialized structure would make it
significantly easier to resolve a number of issues in the
fight against new challenges and threats at sea.
In the context of such threats, the Council naturally
will not remain on the sidelines. It has frequently
discussed specific aspects of piracy and robbery at
sea in various regions of the world, as well as human
trafficking in situations of armed conflict. Needless to
say, it has also given major attention to the ongoing close
links between armed conflicts, terrorism and the various
forms of transnational organized crime, including illicit
trafficking in weapons, drugs and cultural heritage
objects as well as illegal migration. The Security
Council has developed a serious legal foundation in all
those areas through its adoption of specific resolutions
and presidential statements. However, there are areas
where its power and prerogatives are not so clear. A
lot of questions would be asked if the Security Council
took it upon itself to regulate illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing, or the degradation of the maritime
environment, for instance. Under the Charter of the
United Nations, the Council’s job is to respond as
effectively, situationally and efficiently as possible to
crises that threaten international peace and security.
That said, we reaffirm our determination to
continue to contribute to expanding international
cooperation on law enforcement in order to eliminate
urgent threats posed by transnational organized crime.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to thank you, Mr. Esono Angue, for joining us
and presiding over today’s meeting. I also thank
Mr. Fedotov and Mrs. Ukonga for their briefings. The
United States thanks Equatorial Guinea for putting this
deeply problematic side effect of our modern global
economy on the Security Council’s agenda. All of us
rely on ships to carry the world’s goods safely from

19-028039/29

S/PV.8457

Maintenance of international peace and security

one port to another. We all have a stake in stopping
crime at sea. It is an issue too large for one nation to
handle alone.
Every country should be deploying a broad range
of tools — diplomatic, economic, social, military,
intelligence, law-enforcement and judicial — to tackle
the problem. Likewise, all countries that have ratified
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocols should redouble
their efforts to implement it more effectively. We
urge all States that have not yet done so to ratify the
Convention, and all States parties to ensure that their
domestic laws appropriately criminalize the core
offences listed in the Convention and its Protocols.
Doing so will make it easier for law-enforcement and
criminal justice authorities to investigate and prosecute
transnational criminals.
In addition, there are numerous existing Security
Council resolutions that promote maritime security,
and their implementation is keeping our seas safer.
Resolution 1816 (2008) led to the coordinated
deployment of international naval forces to fight piracy
off the coast of Somalia, resulting in a steady decline
in pirate attacks and hijackings since 2011. Resolution
2036 (2012) banned the export of Somali charcoal,
successfully cutting off an important revenue stream
for Al-Shabaab and weakening its ability to carry out
its acts of terror. Resolution 2216 (2015) established
a targeted arms embargo to prevent acts that threaten
peace, security and stability in Yemen, and in connection
with it, the United States Navy has seized weapons that
were destined for Houthi rebels. Resolution 2375 (2017)
banned ship-to-ship transfers of any items or goods to
or from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
prevent it from illegally selling coal and buying fuel,
and resolution 2397 (2017) enabled States to seize
and impound any ships violating those sanctions.
Resolution 2146 (2014) banned illegal oil exports from
Libya and authorized States to take action against such
vessels through the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011).
In addition to those tools, capacity-building is vital
to addressing maritime security. The United States has
been a long-time partner for many countries in those
efforts. President Trump renewed that commitment in his
February 2017 executive order on transnational criminal
organizations, in which he directed our Government to
assist partners in strengthening their maritime security
capabilities. In support of the 2013 Yaoundé process,
10/29

05/02/2019

the United States works with INTERPOL and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to provide
assistance to Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Togo, Benin and
Nigeria in the Gulf of Guinea. We work together to
improve regional information-sharing, maritime lawenforcement interdiction and investigation capabilities
and legal reforms. To combat offshore listed activities
in Africa, the United States Africa Command has
worked with European and African partners since 2011
to conduct annual at-sea maritime exercises in the
Gulf of Guinea and the Gulf of Aden, programmes that
have increased law enforcement’s capacity to interdict
illicit goods, counter human trafficking and prevent
unlawful fishing.
International drug trafficking also threatens
maritime security, including for people who depend
on our oceans, especially since global cocaine and
opium production hit record highs in 2018. In order to
address that, President Trump announced a global call
to action on the world drug problem in his September
2018 speech at the General Assembly (see A/73/PV.6),
with the objective of reducing drug demand, cutting
off the supply of illicit drugs, expanding treatment and
strengthening international cooperation.
Organized crime at sea hurts us all and requires
a coordinated response from us all. Making real
progress on that issue will require concrete action and
even stronger international cooperation, for which the
United States will remain a strong partner.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): As this
is the first time I have addressed the Council since the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea assumed its presidency,
while welcoming your presence here, Mr. President, I
would also like to congratulate your country and extend
to Ambassador Ndong Mba and his team my best
wishes for their successful leadership of the Council’s
work during the month of February.
Côte d’Ivoire and Equatorial Guinea, like the other
countries of the Gulf of Guinea, have been dealing with
persistent maritime insecurity and acts of piracy for a
number of years. In view of the major importance of
the maritime sector to the economies of the Gulf of
Guinea States, it is clear that in addition to being a
threat to peace and security, acts of maritime piracy
undermine the tireless efforts of the countries of the
region to achieve economic and social development. It
is therefore for good reason that we welcome Equatorial
Guinea’s choice of the topic of transnational organized
19-02803

05/02/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8457

crime at sea, whose challenges are even more clear
thanks to the informative briefings from Mr. Yury
Fedotov and Mrs. Ukonga, whom we want to thank.

boosted by the implementation of subregional counterstrategies such as the ECOWAS Integrated Maritime
Strategy, adopted on 29 March 2014 in Yamoussoukro.

The steady drop in the number of attacks on ships
between 2013 and 2015 fuelled hopes that the Gulf of
Guinea was gradually ceasing to be a maritime risk area.
According to International Maritime Bureau (IMB)
statistics, attacks on ships in the region fell from 52
in 2013 to 41 in 2014 and 31 in 2015, declines of 21 per
cent and 24 per cent for the two periods. Unfortunately,
in 2018 such acts of piracy, mainly targeting merchant
ships, saw an upward trend in West Africa. According
to the latest annual report of the IMB’s Piracy Reporting
Centre, the number of acts of piracy recorded between
Côte d’Ivoire and the Democratic Republic of Congo
more than doubled, reaching 82 of the total of 87
recorded around the African continent. The area also
has the highest concentration of violent acts during the
year, including 100 per cent of the six ship hijackings,
13 of 18 incidents involving firing on boats, 130 of 141
hostage-taking incidents and 78 of the 83 kidnappings
for ransom worldwide.

The resurgence in acts of piracy demands that
the Council address the urgent need to strengthen the
logistical and operational capacities of the States of the
region and further promote subregional cooperation.
Côte d’Ivoire remains convinced that subregional
and regional strategies can be effective only when
based first and foremost on strong national strategies
and capacities, since the primary responsibility for
ensuring peace and security lies with each State. With
that in mind, and with the support of its bilateral and
multilateral partners, my country has therefore adopted
a national strategy for State action at sea aimed at
creating a secure, adequate and sustainable maritime
space for Côte d’Ivoire that serves economic prosperity
and human development. In order to implement the
strategy, we have acquired four patrol boats and opened
maritime operations centres in our two main ports in
order to enable our navy to better identify and prevent
threats, protect our maritime resources and share data
with neighbouring countries. My delegation would
like to take this opportunity to reiterate the gratitude
of the Government of Côte d’Ivoire to its bilateral and
multilateral partners for their multifaceted support in
implementing our State action at sea and building our
national capacity for tackling the challenge of maritime
insecurity. With regard to subregional cooperation, my
country’s hosting of the Regional Maritime Security
Centre for West Africa and the Interregional Institute
for Maritime Security is a clear reflection of its
commitment to combating maritime insecurity.

Acts of piracy are a serious concern for those
States, especially since they now affect the safety and
security of their port infrastructures, which are the
lifeblood of local economies. In order to keep these
threats in check, the States of the Gulf of Guinea
have recognized the urgent need to provide effective
and sustainable responses to them. With the adoption
of resolution 2039 (2012), which encouraged them to
develop a regional strategy to combat piracy and create
a multinational and transregional mechanism for the
entire Gulf region, those States developed a common
strategy for fighting maritime insecurity in the Gulf of
Guinea, adopted on 25 June 2013 by the Heads of State
and Government of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Community
of Central African States and the Gulf of Guinea
Commission at the Yaoundé Summit. The Summit
also enabled them to approve a code of conduct and a
memorandum of understanding on maritime security
in the Gulf of Guinea establishing an Interregional
Coordination Centre in Yaoundé designed to cooperate
with the Regional Centre for Central African Maritime
Security in Pointe-Noire, in the Republic of the Congo,
and the ECOWAS Regional Maritime Security Centre
in Abidjan, in Côte d’Ivoire. This institutional network,
perfectly aligned with 2050 Africa’s Integrated
Maritime Strategy for oceans and seas, has been

Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the efforts of the States
of the Gulf of Guinea to strengthen their national
capacities in synergy with the African Union and all
its international partners. We believe that in order to be
effective, the Gulf of Guinea States must act according
to the three rules of cooperation, coordination and
collaboration. We must strengthen the coordination
among our national institutional actors, including
navies, coastguards, port police, customs officers and
legal authorities. Ultimately, that coordination should
result in a single space within which States’ police,
customs and legal institutions can share information
and where the right to prosecute the perpetrators of acts
of maritime piracy on sea and on land is recognized.
Furthermore, finding sustainable solutions to
acts of maritime piracy must be conducted within the

19-0280311/29

S/PV.8457

Maintenance of international peace and security

framework of a holistic approach that integrates the
fight against poverty and unemployment, two scourges
that foster the recruitment of many young people by
maritime crime networks. In that regard, my country
would like to emphasize the important role of the
United Nations, in particular the Security Council. We
commend the work of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime in providing its technical assistance
in building the capacity of West African States.
In conclusion, I would like to affirm my country’s
belief that building national capacities and strengthening
cooperation among States, regional and international
organizations must be the basis for our action if we are
to effectively combat maritime insecurity and piracy in
the Gulf of Guinea.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, I would like to
thank Equatorial Guinea for organizing this debate and
Mr. Esono Angue for presiding over it. We would also
like to thank Mr. Fedotov and Mrs. Ukonga for their
excellent briefings.
Piracy, armed robbery at sea and other illicit and
illegal activities in the Gulf of Guinea remain a source
of concern. We are not talking about petty crime. Left
unchecked, such activities could destabilize the entire
region. As we heard from the briefers this morning,
the coastal States, the region and the international
community as a whole have analysed the risks and have
acted on them. However, we can and should do more.
We can build on a solid foundation of regional efforts
and international cooperation in the Gulf of Guinea. We
applaud the leadership demonstrated by the countries
of the region. The Summit in June 2013 that included
members of the Economic Community of West African
States, the Economic Community of Central African
States and the Gulf of Guinea Commission (GGC) was
a turning point. I am especially grateful to Mrs. Ukonga
of the GGC for the great work that the Commission has
done on this over many years.
Germany has been active in the region for many
years, bilaterally and as part of the European Union
(EU). We have supported the Yaoundé process for
maritime security in West Africa. To give two examples,
Germany contributed funding to the Interregional
Coordination Centre in Yaoundé, and as a member of
the Group of Seven Group of Friends of the Gulf of
Guinea, we have contributed financial support to four
regional coordination centres in Benin, Ghana, Côte
d’Ivoire and Cabo Verde.
12/29

05/02/2019

Let us not forget the substantial role of the
European Union. Among other things, the European
Union supported the Critical Maritime Routes Gulf of
Guinea project and its successor, the Gulf of Guinea
Interregional Network, and it will continue to help
and assist as part of the EU strategy for the Gulf of
Guinea aimed at supporting efforts by coastal States
and regional organizations.
The European Union’s greater maritime security
strategic effort, however, extends beyond the Gulf of
Guinea. In the framework of its common security and
defence policy, to which some speakers have already
alluded, the EU is notably engaged with a military
operation and a civilian mission with a maritime focus
on the Horn of Africa, the European Union Naval Force
Operation Atalanta and the EU Capacity Building
Mission in Somalia. Germany is contributing personnel
and assets to both. Germany is also currently supporting
the implementation of the Port State Measures
Agreement of the Food and Agriculture Organization
to the tune of €1 million in order to support harbour
States in combating illegal fishing. In that context
regional ownership is key to success.
Tackling criminal networks that deal in piracy,
trafficking, robbery and theft requires wit and stamina.
Crimes on the high seas pay well and criminal networks
have proved highly adaptable in protecting their sources
of income. We need a combination of intelligence,
policing and support by armed forces. We have to cut
financial flows and recover the funds derived from
criminal activities. At the same time, we have to
look at the root causes of the issue. The fight against
criminal networks at sea can only be successful when
socioeconomic development in the region is fostered. A
lack of jobs and opportunities can push marginalized
populations into illegal pursuits. Without legal sources
of income, young people are easily attracted by
criminal networks.
Once again, we are grateful to Equatorial Guinea
for organizing this debate. As a trading nation,
Germany depends heavily on the freedom of the
seas. We will continue to support regional and other
multilateral initiatives aimed at guaranteeing safe and
unhindered navigation.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): I would like to express my gratitude
to Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, for his informative
19-02803

05/02/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8457

briefing today, and to Her Excellency Mrs. Florentina
Adenike Ukonga, Executive Secretary of the Gulf of
Guinea Commission. And through you, Mr. President, I
would like to thank Equatorial Guinea for coordinating
this debate on an issue that the Dominican Republic
also considers particularly important.

use of our seas and oceans for such purposes depends
to a great extent on our ability to deepen cooperation
among our nations. It is a matter of joining efforts
to combat a common evil that affects all of us by
optimizing resources and strengthening our national
and regional capacities.

Transnational organized crime at sea continues to
be one of the main threats to international security and
global economic stability, which is obvious, considering
that the sea, which occupies two-thirds of the planet,
is an essential space for the continued development of
humankind. It is up to all States, regardless of their
geographic location, to protect this essential common
good. As we have already seen, piracy, armed robbery,
trafficking in arms and drugs, the smuggling of migrants
and trafficking in persons are some of the scourges
committed by organized crime throughout our seas
and oceans whose modalities are constantly changing.
That requires appropriate action. In that regard, the
availability of resources and cooperation among States
are essential.

The implementation of joint maritime operations,
improvements in the collection, analysis and exchange
of intelligence information, the best possible
infrastructure, equipment and training, and judicial
and law enforcement systems, including customs,
counter-narcotics agencies and coast guards, among
others, are in accordance with the relevant international
instruments on the protection of our maritime space.
All that should keep pace with the threats that we face
and the capacity of each State, since the burden of
responsibility of some transit States, such as ours, is
sometimes disproportionate to that of others that are
the final destination or market.

Among the evils that have been mentioned, one
of the most harmful is transnational drug trafficking,
which affects almost all regions, and our country is
no exception to that scourge. Regardless of where
our countries are placed in the range of activities of
those criminal organizations, whether in production,
trafficking or consumption, the severe negative impacts
of such activities damage our societies and economies.
The figures available regarding this issue are
heartbreaking and alarming. The trafficking of cocaine
and heroin gives rise to drug trafficking by sea of
more lethal substances, which have been described as
epidemics. I am talking about the trafficking of opioids,
which in 2018 represented nearly 90 per cent of global
seizures, in the countries of North, Central and West
Africa alone, and in the United States in 2017 claimed
the lives of approximately 48,000 people, equivalent to
68 per cent of all overdoses.
Bearing witness to that reality, we can understand
that apart from the dangers that it poses to public health,
transnational drug trafficking is an obstacle to economic
growth and a threat to the national security of our
countries, which weaken the rule of law and undermine
public confidence, heightening the weaknesses of our
regions and limiting our development.
From our own regional experience, we understand
that combating transnational organized crime and the

That assessment is relevant, since it serves as a
way to contain a general problem that has differentiated
impacts on States and tends to drain vital resources for
the development of basic social policies. We must ask
ourselves whether that strategy is beneficial to all and
how cooperation mechanisms can better distribute the
burden of responsibilities.
Finally, we cannot fail to address the root causes that
fuel the participation of young people in transnational
organized crime, including limited development
opportunities, as a preventive policy.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Equatorial Guinea for its initiative in convening
this open debate under the rotating presidency of
the Security Council for this month. I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Oyono Esono Angue, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Equatorial Guinea,
to New York and would like to thank him for presiding
over this meeting. I also thank Mr. Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, and Mrs. Ukonga, Executive Secretary of the
Gulf of Guinea Commission (GGC), for their briefings.
Oceans are a fount of the resources on which we rely
for our survival and development. They are instrumental
to international peace and security, interconnectivity
and free trade. Pirate attacks and armed robbery at
sea still occur frequently. Maritime trafficking in
arms, drugs and persons continues unabated. Illegal
funds flow into terrorist organizations, extremist

19-0280313/29

S/PV.8457

Maintenance of international peace and security

forces and criminal groups, exacerbating national and
regional instability and threatening international peace
and security.
In recent years, pirate attacks in the Gulf of Aden
have significantly decreased thanks to the concerted
efforts of the international community. However, the
situation of maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea, off
the west coast of Africa, remains grim and has severely
affected the economic and social development of coastal
States in Africa. China always actively supports mutual,
pragmatic and win-win maritime security cooperation
and abides by the new common, comprehensive,
integrated and sustainable maritime security strategy.
We support the countries concerned in their efforts to
enhance coordination, formulate common strategies
and mechanisms, and combat transnational organized
crime at sea, thereby promoting development and
prosperity in the coastal States and regions. I would
like to highlight the following points.
First, we should assist the capacity-building efforts
of coastal States, while respecting their sovereignty.
That involves supporting coastal States in improving
their domestic legislation and in establishing
and strengthening maritime security forces. The
international community should take an active part
in the construction, operation and maintenance of the
ports and other facilities of the coastal States so that
they can provide better service to ships in the areas
of docking, supplies and maintenance and be better
equipped to provide adequate logistical support. It is
also necessary to help coastal States and areas, as well
as countries of the region, to improve their operational
capacity in joint law enforcement and monitoring.
Secondly, regional and subregional organizations
should have a greater role and a long-term mechanism
should be put in place at the regional level. China
welcomes the adoption of the Charter on Maritime
Security and Safety and Development in Africa at the
African Union (AU) Extraordinary Summit of Heads
of State and Government on Maritime Security and
Safety and Development in Africa, which guides the
way forward for African countries to jointly address
maritime security issues and develop the marine
economy. We call on the international community to
support regional and subregional organizations such
as the AU, the Economic Community of West African
States, the Economic Community of Central African
States and the GGC in their efforts to fully implement
the comprehensive anti-piracy strategy. We support the
14/29

05/02/2019

capacity-building of the Regional Centre for Maritime
Security in Central Africa, the Regional Maritime
Security Centre for West Africa and the Interregional
Coordination Centre for Maritime Security in the Gulf
of Guinea through increased funding and technological
input and enhanced information-sharing so that the
regional mechanisms can operate fully and effectively
over the long term.
Thirdly, it is necessary to mobilize resources to
strengthen international cooperation. The relevant
United Nations agencies, including the International
Maritime Organization, and INTERPOl, among others,
should provide more assistance to coastal States.
Drawing on past successes and on the basis of full
consultation with the coastal States, the international
community should strengthen joint law enforcement,
increase the transfer of pirates and others suspected
of transnational organized crime at sea, step up the
exchange of evidence and information and facilitate the
investigation, prosecution and trial of relevant cases
with all the necessary assistance.
Fourthly, I would like to point out the importance
of increasing development assistance to coastal States.
Development is the overarching key to solving all
problems. The international community should look
at the economic and social development plans of those
countries and increase assistance to help them root
out the causes of poverty and social injustice, speed
up economic and social development and increase
the youth employment rate and counter-terrorism
cooperation so as to effectively combat transnational
organized crime at sea.
China has always been good friend, partner
and brother of African States and has been by their
side through thick and thin. We adhere to the policy
concept of sincerity, practical results, affinity and good
faith towards Africa, uphold the values of friendship,
justice and shared interests and actively assist Africa
in its security capacity-building. In accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions,
China has carried out escort operations in Somalia’s
coastal waters, actively participated in international
cooperation against piracy in the Gulf of Guinea and
provided assistance to coastal States in strengthening
infrastructure and other capacity-building.
China will continue to implement the Beijing action
plan adopted at the Summit of the Forum on ChinaAfrica Cooperation in September last year so as to
19-02803

05/02/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8457

strengthen our exchange and cooperation with African
ports and support African countries in promoting port
informatization. We will scale up defence and security
assistance in Africa and strengthen results-based
cooperation in the areas of social governance, counterterrorism and counter-piracy. The China-Africa peace
and security cooperation fund will be put in place to
support Africa’s efforts in strengthening maritime law
enforcement capacity-building. China stands ready
to continue its efforts to support African countries in
achieving lasting peace and common prosperity.

Now, nearly 10 years after the report was published,
it is important for the Security Council to consider all
options available in order to understand the threats
posed by transnational organized crime, particularly in
relation to threats of crime at sea. In that regard, the
Council may consider asking the Secretariat to prepare
a report identifying options to enhance cooperation
and coordination and make recommendations to better
prevent and counter transnational organized crimes at
sea, within the applicable legal framework, and report
to the Council on it regularly.

Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, I would like to
begin by thanking Equatorial Guinea for convening a
debate on this important subject and by welcoming His
Excellency Mr. Simeon Oyono Esono Angue, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea. Your presence, Sir, has certainly
set the tone for today’s important discussion. I would
also like to thank Executive Director Fedotov and
Mrs. Ukonga for their presentations.

Secondly, Indonesia believes that national
prosecutorial and enforcement capability should be
strengthened. Almost every stage in the activities
of transnational organized crime at sea — from
the planning, execution and financial flows to the
keeping of the proceeds of crimes — could happen
in different jurisdictions simultaneously. Therefore,
Member States need to enhance their legal regime to
enable effective international cooperation in the field,
such as extradition, mutual legal assistance and joint
investigations. Jurisdiction should be a bridge, not a
barrier, to ensuring that wrong is redressed and justice
is ensured. Where the crimes occur beyond any national
jurisdiction, States are encouraged to resort to joint or
coordinated maritime operations to curb such crimes,
while observing the law of the sea.

As the largest archipelagic State in the world, with
17,504 islands and strategically positioned between
the Indian and Pacific Oceans, Indonesia knows fullwell that there is no substitute for a strong policy
and swift enforcement response to any threat or act
that endangers the safety and security of its maritime
domains. We believe that transnational organized
crimes, wherever they are committed, may constitute
a threat to peace and security, and therefore need to
be comprehensively and collectively addressed by the
international community. The detrimental impacts of
transnational organized crimes are neither isolated nor
local, but are increasingly regional and global in nature.
The groups behind such crimes do not operate solely
in countries with weak law enforcement or governance
capacity. They also take advantage of the finer features
of the global economy, such as banking, trade and
communication networks, in order to fully expand the
scope their criminal activities. Technology has made
criminals more elusive. With regard to today’s debate,
the Indonesian delegation would like to highlight the
following points.
First, we need a better understanding of the nature
and threat of transnational organized crimes, as well
as of their implications for international peace and
security. The 2010 report of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) entitled The Globalization
of Crime noted a lack of available information
regarding transnational criminal markets and trends.

Thirdly, Indonesia also strongly advocates the
critical role of regional mechanisms as first responders
to transnational organized crimes at sea. Numerous
mechanisms have been established in the Asia-Pacific
region to address the scourge of transnational organized
crime, among which is the Malacca Strait Patrols by
Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore. In addition, the
Trilateral Patrol was initiated in 2016 by Indonesia,
Malaysia and the Philippines to counter and address
maritime crimes in the Sulu Sea. Such cooperation
envisages a coordinated naval patrol to secure the
important Sulu-Celebes maritime trade routes. We
also believe that everyone should be involved in the
discourse on maritime security and be supported by the
efforts made under the auspices of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Maritime Forum,
the ASEAN Regional Forum, the Indian Ocean Rim
Association and others. International organizations
such as the International Maritime Organization and
the International Labour Organization should also
support regional efforts.

19-0280315/29

S/PV.8457

Maintenance of international peace and security

Fourthly, Indonesia would also like to mention at
today’s debate an emerging transnational organized
crime, namely, crimes related to fisheries, which entail
not only criminal aspects with a transnational dimension
but a human rights facet as well. In our experience,
many vessels committing crimes related to fisheries are
also implicated in human rights violations, particularly
the forced labour of trafficked persons. Studies reveal
that crimes related to fisheries involve big business
players, high-ranking persons, political back-up and
massive financial resources. For Indonesia, the issue
of illegal, unreported and unregulated fisheries is a
crime that needs common action. Crimes related to
fisheries threaten not only the economy of the victim
countries but also the sustainability of their marine
environment. That concern is also highlighted in the
2011 UNODC report. It is high time for the Council to
discuss the issue.
Crime at sea is transnational, transboundary and
extrajudicial in nature. In the past the sea has been a
vast body of water where criminals could be elusive,
hiding behind waves and reefs. With the emergence of
technology, nowadays criminal ships become a dot on a
computer screen and are easily recognized on a satellite
map. What is needed now is collective responsibility
and a common approach and joint action by nations to
fight this centuries-old crime. The Council, in line with
its mandate, should be active to ensure peace at sea and
that ships sail safely.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
commend Equatorial Guinea for having convened this
important debate and welcome your presence here,
Mr. Minister. We are also grateful for the presence of
the Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and of the Executive
Secretary of the Gulf of Guinea Commission.
Peru is part of an age-old culture that has always
recognized the marine wealth of our coasts. Fishing
remains for us an important source of nourishment
and development, and we therefore deem of the highest
importance the protection and monitoring of maritime
spaces. We are seriously concerned about the threat that
piracy and armed robbery at sea pose to international
navigation, security and economic growth, particularly
in the Gulf of Guinea, as well as to the security and
well-being of seafarers.
We would therefore stress the importance of
taking a comprehensive approach, led by the countries
16/29

05/02/2019

of the region, to fighting crime, which must include
addressing the root causes of such threats. This is
particularly urgent in an increasingly interdependent
world in which 90 per cent of global trade takes place
by sea.
While the focus of the international community in
this field has been on the Horn of Africa and SouthEast Asia, the Gulf of Guinea has also become a locus
of maritime crime and piracy owing to its vast oil and
gas resources, as statistics for 2018 show. We condemn
the killings, hostage-taking and robberies committed
by pirates operating in the Gulf of Guinea and other
areas, and we urge the States of the regions affected to
cooperate in bringing those responsible to justice and in
strengthening judicial systems and judicial cooperation.
We also call on all States and on the private sector
to foster fresh synergies, including in the area of the
exchange of information and intelligence. We are
particularly concerned at the fact that some of the drugs
produced in South America and Asia pass through the
Gulf of Guinea on their way to European markets. This
is also clear evidence of the link between piracy and
armed robbery at sea with transnational organized
crime, including drug trafficking.
Peru would recall its concern, recognized by
the Council in its presidential statement of May
last (S/PRST/2018/9), at the relationship between
transnational crime and terrorism, which makes it
possible for terrorist groups from West Africa and the
Sahel region to profit from the income generated by
piracy and armed robbery. In that vein, we acknowledge
the positive cooperation between UNODC and the
United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice
Research Institute and with INTERPOL.
Likewise, we acknowledge the efforts made in
the region by the International Maritime Organization
and urge it to explore new areas for cooperation and
possible synergies in the area of maritime security.
We encourage active participation by regional
organizations in responding to maritime crime on the
basis of applicable international law, including the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. It is
also important to resolve disputes on maritime limits in
order to ensure greater stability in the areas concerned.
I wish to conclude by reiterating the primary
responsibility of States for eradicating piracy and
armed robbery at sea, as well as the key role that the
19-02803

05/02/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

Organization is called upon to play in supporting
national and regional efforts to respond to this threat.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I wish to welcome you, Mr. President,
to New York and to thank you for having convened
this meeting. I wish also to thank Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), and Mrs. Florentina
Adenike Ukonga, Executive Secretary of the Gulf of
Guinea Commission, for their valuable briefings.
I should like also to congratulate the representative
of the People’s Republic of China and his friendly
country on the occasion of the Chinese New Year.
In our debate today I want to focus on three issues:
first, efforts made at the international level; secondly,
the ramifications of transnational organized crime; and,
thirdly, the importance of international cooperation.
Concerning the first issue, tireless efforts have
been made at the international level to protect and
preserve the seas. This has included the conclusion of
various conventions and the holding of various regional
and international conferences such as the ministerial
meeting on the Western Indian Ocean in Mauritius
in April 2018, which led to the Mauritius Declaration
on Maritime Security, and the agreement on the
coordination of maritime operations in the Western
Indian Ocean. Such regional measures build and
promote the international legal framework necessary
to guarantee safe shipping, with positive effects on
peace, security and cooperation as well as on friendly
relations among all nations, as well as on the economic
and social advancement of peoples.
The report of the Secretary-General on oceans
and the law of the sea (A/73/368) indicates that 80 per
cent of world trade takes place by sea, which is the
main means of international trade and a fundamental
driver in the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
Secondly, on the repercussions of transnational
organized crime at sea, such a crime constitutes a serious
threat to international peace and security. Terrorist
groups such as those in the Gulf of Aden, on the coast of
Somalia and in the Gulf of Guinea are involved in many
illegal activities, including drug trafficking; weaponssmuggling; migrant-smuggling; trafficking in human
beings; piracy and armed robbery; and terrorist activity
against vessels at sea and kidnapping for ransom.

S/PV. 8457

The achievement of such illegitimate purposes
causes tremendous damage and loss of human life
and can also undermine international trade, energy
provision and the world economy in general. By way of
example, illegal migration at sea today represents one of
the greatest challenges to the international community,
since it has security and humanitarian dimensions.
Statistics provided by the International Organization
for Migration indicate that 1,514 people died at sea in
the first seven months of 2018 alone. In 2017, 3,140
people lost their lives trying to get to Europe.
In some States, political vacuums and political
troubles, as well as economic recession, an increased
unemployment rate and poverty, create a fertile breeding
ground for increased transnational organized crime and
the proliferation of terrorist organizations that commit
crimes such as the ones I listed earlier. This also
exacerbates the complexity and duration of conflicts.
All of this requires that we redouble our international
efforts to combat piracy in all of its manifestations in
order to maintain energy provision, international trade
and shipping.
Article 100 of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea stipulates that:
“All States shall cooperate to the fullest possible
extent in the repression of piracy on the high seas
or in any other place outside the jurisdiction of
any State.”
In that regard, we underscore the commitment
to implement the measures set out in resolution 2442
(2018), on piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast
of Somalia. That should go hand in hand with national
efforts of Member States.
We pay tribute to the Contact Group on Piracy off
the Coast of Somalia and to international cooperation
undertaken in the framework of the Group of Friends of
the Gulf of Guinea, which is affiliated with the Group
of Seven; the Economic Community of West African
States; and the Economic Community of Central
African States in the fight against organized crime.
Thirdly and finally, international cooperation among
States and international and regional organizations has
become important. It can be undertaken by building
State capacity and cooperation among maritime
sectors, as well as by implementing and acceding
to international conventions and instruments, while
enacting legislation to effectively prevent organized

19-0280317/29

S/PV.8457

Maintenance of international peace and security

crime. In that regard, I note the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and its protocols, and the Arab Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime. We appreciate the
efforts made by the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime in undertaking a range of capacity-building
activities, including the establishment of maritime
departments and appropriate legislative frameworks
within its Global Maritime Crime Programme.
We reiterate that transnational organized crime still
represents a threat to international peace and security.
It is closely connected to terrorism, which requires us
to coordinate better, in particular with those countries
that suffer from this phenomenon, and to continue
providing technical assistance to build the capacities of
all affected countries.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I welcome you to the
Chamber, Mr. President. I would also like to thank
Equatorial Guinea for convening this timely and
important meeting.
I also thank our briefers, Mr. Yury Fedotov and
Mrs. Florentina Adenike Ukonga, for their insightful
interventions, in particular on the practical steps to
tackle the threats arising from transnational organized
crime at sea.
Poland recognizes the importance of the seas and
oceans for our planet. We stress the need for their
sustainable use and we call for respect or, where
appropriate, the development of regulatory frameworks,
for instance on biodiversity beyond national jurisdiction.
Transnational organized crime at sea is recognized
as being among the most serious threats to the
security, stability and economic activity of numerous
coastal States. Maritime threats, which include illegal
activities such as piracy and human trafficking, may
also impact international peace and security. Moreover,
linkages have been identified between criminal groups
operating at sea and terrorist groups. We strongly
condemn the activity of all such groups and stress the
need for a comprehensive response and a concerted
effort, both at sea and on land, to tackle them and their
root causes. It is to be recognized that they require both
building maritime security, relevant legal frameworks
and law enforcement capacities and creating conditions
for sustainable prosperity.
We welcome the national, regional and
international initiatives to these aims, including those
18/29

05/02/2019

taken, for example, by the United Nations Development
Programme, the International Maritime Organization
and Interpol, and in the framework of the Global
Maritime Crime Programme of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). We also
commend the involvement of the private sector and
civil society, and encourage all stakeholders to develop
their cooperation and raise its efficiency further.
Poland
actively
contributes
to
maritime
safety and security, including to the fight against
transnational organized crime, which corresponds
with one of the priorities of Poland’s Security Council
membership — namely, the strengthening of respect
for international law and the guiding principles of our
term: solidarity, responsibility and commitment. We do
so not only in the Baltic Sea to our north. Recognizing
the challenges and the role that regional organizations,
including the European Union (EU), have to play in the
Mediterranean Sea, we contribute, for instance, assets
to the EUNAVFOR Med Operation Sophia.
Poland notes with satisfaction the EU Naval Force
Operation ATALANTA and Combined Maritime Forces
operations, as well as the contributions of individual
States and regional actors to maritime security in
the Horn of Africa region. Additionally, the relevant
activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia, the EU capacity-building mission Somalia, the
African Union Mission in Somalia and particularly the
UNODC Maritime Crime Programme for the Horn of
Africa should be recognized. Welcoming all endeavours
aimed at strengthening security in the region, we
encourage their even closer coordination, including
through information exchange, joint operations and
increased legal cooperation.
The collective and coordinated efforts of the
countries of the Gulf of Guinea region, the Economic
Community of West African States and the Economic
Community of Central African States under the
regional maritime architecture, as well as their
cooperation with other partners, including UNODC,
also merit recognition and continuation. Developing
legal instruments and institutions and maritime law
enforcement operational capabilities, and strengthening
international cooperation in other regions, including
in the Indian and Pacific Oceans, as well as in the
Caribbean, should be continued as well.
Poland encourages States that are not parties to
relevant international instruments on combatting piracy
19-02803

05/02/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

and organized crime at sea to consider acceding to them.
In this regard, the special role of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, also known as the
“Constitution of the Oceans”, should be highlighted.
We stress that all efforts in fighting maritime crime
should be consistent with applicable international law,
including the law of the sea, international human rights
law and relevant Security Council resolutions.
Poland also endorses the wider use of tools and
assistance in combatting maritime crime, available from
UNODC, among others. The mobilization of efforts
in preventing and disrupting such crime is crucial to
ensuring freedom of navigation, the rule of law and the
sustainable use of the seas and oceans. We encourage
and look forward to their further advancement and
remain committed to contributing to it.
Mr. Nkosi (South Africa): Allow me to join previous
speakers in expressing our deepest gratitude to the
fraternal Republic of Equatorial Guinea for convening
this important debate on transnational organized crime
at sea, which poses a great threat to international peace
and security. We also take this opportunity to welcome
you, Sir, to New York and to thank you for the brilliant
and wise manner in which you are presiding over our
proceedings this morning.
I wish to express our gratitude to the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, Mr Yury Fedotov, and to our dear sister, the
Executive Secretary of the Gulf of Guinea Commission,
Mrs. Florentina Adenike Ukonga, for their extremely
useful, comprehensive and informative briefings on the
subject under discussion.
South Africa, as the Council is aware, is a maritime
country with more than 2,800 kilometres of coastline
and an exclusive economic zone of 1.54 million square
kilometres straddling both the Indian and Atlantic
oceans that is larger than our land area of 1.2 million
square kilometres. It is estimated that there are 580
ships in South African waters every day, and more
than 11,000 ships dock in our ports every year. South
Africa therefore continues to be concerned about the
prevalence of transnational organized crime at sea.
Africa is very conscious of the impact of these insidious
activities on the stability, security and development of
both coastal and inland countries. In many instances,
the effects of such transnational organized crime fuel
conflicts on the continent. The proceeds from those
crimes contribute to the proliferation of small arms

S/PV. 8457

and light weapons, protracted conflicts, trafficking
in drugs and humans, terrorism, money-laundering
and increased mercenary activity. In the past few
years South African security and coastal patrols have
confiscated numerous vessels and arrested countless
people involved in illegal fishing and abalone poaching
in our waters, which deprive South Africans of millions
of dollars of revenue and have a negative effect on the
livelihoods of our coastal communities.
The link between transnational organized crime at
sea and the threat that it poses to the stability, security
and economies of both coastal and landlocked States is
visible and a matter of grave concern. In order to meet
the challenges posed by this large-scale phenomenon, it
is crucial that we develop a robust regulatory framework
and a coordinated and comprehensive approach at the
national, regional and international levels to address
it. South Africa welcomed the Council’s adoption of
resolutions 2383 (2017) and 2442 (2018), which we
believe will make a major contribution to dealing with
the challenge of transnational organized crime at sea,
specifically off the coast of Somalia and the affected
coastal areas in the Gulf of Guinea. They embody some
of the important steps that the international community
should take to prevent and counteract maritime crimes
and maintain international peace and security.
In 2014, the African Union (AU) adopted 2050
Africa’s Integrated Maritime Strategy (2050 AIM
Strategy), which identifies threats and vulnerabilities
that could fuel violence and insecurity on the African
continent. Those threats include transnational
organized crime in the maritime domain, which
covers illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing,
money-laundering, trafficking in illegal arms and
drugs, piracy and armed robbery at sea, illegal oil
bunkering and human trafficking. Through the 2050
AIM Strategy, the AU seeks to rally its member
States in a coordinated and collaborative partnership
that will foster wealth creation in a safe and secure
African maritime domain, thereby contributing to the
continent’s socioeconomic development.
Furthermore, in 2016 the AU adopted the African
Charter on Maritime Security, Safety and Development,
known as the Lomé Charter, developed to operationalize
the security and developmental aspects articulated in
the 2050 AIM Strategy and the AU’s Agenda 2063. It
provides general rules and principles for regulating
navigational security and combating piracy and illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing activities, as

19-0280319/29

S/PV.8457

Maintenance of international peace and security

well as for preserving marine life and biodiversity. It
includes provisions for enhancing areas of economic
development through ocean-economy activities and
cooperation in the use of oceanic riches at the level of
exclusive economic zones and international waters. It
should also be noted that the AU declared the period
from 2015 to 2025 to be the Decade of African Seas and
Oceans, with the strategic goal of improving maritime
conditions to ensure the protection and sustainable use
of the seas and oceans of Africa.
South Africa has worked together with fellow
African countries in developing those key continental
instruments, which seek to create an ocean environment
that is safe, secure and environmentally sustainable for
the benefit of the peoples of Africa. In cooperation
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
the Governments of Mozambique, Tanzania and South
Africa have entered into a trilateral agreement to counter
drug trafficking on maritime routes in the Indian Ocean
that seeks to intensify maritime-surveillance capability
and the detection of illicit trafficking in the Indian
Ocean, as well as to enhance security at ports and other
points of entry in the region.
In addition to those initiatives on the African
continent, South Africa is currently Chair of the
Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA), which was
established in 1995 and consists of 21 Indian Oceanrim countries straddling the continents of Africa,
Asia and Australasia. IORA recognizes that the ocean
economy is emerging globally as a common and
critical source of growth, innovation and employment
creation owing to its enormous economic potential,
and it has therefore identified maritime security and
safety as two of its priorities. At the domestic level,
South Africa has identified marine protection and
governance as a top priority of our ocean economy
strategy, known as Operation Phakisa, which means
“make haste”, underlining the importance that our
Government attaches to this important area of human
endeavour. South Africa believes that the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea outlines a
comprehensive legal framework applicable to piracy
and armed robbery at sea. Our current efforts to combat
transnational organized crime at sea must be fully
consistent with that international legal framework.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my
Government’s support for the call to strengthen the
capacity of Member States’ maritime security to
enforce international maritime law. In that regard, the
20/29

05/02/2019

importance of exchanging evidence and information
for anti-piracy law-enforcement purposes, as well
as sharing lessons learned and best practices among
States and international and regional organizations,
is imperative, and should ensure that the necessary
structures remain dynamic and that the relevant
structures, strategies and programmes are adapted to
align with prevailing shifts in global trends.
We wish to reiterate that transnational organized
crime at sea is linked to insecurity on land. It is only
through concerted, holistic and comprehensive action,
both on land and at sea, that we will be able to fight
that scourge.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I welcome you to
New York, Mr. President, and thank you very much
for being with us today, as well as for picking this
important topic, which, as I think you have heard from
all the speakers, in particular from our last speaker,
has very particular resonance for a very large number
of countries. Many thanks as well to Mr. Fedotov and
Mrs. Ukonga for their briefings, which we appreciate.
The United Kingdom welcomes this discussion. We
take this extremely seriously. We want to support the
region in being able to overcome the problems, and we
ourselves participate in various international operations
to help eradicate the problem, especially with regard to
piracy — but, of course, that is not the only problem,
as the last speaker set out. We are strong supporters of
resolution 2039 (2012). I would like to agree with what
the Chinese Ambassador said about how piracy and
maritime crime retards development. I therefore think
that it is important to recognize that it is not just crime
at sea, but it also robs people living on land. We should
keep that in mind.
I wanted to highlight as well the effect that
those crimes have on global trade with West Africa.
International trade is critical to many African
economies. Over 90 per cent of imports and exports are
conducted by sea. Safe and secure maritime transport is
therefore obviously key to successful trade and growth
in Africa, and it is fundamental to the sustainable
development of African States’ economies. I just want
to highlight that.
I also want to pay tribute to the efforts of States
in the region, particularly your country, Mr. President,
Equatorial Guinea, for everything you have done
to shine a light on these issues and secure regional
cooperation. I thought that the statistics that the South
19-02803

05/02/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

African representative gave us were very fundamental.
It was interesting to hear what a priority that is for the
Indian Ocean Rim Association.
For our part, the United Kingdom wants to
support the region and share its expertise. We and the
French have a maritime-domain-awareness-for-trade
mechanism that can alert ships and seafarers of the threat
from maritime crime. It can also inform those able to
respond to the threat that an incident is occurring. We
are continuing to develop with the French a website that
enables industry to access information on threats in the
Gulf of Guinea, and we hope that it will be published
soon. We are therefore trying, on a practical basis, to
help the region deal with this important problem.
We were very interested in the Yaoundé Code of
Conduct and the international audit that took place
in Cameroon last month, which we understand that it
will be published soon. We await its recommendations.
We also would like to work even more closely as
international partners with States of the region to build
indigenous capability to address maritime crime. The
United Kingdom is working with Nigeria to improve
civilian capacity in the Nigerian justice system from the
point of arrest to prosecution, so that we can increase
convictions and help create a deterrent.
The United Kingdom will continue to play a part in
supporting activity against maritime crime in the Gulf
of Guinea and around the globe. We will continue to
provide direct assistance through the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and the International
Maritime Organization, as well as directly support
regional partners.
A number of speakers today drew attention to the
root causes of piracy and maritime crime. That shows
what happens when peace, security and prosperity are
replaced with criminology, conflict and instability. I
therefore want to pledge again today that, as well as
focusing on the threat at sea, the United Kingdom will
continue to work with partners to tackle the land-based
root causes and ensure that development and security
policies are coherent and mutually reinforcing.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President for
convening today’s important debate and presiding over
it. Japan is honoured to speak at the Security Council

S/PV. 8457

on this very important topic. I would also like to thank
the briefers for their valuable inputs.
We have a national holiday in Japan, held in July,
called Marine Day, to give thanks for the ocean’s
blessing. As a country that conducts 99.6 per cent of its
international trade volume on maritime transportation,
Japan takes the issue of maritime security very
seriously. We believe that peaceful seas governed
by the rule of law bring prosperity for all. Today,
however, many waters of the world face the destructive
consequences of transnational organized crime. Japan
believes that a free and open maritime order constitutes
a cornerstone of international stability and prosperity.
Our anti-maritime crime efforts are part of our free and
open Indo-Pacific initiative to ensure open sea lanes
and enhance connectivity between Asia and Africa.
Japan led the way in founding the Regional
Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and
Armed Robbery against Ships in Asia, which has
successfully reduced piracy in Asia over the past decade.
We have also sent Japan Self-Defense Forces and the
Japan Coast Guard to join the multinational effort to
combat piracy off the coast of Somalia and the Gulf
of Aden. In addition, we have contributed to capacitybuilding to tackle maritime crime through the Global
Maritime Crime Programme of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime. Those undertakings have
helped secure some of the world’s most vital shipping
lanes, and they prove that international cooperation
against maritime crime can work.
Despite those successes, however, the issue of
transnational organized crime at sea remains a concern.
That is especially the case in the Gulf of Guinea, which
has seen rising piracy and armed robbery in recent
years. Mounting an effective response to that threat
will require both a strategic and a comprehensive
approach. It must be strategic, using multi-layered
cooperation at the national, regional and international
levels. Countries need to strengthen their national
institutional capacity, while collaborating with their
neighbours, regional organizations and the United
Nations to build an effective maritime governance
system through harmonized legal frameworks and
improved information exchange. Japan will continue to
play a constructive role. It must also be comprehensive
by empowering individuals and communities in
addition to ensuring maritime governance.

19-0280321/29

S/PV.8457

Maintenance of international peace and security

Ultimately, however, we must tackle the
overarching cause of maritime insecurity, namely,
poverty. Poverty provides a fertile environment for
organized crime, and poverty drives desperate people
to take desperate measures. What pushes a young
person to take extraordinary risks every day to produce
illegal kerosene to sell on the black market, or to hijack
a tanker and take hostages for ransom? Poverty and a
lack of opportunity do.
Therefore, to uproot criminal networks, the
perspective of the individual in their local context
needs to be considered. United Nations sustaining
peace initiatives, including those by the Peacebuilding
Commission, can be leveraged to that end. Such a
holistic approach will also help promote a blue economy.
In that regard, we are encouraged by recent efforts by
some African countries to reduce marine plastic waste,
which can help protect fisheries and livelihoods and
ensure the sustainable use of marine resources.
Let me conclude by underscoring the importance
of prevention in maritime security. Transnational
organized crime can exacerbate existing problems and
set off a vicious cycle, but successful prevention can
help start a virtuous one. A strategic and comprehensive
approach will allow us to ensure both secured sea lanes
and environmentally sustainable economies, while
providing prosperity, security and opportunity for
generations to come.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Senegal.
Mr. Niang (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you personally, as
well as the Government of Equatorial Guinea, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and to welcome the organization of this
high-level debate on transnational organized crime at
sea as a threat to international peace and security. This
is an issue of crucial importance for African countries
in particular.

05/02/2019

unreported and unregulated fishing, illegal migration,
piracy, armed robbery against ships, arms trafficking,
human trafficking, smuggling, environmental and
ecological threats and many other ills. Consequently,
transnational organized crime at sea is one of the
most serious threats to international security and
global economic stability. This shows the relevance of
today’s debate, which challenges us to analyse the root
causes, the means of prevention and the mechanisms to
effectively combat this scourge.
Our common commitment to the security of
maritime spaces must be commensurate with the
crucial challenges that the sea represents in achieving
peace and sustainable economic development, in
particular for developing countries. That is why
we need to demonstrate constant political will and
tireless determination.
For its part, in accordance with its international
commitments and aware of its maritime vocation,
Senegal has set up a framework for coordinating State
action at sea to effectively combat maritime crime
in all its forms and manifestations. The Government
of Senegal has taken an inclusive and participatory
approach and put in place an institutional coordination
architecture based on a national maritime security
system and a national maritime emergency response
plan. Those instruments make it possible to plan,
organize and coordinate State action to better prevent
and stop of criminal activities at sea, in accordance
with the provisions of international maritime
conventions. The relevance of such a mechanism means
that it is cited as a reference within the international
maritime community.
In addition to those institutional measures, our
country has adopted a relevant legal framework
through various instruments, such as the criminal
code, the criminal procedure code, the Code of Conduct
for the Merchant Navy and the Code of Conduct
for Responsible Fisheries, all of which are aimed at
effectively punishing various criminal acts at sea.

Allow me also to thank the briefers for their
informative statements, namely, Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, and Mrs. Florentina Adenike Ukonga,
Executive Secretary of the Gulf of Guinea Commission.

Senegal has also significantly strengthened its
coastal surveillance capacity by equipping its naval
forces with new vessels and aircraft to better secure
waters under its national jurisdiction and to fight, in
particular, against illegal fishing.

Crime at sea was once linked to control over
the oceans and naval power games, but today it is a
multi-faceted scourge involving terrorism, illegal,

Despite all those efforts, we must recognize that
countering maritime crime through national legislation
is not an easy task. Although we have at our disposal

22/29

19-02803

05/02/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

several complex legal instruments, controlling this
phenomenon is not easy, including for the agents
responsible for combating these offences. The situation
also raises the delicate question of the integration into
national legislation of the legal instruments adopted by
the United Nations in order to effectively prevent and stop
illicit acts committed in both international and national
waters. We therefore strongly call for the strengthening
of technical cooperation on the ground to build the
capacity of Member States to effectively combat crime
at sea in all its forms and manifestations. At the same
time, we must promote direct communication between
administrations and harmonize texts and laws to ensure
a consistent legal framework.
The challenges in the fight against organized
crime at sea are enormous. No State alone can
address them effectively. A correct understanding of
the issues requires more action by the international
community to develop and strengthen consultation
frameworks in order to better coordinate action and,
above all, anticipate the problems related to these
phenomena. We must therefore welcome the continued
mobilization of States and subregional organizations,
in particular in Africa, which have made substantial
progress in institution-building and the adoption of
legal frameworks to ensure maritime security and
safety architecture.
For example, in response to the increasingly
complex crime in the Gulf of Guinea, the Summit of
Heads of State and Government on Maritime Safety and
Security in the Gulf of Guinea was held in Yaoundé in
2013, which represented a manifestation of the collective
commitment of the States in the region. In view of the
progress made since then, with the operationalization,
in 2016, of the Interregional Coordination Centre for
Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea,
which adopted a four-year programme for 2017-2021,
we should welcome the efforts made in this area.

S/PV. 8457

networks of illicit activities that are progressively
being built on a foundation of poor governance,
extreme poverty and socio-political violence. We
must vigorously combat criminal and terrorist groups,
without forgetting to address the deep-rooted causes
that give rise to their activities. In that regard, among
other things, it is essential to strengthen partnerships
to make rational use of fisheries resources and to
have better governance and sharing of transnational
marine resources.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Perera (Sri Lanka): Let me begin by
congratulating Equatorial Guinea on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month and for organizing this debate on one of the
most immediate threats to international peace and
security — transnational organized crime at sea. We
also thank Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
and Mrs. Ukonga, Executive Secretary of the Gulf of
Guinea Commission, for their informative briefings
earlier this morning.
In June last year, Sri Lanka was pleased to
participate at the ministerial level in the successful
Arria formula meeting on maritime crime as a threat to
international peace and security, which, Mr. President,
your country, along with Côte d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, the
Netherlands, the United States and UNODC, hosted
and which provided an excellent forum to highlight the
emerging threats posed by maritime crime.

We must also welcome the adoption, on 15 October
2016 in Lomé at the Extraordinary Summit of the
African Union, of the African Charter on Maritime
Security and Safety and Development in Africa, the
Lomé Charter, which is in line with the 2050 Africa
Integrated Maritime Strategy for the seas and oceans,
which aims to make maritime space one of the main
drivers of Africa’s economic and social development.

As an island nation strategically located in the
Indian Ocean, Sri Lanka is well aware of the importance
of creating a maritime order that can withstand the
emerging threats from transnational criminal acts.
With its sea lanes serving as major arteries of EastWest trade, the Indian Ocean carries approximately
half the world’s container shipping and about two thirds
of its oil shipments. Heavy tanker traffic between the
Middle East and the Far East passes in close proximity
to the southern coast of Sri Lanka. Therefore, ensuring
security and stability and maintaining freedom of
navigation in the sea lanes of communication of the
Indian Ocean are of vital concern to Sri Lanka and of
importance not only to the global economy but also to
global security.

Let us never forget that the main causes of maritime
insecurity are to be found on land, namely, the vast

Increased mobility at sea and heavy traffic open
up opportunities for drug trafficking, the illegal arms

19-0280323/29

S/PV.8457

Maintenance of international peace and security

trade, migrant smuggling and trafficking in persons,
among others. Furthermore, it can give rise to a plethora
of corrupt practices, including illegal and unreported
fishing, bottom trawling, environmental degradation
and the destruction of coastal infrastructure. For Sri
Lanka, with its existence so inextricably linked to the
ocean and its resources, the impact of such actions
would be enormously detrimental to our very survival.
In addition, UNODC has highlighted a range of new
threats and crimes, including intentional damage to
fibre-optic submarine cables, and legal issues arising
from floating armouries, among several others.
Littoral States such as Sri Lanka are at the forefront
of the fight against drug trafficking through maritime
routes. The use of the Indian Ocean as a major drug
trafficking highway poses a threat to maritime security
and maritime law enforcement. One of the major
challenges is the lack of a legal conclusion, such as
prosecution, for the majority of drug seizures made
within international waters in the Indian Ocean region.
Sri Lanka has historically been a champion of a
rules-based order for the maritime domain. In 1973, we
chaired the historic third United Nations Conference on
the Law of the Sea, which led to the adoption of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea — a
comprehensive constitution for the oceans. For those
reasons, and recognizing the unique nature of the high
seas, which fall outside the jurisdictional domain of
a single State, Sri Lanka calls most emphatically for
concerted and collective international cooperative
measures to provide the requisite regulatory framework
to counter such threats. Given the nature of the current
challenges, such crimes must not be allowed to fall into
an area where there is a legal vacuum.
In that context, it is also relevant to mention that in
October last year Sri Lanka organized an international
conference entitled “The Indian Ocean — Defining our
Future”, where Prime Minister Ranil Wickremasinghe
addressed two core issues related to the Indian Ocean,
namely, freedom of navigation and freedom of digital
connectivity. While the former is absolutely vital, the
safeguarding of the freedom of digital connectivity is
of equal importance, especially given the rapid increase
in technology and the fact that the presence of undersea
cables has grown exponentially in the past few decades.
It is known that more than 80 per cent of Internet
traffic is transferred using undersea cables. Internet
connectivity is inextricably linked to the economies
24/29

05/02/2019

of most countries, and the seabed is fast becoming a
tangle of ungoverned undersea cables.
That aspect presents a new threat to international
peace and security. Although the 1982 United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea deals with submarine
cables and provides a basic framework, nevertheless,
new threats have emerged since then. In recognition of
that, on 11 December 2018, through resolution 73/124,
on oceans and the law of the sea, which Sri Lanka
co-sponsored together with a large number of other
States, the General Assembly addressed the issue of
fibre-optic submarine cables and their susceptibility to
intentional and/or accidental damage.
Consequent to that General Assembly resolution,
last week the UNODC Global Maritime Crime
Programme held an event in Colombo, Sri Lanka,
for legal experts, which was followed by a high-level
ministerial meeting on the existing legal regime
governing fibre-optic submarine cables. In a world that
is now heavily reliant on connectivity for everything,
from military operations and flight reservations to
basic navigation, a damaged or destroyed cable can
have a tremendous impact on all aspects of life. Some
examples of the vulnerability of those cables and how all
States are reliant on submarine cables were highlighted
at the meeting in Colombo.
Sri Lanka therefore fully endorses the recommendations
put forward by UNODC to address that new threat in
order to support all States, namely, classifying submarine
cables as critical communications infrastructure and/or
critical national infrastructure, developing a national
action plan for resilience in addressing the protection
of submarine cables, enhancing the legal treatment of
submarine cables in line with public international law
and encouraging States to designate a lead agency on
the protection of submarine cables.
To that end, Sri Lanka encourages the exploration
of mutual assistance at the international and regional
levels for resilience in the face of interference with
submarine cables and the harmonization of laws on the
protection of submarine cables, including cooperative
law enforcement initiatives for their protection.
In conclusion, we need to encourage greater
dialogue and cooperation among all States in assessing
the security imperatives, threats, vulnerabilities and
responsibilities given the increase in undersea cables on
the seabed. As a State strategically located in the Indian
Ocean, much of the digital connectivity between the
19-02803

05/02/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

East and the West traverses over the seabed adjacent to
Sri Lanka. We therefore call for immediate international
action in seeking urgent measures to address that new
and imminent threat.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I commend you, Mr. President,
for including this matter on the Security Council agenda.
As a country with a long coastline and a large
maritime sector, Norway is concerned that piracy,
fisheries crime and trafficking in people, drugs,
weapons and protected species are threatening the
legitimate use of the oceans. The livelihoods and
security of coastal communities are at stake. Enhanced
global and regional cooperation is required. Coastal
States must govern their territorial waters and their
exclusive economic zones to the best of their abilities.
The Gulf of Guinea is among the areas where
maritime security is a challenge. The members of the
Gulf of Guinea Commission, the Economic Community
of Central African States and the Economic Community
of West African States took an important decision
in 2013 when they adopted the Code of Conduct
concerning the Repression of Piracy, Armed Robbery
against Ships and Illicit Maritime Activity in West and
Central Africa. Norway remains a committed partner
in support of the implementation of the Code.
The Western Indian Ocean was the area most affected
by piracy until 2012. The Contact Group on Piracy off
the Coast of Somalia was able to curb those activities
through a series of coordinated measures. However,
pirates continue to test our readiness. The situation in
West and East Africa differ, but both require a viable
legal solution. In our view, it is particularly important
to prosecute the men in Somalia who organize piracy
groups. Norway supports the efforts of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) to assist
countries in drafting anti-piracy legislation. I commend
the countries that have acquired the legal instruments
necessary to prosecute pirates who are arrested outside
their territorial waters. Kenya, Mauritius, Seychelles
and Togo are among those countries.
Another of Norway’s priorities is to assist our
multilateral partners in the fight against maritime
piracy. One example is our active support to
INTERPOL, deploying police officers to Seychelles for
a period of four years. Building up local, sustainable

S/PV. 8457

police is a consistent way to prevent transnational
organized crime.
Fisheries crime poses a threat to the world’s
fisheries resources and to economic development.
Around 20 per cent of the fish on the market is caught
illegally. Developing countries, and particularly small
island States, are hardest hit. As a country that relies
heavily on a sustainable blue economy, Norway has
long advocated increased international cooperation and
an effective legal framework to fight that type of crime.
Norway provides substantial support to a number of
projects to combat fisheries crime.
The Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent,
Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated
Fishing includes effective measures and places special
emphasis on capacity-building in developing countries
to enhance their efforts to implement the agreement.
Norway has allocated almost $5 million in funding
for UNODC efforts to combat fisheries crime, as well
as significant resources, in cooperation with the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, to
fight illegal, unregulated and unreported fishing.
We call upon States that have not yet done so to
become parties to relevant international instruments
for combating organized crime at sea, including the
protocols supplementing the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime, and to take
measures to ensure their implementation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Trinidad and Tobago.
Ms. Beckles (Trinidad and Tobago): Allow me to
first congratulate Equatorial Guinea on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and to
commend you, Sir, for your leadership of this initiative
to address transnational crime at sea as a threat to
international peace and development. Trinidad and
Tobago appreciates the opportunity to address the
Council, as we view today’s debate as a means to
further strengthen multilateralism, which is a most
crucial vehicle for resolving the peace and security
challenges we face.
Allow me to also express my delegation’s
appreciation to Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), and Mrs. Florentina Adenike Ukonga,
Executive Secretary of the Gulf of Guinea Commission,
for their informative briefings, which allow us to

19-0280325/29

S/PV.8457

Maintenance of international peace and security

frame our discussion around organized crime at sea
as a multifaceted problem involving many criminal
activities and many practical difficulties for States, as
well as regional and international bodies.
Transnational organized crime and its global
networks pose a daunting challenge to the security
of all States. It attacks the functioning of State
institutions, intensifies vulnerabilities to governance,
fosters instability and, in doing so, undermines
the fundamental premise of our democracy, rule of
law, respect for human rights and efforts towards
sustainable development.
Trinidad and Tobago are the southernmost islands
of the Lesser Antilles and located just 11 kilometres
off the South American continent. As a small island
developing State, Trinidad and Tobago comprises an
area of only 4,828 square miles. Yet, our marine space
is 15 times larger than our land. That geographical
location, large marine space and porous borders
have rendered Trinidad and Tobago an easy conduit
for the transhipment between the major sources and
destinations of illicit drugs and the illegal trade in
small arms and light weapons, often trafficked through
maritime domains.
Trafficking in illicit drugs and the illegal trade
in small arms and ammunition wreak havoc on the
economic, social and development fabric of Trinidad
and Tobago and the wider Caribbean. Furthermore,
we must also remain vigilant to ensure that crimes
such as piracy, human trafficking, illegal fishing,
trafficking in cultural property, wildlife smuggling and
pollution of the marine environment are also combated
and prosecuted wherever they occur. In doing so,
however, we are compelled to divert resources from
vital development activities, such as education, health
care and infrastructure development. Therefore, such
security challenges place an added burden on the
small and vulnerable societies of island States, such as
Trinidad and Tobago.
Notwithstanding that challenge, Mr. President, you
may rest assured that the Government of Trinidad and
Tobago will not be a bystander to these destabilizing
pressures. Rather, we accept our responsibility to
meet our obligations, both domestic and international,
and will continue to join multilateral efforts aimed at
combating threats to peace and security.
The effective repression of transnational organized
crime at sea requires a robust system of adequate and
26/29

05/02/2019

precise bilateral and multilateral instruments. Given
the destructive impact of illegal small arms and light
weapons in our communities, Trinidad and Tobago
reaffirms its belief that the Arms Trade Treaty, if
implemented in good faith, could significantly reduce
human suffering caused by the illegal and irresponsible
transfer of arms and improve regional security
and stability.
Furthermore, as a State party to the United Nations
Convention on Transnational Organized Crime and its
protocols, as well as the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea, Trinidad and Tobago has adopted
and continues to implement a multifaceted approach to
tackling the issue, relying not only on law enforcement
but also on strategic interventions through cooperation
with regional and international partners, including the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and the United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and
Development in Latin America and the Caribbean.
In keeping with the CARICOM Strategic Plan
for 2015-2019, Trinidad and Tobago has continued its
unwavering efforts to counter transnational organized
crime and its illegal activities. Through its support
of the CARICOM Implementation Agency for Crime
and Security, the region is focusing on deepening its
crime prevention initiatives, facilitating justice reform,
strengthening regional security systems and enhancing
maritime and airspace awareness.
Trinidad and Tobago is also working closely
with its development partners in the areas of
information-sharing, capacity-building and technical
assistance. Transnational crime is a common and
shared responsibility and, therefore, collaborative
partnerships will continue to support efforts to
strategically disrupt transnational crime and bolster the
capacity of developing countries to enhance the safety
of their citizens and the security of their borders, while
reducing the negative impact of crime at sea, as well as
on land.
Given what I have said, the challenge of transnational
organized crime at sea has to be addressed on different
fronts in a coordinated manner. With regard to the legal
framework, it is important to identify gaps that exist and
promote the ratification of existing multilateral treaties
concerning transnational crime and the harmonization
of domestic legislation to ensure that States parties
can fully and effectively assume their responsibilities
and obligations under international law. Further, there
19-02803

05/02/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

is a need for a deeper analysis and understanding of
this problem and its impact on small island developing
States, given the acute vulnerabilities that countries
such as my own face.
In order to achieve that, we must focus on capacitybuilding for enforcement and prosecution with regard to
international law, as well as on developing partnerships
for best practices in arresting and detaining suspected
offenders and protecting victims. As stated before,
that will require domestic, inter-agency, regional and
international intelligence and information-sharing. In
that regard, Trinidad and Tobago underscores the need
for regional and international agencies and bodies,
including UNODC, to be provided with adequate,
predictable and reliable resources to enable them to
effectively undertake activities within their mandates.
Lastly, women and girls remain most vulnerable
to migrant smuggling and human trafficking through
maritime channels. Therefore, it is imperative that
a gender perspective be mainstreamed into efforts
to address transnational crime at sea in ways that
foster the empowerment of women and place them in
decision-making processes for the maintenance of
peace and security. It is in that conviction that Trinidad
and Tobago first introduced the resolution on women,
disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control in
2010 (resolution 65/69), as a means to promote the
crucial role of women in countering crime and violence.
Gender is an undeniable factor in peace and security.
In conclusion, Trinidad and Tobago constantly
strives to devise solutions to peace and security
challenges, including transnational organized crime
at sea. We remain committed to working with our
international partners and will continue to press for
more effective measures to curb the flow of organized
criminal activity within the Caribbean with a view
to achieving long-lasting peace and the safety of
our societies.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Stefanile (Italy): We would like to express our
appreciation, Mr. President, for your decision to hold a
debate today, at the beginning of your presidency, on
a very relevant issue pertaining to international peace
and security. We also thank the Executive Director of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
Executive Secretary of the Gulf of Guinea Commission
for their briefings.

S/PV. 8457

Transnational organized crime at sea is a serious
threat to international security, and international and
regional cooperation are indispensable to tackling this
scourge in all its dimensions, including the trafficking
of persons, weapons, drugs and cultural artefacts.
Maritime security is a priority interest for Italy and
we are deeply involved in fostering security and
supporting the development of related capabilities of
partner countries, particularly in Africa.
There is indeed a need for comprehensive capacitybuilding assistance to African countries in areas such
as maritime governance, coast guard authorities and
functions, disaster relief, maritime search and rescue,
and maritime information sharing and integration.
At the same time, efforts are required to improve
legislative, judicial and prosecutorial capacities. The
development of a sustainable maritime economy is also
essential in order to effectively counter transnational
organized crime at sea.
Among the various forms of organized crime
at sea, the trafficking of persons is a particularly
heinous crime that the entire international community
is called on to fight against. In line with resolution
2388 (2017), among others, we need all countries to
work together at the bilateral and multilateral levels
with a view to disrupting criminal networks that take
advantage of migrants; promoting development and
capacity-building in countries of departure and transit;
addressing the root causes, thereby preventing the
smuggling of migrants and the trafficking of persons
at sea; and creating sustainable mechanisms to ensure
a much-needed shared responsibility among countries
receiving migrants.
That is what Italy has done in the past two years
through its Africa Fund, from which considerable
resources have been used to assist African countries in
dealing with migration flows, taking a three-pronged
approach: first, financing the work of international
organizations, such as the International Organization for
Migration and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, in transit countries in order to improve
conditions for migrants; secondly, cooperating
with countries of departure and transit to build the
institutional capacities needed to disrupt criminal
networks and provide assistance to migrants; and
thirdly, increasing development cooperation activities
in countries of departure and transit so that the root
causes of migration can be effectively addressed.

19-0280327/29

S/PV.8457

Maintenance of international peace and security

At the multilateral level, Italy continues to lead
EUNAVFOR MED Operation Sophia and is one of
the largest contributors to the European Union-Africa
Infrastructure Trust Fund. By pooling together
financial resources and initiatives from all member
States of the European Union (EU), the EU has proven
how effective its shared activities can be in building
robust regional institutions and multi-agency capacity
that can guarantee security at sea and the rule of law.
Italy also actively participates in important counterpiracy operations. In the Horn of Africa, we have been
participating in EUNAVFOR Operation Atalanta since
its inception, continuously providing one or two naval
assets, including the flagship. Italy remains committed
to Somalia’s institution-building process in an effort
to address the root causes of piracy off of its coasts,
including through the contribution to the European
Union Training Mission in Somalia and the European
Union Capacity-Building Mission in Somalia.
In the Gulf of Guinea, the recent activity of an
Italian Navy ship announced the start of new capacitybuilding and cooperation programme with the national
authorities from within the region. I also note the two
meetings of the Group of Friends of the Gulf of Guinea
that the Italian Group of Seven presidency organized in
2017 in Rome and Lagos, as well as our support for the
Luanda Declaration on Peace and Security in the Gulf
of Guinea Region.
In conclusion, I stress Italy’s commitment to
working together with its partners, especially African
countries, in fighting transnational organized crime at
sea and tackling its root causes. At the same time, we
deem it essential to fully respect and encourage local
ownership. In that spirit, we stand ready to improve
information sharing, increase legal cooperation and
cooperate on institution- and capacity-building.

05/02/2019

of maritime ecosystems and aquatic resources, and the
welfare of our nationals. My country’s location makes
it vulnerable to the activities of international crime
syndicates, including piracy, drug trafficking and
human trafficking.
The Philippines also has a stake in the security of
the seas beyond its surrounding waters. Our seafarers
constitute about 20 per cent of global seafarers,
servicing mainly international merchant ships. There is
one Filipino seafarer for every complement of four on
board a vessel at any time. It is therefore vital for my
country that threats to maritime security be addressed
and abated.
At the height of the piracy in the Horn of Africa
in 2008, more than 200 Filipino seafarers were in the
hands of pirates on any given day. During the period
from March 2006 to March 2009, 293 Filipino seafarers
were taken hostage by pirates while working on board
seagoing vessels. It was only in October 2016 that the last
group of hostages from the last fishing vessel hijacked
in the Gulf of Aden was released. Five Filipinos were
in that group; they had been held hostage for more than
four years.
The Philippines cooperates with the Government of
the flag of hijacked vessels, as well as with the vessels’
owners, to ensure the safety and return of the abducted
crew. In the case of the most recent release and recovery
of hostages, the Philippines worked with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in repatriating the
Filipinos as well as the Cambodian seafarers and in
providing them with medical and psychosocial services.
Financial assistance to the families of the released crew
was also provided by my Government, in keeping with
the third pillar of our foreign policy, to promote and
protect the welfare of overseas Filipinos.

Mrs. Azucena (Philippines): I thank you,
Mr. President, for inviting the Philippines to participate
in this important debate, as this issue is a national
security priority for my country.

Piracy in the Horn of Africa was stemmed by the
vigilant and efficient counter-piracy operations and
cooperation of many Governments and organizations.
However, piracy elsewhere continues. In September
last year alone, seven Filipino seafarers were abducted
in Nigerian waters. They were released in October, but
just a few days after that, 10 others were abducted in the
Gulf of Guinea.

Due to its strategic location in South-East Asia
and its more than 36,000 kilometres of coastline, the
Philippines attaches paramount importance to maritime
security. The security of the seas surrounding the
country impacts our territorial integrity, the protection

The Philippines’ southern maritime borders, which
are shared with Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) neighbours, are areas of concern owing to
the prevalence of high-seas piracy, terrorist activities
and other crimes. The Philippines joined Indonesia

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Philippines.

28/29

19-02803

05/02/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

and Malaysia in the trilateral cooperative agreement to
implement counterterrorism measures and strategies
and to effectively address existing and emerging
transnational challenges and threats. Joint air and sea
patrols were conducted on the three countries’ common
borders to reinforce security and accelerate the capture
of armed elements, fugitives and those who are providing
assistance to extremists. That cooperation has also
enhanced intelligence- and information-sharing among
security and intelligence agencies.
The Philippines is also a member of the Regional
Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and
Armed Robbery against Ships in Asia (ReCAAP), a
multilateral mechanism involving 20 States aimed at
promoting and enhancing cooperation against piracy
and armed robbery against ships in Asia. In 2018, the
ReCAAP information-sharing centre reported a total of
76 incidents of piracy and armed robbery against ships
in Asia, a 25 per cent decrease from the 102 incidents
reported in 2017. The ReCAAP information-sharing
centre also conducts capacity-building for the focal
points of countries and provides links with the
International Maritime Organization, INTERPOL, the
Baltic and International Maritime Council and other
relevant organizations.
The Philippines is active in the ASEAN Maritime
Forum, a mechanism in ASEAN to enhance dialogue
and confidence-building in maritime cooperation and
maritime security in the region, including in countering
piracy, in humanitarian assistance and disaster relief,
and in the management and protection of maritime and

S/PV. 8457

aquatic resources. The expanded ASEAN Maritime
Forum, which includes ASEAN dialogue partners,
also holds discussions on maritime security, safety and
environmental protection. The Philippines is likewise
active in the ASEAN Regional Forum and the East
Asia Summit, as well as the ASEAN Senior Officials
Meeting on Transnational Crime, which focuses on
maritime security and cooperation.
Organized crime at sea is a global problem that
threatens security, stability and the rule of law,
undermines economic prosperity and threatens the
environment. Thus international cooperation to
prevent and control it is essential. States have a shared
responsibility to counter the threat of maritime crime
through enhanced international cooperation, awarenessraising, information-sharing, capacity-building, technical
assistance and strengthened law enforcement. We call
on all Member States to adhere to and implement the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its protocols, the relevant
resolutions and guidelines adopted by the International
Maritime Organization, and the relevant conventions
countering maritime piracy.
In my country’s experience, the scourge of piracy
and robbery at sea is best addressed by an international
response through an intergovernmental approach. With
approximately 80 per cent of global trade taking place
by maritime transport, attaining maritime security is
vital to our shared prosperity.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

19-0280329/29
