S/PV.7893

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7893rd meeting

Tuesday, 28 February 2017, 11.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Yelchenko. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ukraine)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skau
Mr. Rycroft
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 24 February 2017 from the Permanent Representatives of France,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2017/170)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-05288 (E)
*1XXXXXX*

S/PV.7893

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 11.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 24 February 2017 from the
Permanent Representatives of France, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2017/170)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Albania, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Germany,
Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Montenegro, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, Spain, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey and the United Arab
Emirates to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2017/172, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Albania, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Saudi Arabia,
Slovakia, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, Ukraine, the United
Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and the United States of America.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/170, which contains a letter dated
24 February 2017 from the Permanent Representatives
of France, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
2/17

28/02/2017

Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): For
months now, France, the United Kingdom and the
United States have sought to unite the Security Council
in response to the heinous crimes committed in Syria
involving the repeated, corroborated use of chemical
weapons against civilians over several years. These
criminal acts continue today, as we speak. We must put
an end to them.
The stakes involved are extremely serious, above
and beyond the situation in Syria. More than a century
ago, the world learned with dismay of the horrors of
chemical warfare when chlorine gas was first used
against civilians on 15 April 1915 in Ypres, Belgium.
The international community decided at that time
that it was duty-bound to ensure that such atrocities
never recur.
The current retrogression is therefore especially
terrible. What we once thought impossible is now an
imminent danger; what we had once thought to be in
the past is happening right now before our very eyes.
Prohibited weapons have been used several times in
the Syrian conflict, despite that fact that 192 States are
committed, through their ratification of the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their
Destruction, to never using such weapons again and to
destroying their existing stockpiles.
I call on all present to fully grasp the extent of
our responsibility today. We face not only the threat
of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction;
we face the repeated, methodical and barbarous use of
weapons of mass destruction — in this case, chemical
weapons — against civilians. On the scale of threats to
international peace and security, we have hit 10. That
is why France believes that weakness and inaction are
not and cannot be an option. It is why, I recall, that
the members of the Security Council, together and
unanimously, in September 2013 resolutely decided that
“in the event of non-compliance with this
resolution, including unauthorized transfer of
chemical weapons, or any use of chemical weapons
by anyone in the Syrian Arab Republic, to impose
measures under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter” (resolution 2118 (2013), para. 21).
Today we have reached this moment of truth,
when it is no longer a matter of evading or looking
away. Many instances of the use of chemical
weapons have been confirmed and continue to be
17-05288

28/02/2017

The situation in the Middle East

reported — very accurately, professionally and
methodically. The responsibility of the Syrian regime
was established in three of such cases without any
ambiguity at all. The Joint Investigative Mechanism
has also demonstrated the responsibility of the Da’esh
terrorist organization in a case of chemical attack. It
is now up to the Security Council, as guardian of our
system of collective security, to act and not just talk.
It has the duty and the responsibility to do so, as it has
committed itself to do. This is a necessity consistent with
the establishment of the Joint Investigative Mechanism,
on which the Council has reiterated its confidence.
The continuation of the work of the Mechanism,
decided unanimously with the adoption of resolution
2319 (2016) last November, has been indispensable.
But that cannot delay or supplant a vital action on our
part to sanction those who have flouted the prohibition:
an action drawing the necessary conclusions from
established determinations by a Mechanism that we
unanimously renewed, and an action, finally, to send
a warning and a message of firmness against those
who would consider breaking the taboo in the future.
By putting off acting on the demand for justice to
which we have collectively committed, abdicating our
responsibility, would send an irresponsible signal of
impunity, which we must avoid.
My country, which has long been engaged in the
fight against the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, cannot accept that. The international
situation in which we find ourselves calls for our
immediate and firm reaction. It is up to us to protect
the chemical non-proliferation regime, and with it
all non-proliferation regimes. That is a treasure we
possess, for which we are responsible and of which we
are the guardians.
We come late to this today. That is why France,
together with its British and American partners,
wanted to engage in good faith in a negotiation to bring
together all the members of the Council around to the
appropriate response. The result of our efforts has
produced a balanced proposal aimed at punishing all
the actors involved that is based on targeted measures.
First, the draft resolution (S/2017/172), which
provides for the adoption of measures under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations, identifies a
violation of resolution 2118 (2013) and condemns the
use of chemical weapons in Syria. Secondly, it reaffirms
the Council’s conviction that those responsible for the

S/PV.7893

use of chemical weapons must be prosecuted. Thirdly, it
reiterates the need for the Syrian regime to comply with
all its international obligations. Fourthly, it reaffirms
all measures taken against Da’esh and the terrorist
groups listed by the Council. Fifthly, it reiterates the
measures specific to the sanctions regime. It establishes
a sanctions committee, supported by a panel of experts.
It establishes the appropriate criteria for listing entities
and individuals responsible for the use of chemical
weapons, in connection with which it includes a list of
entities and individuals. And it establishes an embargo
on sensitive chemicals and on weapons and materials
that could be used to import dangerous chemical
substances, as well as on helicopters.
An inability to act, as I said, would constitute a
blameworthy move backward for the Council. Beyond
our political divisions, we have in the past been able
to mobilize in unison on non-proliferation issues. If
today we are not able to discuss and agree on issues of
such gravity, if we are not able to echo the collective
consciousness of humankind, we will have failed in our
responsibilities. Our credibility is at stake.
In the noisy clamour of our world, there are
moments of truth when we can no longer dodge our
responsibilities. This vote is that moment of truth,
when our fundamental basic values, the law and our
security are at stake. Values: who would not prosecute
those who have killed innocent women and children
in cold blood, in the most atrocious and reprehensible
of conditions? That would be a negation of our entire
civilization. The law: the Council has been unanimous
in saying that we must prosecute those responsible for
those murdered with chemical weapons. What are we
waiting for in implementing laws that we ourselves
have contributed to putting in place? Lastly, our
security: if we close our eyes to the use of chemical
weapons against civilians, what legitimacy will we have
tomorrow to condemn nuclear terrorism or apocalyptic
attacks using bacteriological agents? Who would be
responsible before history?
At stake today are not tactical interests; at stake
are the very fundamental values of our security. The
world is watching and waiting on us. Let us rise to our
responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations.
Let us rise to ensure the power of the law in the service
of the values of the United Nations and the interests of
present and future generations. If for dubious reasons
we do not succeed today, know that France will never
give up.

17-052883/17

S/PV.7893

The situation in the Middle East

28/02/2017

Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The Security
Council is about to be asked a simple question: Will we
take action against those who use chemical weapons in
Syria? It is that simple. Will we take action on behalf
of those whose lives have been destroyed by these
senseless weapons? Will we take action for people
like Mohammed Abdul-Razzuk Alhashash? Thanks
to the testimony of those on the ground, we know
that Mohammed was admitted to hospital at 1.30 p.m.
on 21 April 2014. A couple of hours earlier, a Syrian
regime helicopter had dropped two containers on his
home town of Talmenes, exposing him and many others
to a yellow toxic gas.

Against:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Russian
Federation

After the attack, Mohammed was unable to breathe.
He lost consciousness. On arrival at hospital he was
intubated under mechanical ventilation. His face went
red. Pink foam poured from his mouth. His pupils were
dilated. His lungs were crackling. His heartbeat and
breathing stopped. Cardio-pulmonary resuscitation
was performed, but all attempts to revive him failed.
Mohammad died at two o’clock. He was six years old.

Mrs. Haley (United States of America): When
members of the Security Council speak about the use
of chemical weapons, it is pretty amazing because there
is unity in the fact that we need to be concerned about
chemical-weapon use in Syria and elsewhere. That is
why the blocking of the draft resolution (S/2017/172)
today is so troubling.

Mohammed is why we are here today. We are here
in the Chamber to begin to bring justice for him, for
his family and for the hundreds, if not thousands, of
other Syrians whose stories are all too similar to his
own. This is not about politics. At its core this is not
really about the Joint Investigative Mechanism or
about the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons — respectively, the JIM and the OPCW, but
forget the acronyms. This is not even about Syria. This
is about taking a stand when children are poisoned. It is
that simple. It is about taking a stand when civilians are
maimed and murdered with toxic weapons — weapons
used in complete disregard for the international rules
and norms that we all claim to uphold.
Therefore, in a moment, when we are asked to
vote on this draft resolution (S/2017/172), I hope that all
members of the Council will lift their hands in favour
of this text, and do so with Mohammed in their minds.
The President: The Council is ready to proceed to
the vote on the draft resolution before it. I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
France, Italy, Japan, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Uruguay
4/17

Abstaining:
Egypt, Ethiopia, Kazakhstan
The President: There were 9 votes in favour, 3
against and 3 abstentions. The draft resolution has not
been adopted, owing to the negative vote of a permanent
member of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.

Russia and China made an outrageous and
indefensible choice today. They refused to hold Bashar
Al-Assad’s regime accountable for the use of chemical
weapons. They turned away from defenceless men,
women and children who died gasping for breath when
Al-Assad’s forces dropped their poisonous gas. They
ignored the facts. They put their friends in the Al-Assad
regime ahead of our global security.
The Security Council banned the Al-Assad regime
from holding onto any chemical weapons in 2013. Still,
Al-Assad arrogantly continued to use these savage
weapons. The Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons sent a fact-finding mission to Syria
to investigate. The fact-finding mission confirmed
that chemical weapons were used, but it lacked a
mandate to say who was responsible, and therefore
the Security Council unanimously agreed to set up the
Joint Investigative Mechanism to answer this obvious
question: If chemical-weapon attacks are happening in
Syria, who is involved? At that time, everyone on the
Security Council, including Russia and China, said that
they wanted to know who used chemical weapons.
The question was answered. However, Russia and
China did not like the answer. The investigators spent
a year collecting mountains of evidence, speaking to
witnesses and verifying testimony. The conclusion was,
and remains, irrefutably clear: the Al-Assad regime
used chemical weapons three times from 2014 to 2015,
17-05288

28/02/2017

The situation in the Middle East

and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) used
chemical weapons once. Those are of course only the
attacks that could be confirmed with limited time and
resources. There are credible reports that Al-Assad
used chemical weapons many more times. Amazingly,
members are willing to condemn ISIL for the one
incident, but turn a blind eye to the Member State
Syria, which committed this crime at least three times.
Russia and China now say they have questions
about the investigation. They sat through almost a year
of briefings by the investigators and they never objected
to their work. But now they suddenly say that the
investigation was just not enough. Russia’s suggestion
is for the Al-Assad regime to investigate itself for
use of chemical weapons. Are we going to have ISIL
investigate itself too? There is nothing wrong with the
investigation. Russia just does not want to criticize the
Al-Assad regime for using chemical weapons. That is
the truth.
What is the message we are sending to the world?
China and Russia will cover the backs of their friends
and allies who use chemical weapons to kill their
own people. Some say we should focus more on ISIL.
The United States condemns any use of chemical
weapons — by ISIL or any other non-State actor. We
are determined to defeat ISIL, and we will defeat ISIL.
Its use of chemical weapons only adds to the urgency
of doing that. But the barbarity of ISIL is no excuse
for Al-Assad’s own barbarity. Both used chemical
weapons. Both should face the consequences.
Other Council members say the timing is not right
for a resolution, or that we should delay the vote for the
sake of Council unity. But let us remember: because
the Al-Assad regime used chemical weapons, people
died in one of the most brutal ways possible. We got
confirmation of the Syrian regime’s involvement. The
question should not be whether to wait longer; the
question should be why we have not acted sooner.
Let us step back from the Security Council. The
reason we all should care about this draft resolution is
that we want to make sure that no one ever thinks about
using chemical weapons. Watch some of the videos
online from the regime’s chemical-weapon attacks in
Syria. Watch the rows of parents and children lying on
the ground suffocated to death. Watch Syrians gasping
for breath in makeshift hospitals, desperate for oxygen
to stop from gagging on chlorine. The suffering is
inhumane. It is grotesque. It should shake every one

S/PV.7893

of us to our core. None of us should hesitate to impose
consequences for these attacks. No one else should get
the idea that they can use chemical weapons.
Shamefully, today’s draft resolution was not
adopted. The names of people and companies involved
in Al-Assad’s use of chemical weapons are public — all
listed in the annex of the draft resolution for everyone
to see. The United States has already designated for
sanctions every person and every entity listed in
the annex. We will work with our European Union
and other like-minded partners to push for similar
sanctions as soon as possible. We will not forget the
overwhelming suffering caused by Al-Assad’s use of
chemical weapons.
For my friends in Russia, this draft resolution is
very appropriate. It is a sad day in the Security Council.
When members start making excuses for other Member
States killing their own people, the world is definitely
a more dangerous place. Today the international
community can look no further than the Security
Council for contributing to that.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I am appalled that
Russia vetoed today’s draft resolution (S/2017/172),
and I am surprised and disappointed that China
chose to join it, at complete odds with the principles
of non-proliferation that both China and Russia claim
to support so strongly. As permanent members of
the Security Council and as parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention, Russia and China have a clear
responsibility to take action against the use and
proliferation of chemical weapons. By vetoing the draft
resolution today they have undermined the credibility
of the Security Council and of the international rules
preventing the use of these barbaric weapons.
In resolution 2118 (2013) we all agreed — Russia
and China included — that any use of chemical weapons
by anyone in the Syrian Arab Republic would lead to
the Security Council imposing measures under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations. Thanks to
those vetoes today, we have failed to do so.
This was not a political text. It was a technical draft
resolution in response to an impartial and factual report
by the Security Council-mandated United NationsOrganization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM). It was a report we
all called for. It was an investigation we all supported.

17-052885/17

S/PV.7893

The situation in the Middle East

But instead of backing the draft resolution, we have
seen yet again that Russia is prepared to abuse its veto
power to stand by a regime that has no regard for its own
people, that has no regard for the basic rules of war or
international treaties, a regime that has indiscriminately
bombed and besieged its own people, a regime that has
turned chemical weapons on its own population, killing
6-year-old children like Mohammad.
This is Russia’s seventh veto on the subject of Syria
in five years. What further evidence do we need that
Russia will always prioritize the Al-Assad regime over
the protection of the Syrian people? Today we have
learned that they will plunge to new depths, that they
would rather cover up for Al-Assad than prevent the
further use and proliferation of chemical weapons.
The Russians will say that this draft resolution was
based on weak or flawed evidence, but the JIM was
a fully independent United Nations mechanism that
Russia created. Russia agreed to the methodology that
the JIM would apply, and yet when it came up with an
answer that Russia did not like, all of a sudden there
was a problem. Russia’s answer is that Syria should
conduct its own investigation. The idea that the guilty
party should investigate itself is absurd, and it is clearly
on record that the Syrian regime has obstructed the
JIM investigation.
Russia will claim that the JIM does not meet a legal
standard of evidence, but it was never intended to. As
we all agreed, in resolution 2235 (2015), it was meant to
examine the available evidence in an impartial manner
and come to a conclusion. Russia will claim that we
should be focusing on the use of chemical weapons by
Da’esh. But we already have robust and comprehensive
measures in place to combat Da’esh. Today’s draft
resolution would have reaffirmed our commitment
to those measures and reiterated our condemnation
of Da’esh. Russia will say that supporting this draft
resolution would disrupt the Syrian political process.
That is simply not true. The United Kingdom remains
committed to working with Russia and everyone else,
through the United Nations, to help the Syrian people
reach a lasting political settlement. But not taking
action against the use of chemical weapons undermines
confidence in the international community’s ability
to tackle flagrant violations of international law. It
undermines the confidence and trust of the ordinary
Syrians affected by these horrific attacks, and that
is no way to build the right conditions for successful
political talks.
6/17

28/02/2017

Despite Russia and China’s actions, I would like
to reiterate our thanks to the JIM for its work, and
to the international partners who helped it. Because
of that tireless work, we know without doubt that the
Al-Assad regime and Da’esh used toxic chemicals as
weapons against civilians in Syria. Those responsible
for such attacks remain free and unpunished to this day.
Today we had a chance to step up and begin to end that
impunity. Instead, Russia and China have let down the
people of Marea, Talmenes, Sarmin and Qmenas, and
the wider international community that seeks justice
for those horrific attacks. Without a clear response to
those flagrant abuses of international law, the Al-Assad
regime is only going to be emboldened to preserve its
chemical weapon capabilities and continue to use them.
We should all be concerned about the reports of further
use of chemical weapons in Syria, most recently in
Aleppo and eastern Hama last year.
In response to today’s vetoes, Da’esh, too, will
surely only be encouraged to continue using chemical
weapons — something that Russia claims to oppose.
And the longer-term credibility and utility of the
Chemical Weapons Convention will also suffer. But
the United Kingdom will not let Russia’s actions today
stop us from working with international partners to see
justice done for the victims and to prevent the use of
chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere. That includes
the international, impartial and independent mechanism
for Syria agreed on by the General Assembly last year.
We must be able to demonstrate that the international
system works and that we are able to bring those
responsible for using chemical weapons to account.
Anything less is not an option.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation voted against today’s
draft resolution (S/2017/172), on imposing sanctions
Syria, because its authors’ concept, which by its very
nature is offensive and flawed, is totally unacceptable.
The fact that the draft resolution failed to receive six
Council members’ votes out of 15 should give its authors
serious reason to think. The statements we have heard
have left us in no doubt that the draft resolution was
based on the Western capitals’ anti-regime doctrine. As
for the insulting remarks about Russia, China and other
States, we leave them to their consciences and may
God be their judge. Let us try to sort out what really
took place.
When the draft resolution first saw the light, at the
beginning of December 2016, we expressed our concerns
17-05288

28/02/2017

The situation in the Middle East

on a number of occasions, collectively and separately, to
each co-sponsor. Our scepticism about the conclusions
of the third and fourth reports (see S/2016/738/Rev.1
and S/2016/888) of the Joint Investigative Mechanism
(JIM) of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the United Nations
to investigate cases of the use of chemical weapons in
Syria is well known. Ambassador Vitaly Churkin, late
Permanent Representative of Russia, had already made
detailed comments highlighting their uncorroborated
conclusions, and at that point we thought we had made
things quite clear. Apparently not. From the point of
view of their practical legal application, the JIM’s
conclusions are not based on convincing facts on which
any sort of charges could be founded. Moreover, they
take no account of the fact that besides the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, there is widespread use of toxic
substances in Syria by the Al-Nusra Front as well as
numerous opposition groups on the ground, including
for purposes of provocation aimed at discrediting the
country’s armed forces and its leadership.
The problem is that the work of the experts in
Syria is based on questionable information provided
by the armed opposition sympathetic international
non-governmental organizations, the media and socalled friends of Syria. At the same time, the attitude to
requests from Damascus about the investigations is one
of shrugging contempt, as was clearly demonstrated
in the report of the OPCW Fact-finding Mission on
an incident that occurred on 2 August of last year in
Aleppo. No wonder, when two thirds of the Mission’s
expert team was staffed by representatives from a
single group of countries. Its geographic balance is in
urgent need of correction. Let us be frank: the whole
thing strengthens the impression that the authors of
the draft text submitted for a vote today needed the
Joint Investigative Mechanism for the sole purpose of
laying responsibility for the use of chemical weapons
at the door of Al-Assad’s Government, thereby creating
additional reasons for regime change in Damascus.
We should once again emphasize that this obsession
with that destructive geopolitical project continues to
be an obstacle to the ability to think clearly and weigh
decisions carefully with the goal of reaching a political
settlement, not just in Syria but in a number of other
trouble spots in the Middle East.
When we created the JIM and agreed to extend its
work for another year, it was on the clear understanding
of the nature of the threat posed to this troubled

S/PV.7893

region by the use of chemical weapons by terrorist
organizations. Today that dangerous trend threatens
to spill beyond the borders of the Middle East. We
were led by the expectation that the Mechanism’s
work would be founded on a basis of impartiality and
on established facts, not assumptions, conjectures or
fabrications. In that regard, the Mechanism needs to
seriously rethink the principles behind its work. We
believe that, as envisaged in resolution 2319 (2016),
the Mechanism’s activities will go beyond Syria to
include its neighbouring countries, and that its mandate
will provide for real counter-terrorism measures.
Much remains to be clarified in that regard, including
enabling Damascus, in accordance with its obligations
under article VII of the Chemical Weapons Convention
(CWC), to appropriately conclude a comprehensive
national investigation verifying the facts laid out in the
JIM’s reports. What is there to say about a situation when
the investigators did not actually travel to the places
where the crimes were alleged to have been committed?
Based on the unconvincing findings of the
JIM’s reports in today’s draft resolution, there is no
justification for concluding that Damascus has failed
to comply with the Chemical Weapons Convention or
has violated resolution 2118 (2013), despite the fact that
resolution 2118 (2013) was seen as a huge success for
the Security Council in its unprecedented disarming
of Syria’s chemical weapons. The draft resolution
envisages applying sanctions similar to those that
have been imposed on other countries. Working from
this type of carbon copy is totally unacceptable. The
authors of the draft resolution have gone as far as to
propose financial, economic and other restrictions on
specific individuals and legal entities.
However, they do not bother to provide justification
for the establishment of sanctions lists. The JIM has not
spoken about any Syrian officials, scientific institutions
or economic entities. This is a clear attempt to prejudge
the outcomes of the investigations. When agreeing
upon this draft resolution, we were told that it served
the goal of non-proliferation. However, if one reads this
voluminous document, it becomes absolutely clear that
the point is to levy sanctions against Damascus, under
imagined pretexts.
We are seeing a clear trend of bringing powerful
political pressure to bear on the Mechanism and
pre-programming the results of the investigation. The
Mechanism is being forced to set aside the principles of
objectivity, independence and impartiality, which were

17-052887/17

S/PV.7893

The situation in the Middle East

set forth in the resolution tht established it. No lessons
have been learned from the past. I recall the tragedy
that occurred as a result of the pressure brought to bear
on the Special Commission on Iraq, and then on the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission. It seems the Council has forgotten that
this marked the very beginning of destabilization in the
Middle East. We have no right to repeat such a thing.
The annex of the draft resolution refers to a ban on
the provision to Syria of a large number of chemical
substances, the majority of which have nothing to do
with the CWC. An embargo on the exports of this country
can adversely affect the fulfilment of major agricultural
and economic needs, in particular given that there are
already unilateral sanctions in place. A ban on the
provision of helicopters, spare parts and services could
indeed be seen as an attempt to undermine the counterterrorism efforts being undertaken by Damascus, not
to mention the critical role played by small aircraft in
resolving humanitarian issues in an armed conflict.
We truly wonder against whom and to what end this
draft resolution has been crafted. It lay on the shelves
for three months and underwent no significant change
despite our numerous observations and the alternative
we proposed on how joint work could be organized to
combat chemical terrorism in the region. Nevertheless,
the draft resolution was brought to the Security Council
for a vote in the context of the efforts undertaken in
Geneva and Astana to establish an intra-Syrian political
dialogue to settle the crisis. This is a railroading of
the draft by the Western troika of permanent Security
Council members. We see this as an attempt to retard
and undermine current political and diplomatic efforts.
We have seen the same scenario before. They say one
thing and then do something completely different. The
sponsors were unable to recognize the inappropriateness
and untimeliness of measures; nor were they able to
recognize the real threat of chemical terrorism in the
Middle East. They do not understand that unilateral
and multilateral sanctions against Damascus will only
weaken the international counter-terrorism effort.
In spite of our consistent appeals, the sponsors
preferred a politically biased approach, leading to
confrontation and an exacerbation of the situation,
including in the Security Council. They heated things
up intentionally, well aware that the initiative had no
chance of being adopted in the Security Council. In that
context, we had no other choice than to block this draft
resolution. The sanctions list contained therein was
8/17

28/02/2017

taken from analogous American lists approved at the
beginning of this year by the outgoing United States
Administration. One should not turn it all around,
get it all backwards, create virtual pictures. Today’s
confrontation is not a result of our negative vote, it is a
result of the fact that the sponsors opted for provocation,
all the while knowing our position.
Furthermore, we would like to underscore that, in
voting against this draft resolution, we voted against
confrontation. By doing so, we demonstrated that
confrontation is doomed to failure. It should be a thing
of the past. We are sending a message: only through
cooperation will we be able to resolve the most difficult
of tasks and move forward in finding a solution to the
Syrian crisis. It is high time that we do so by creating a
broad counter-terrorism front.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): Japan supported and
co-sponsored the draft resolution (S/2017/172) proposed
by France, the United Kingdom and the United States.
We firmly believe that the Security Council needs to
show its shared determination that the use of chemical
weapons is not permissible under any circumstances,
and that the Council will hold accountable those who
are responsible.
Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, in resolution 2118 (2013) we as a
Council decided to impose measures in the event
of any use of chemical weapons in Syria by anyone.
This is the starting point. Then the Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM) was established and its mandate
renewed unanimously. The JIM drew conclusions from
its impartial, objective and independent investigation.
In the view of Japan, it is our primary responsibility
to implement what we have decided as a Council.
Regrettably, today the proposed draft resolution was
not adopted. However, I believe and hope there is unity
inside the Council on the necessity to hold accountable
those who are responsible for the use of chemical
weapons. The Council needs to continue to explore
ensuring accountability.
As for the issue of timing, we heard an argument
that this moment is not opportune in the light of the
political process in Geneva. There is no question about
the Council’s unanimous support for the political
process led by the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura. However, it
is not a question of whether the timing is good or not for
17-05288

28/02/2017

The situation in the Middle East

the Council to take measures to ensure accountability
for the use of chemical weapons.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): As a
signatory to the code of conduct regarding Security
Council action against genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes, Uruguay is committed
to preventing and putting an end to such horrendous
crimes. In that regard, we can only lament the use of
the veto in the case of this draft resolution (S/2017/172).
My delegation believes that ensuring accountability for
the use of chemical weapons in Syria is essential, not
only for reasons of justice but also to put an end to and
prevent such heinous acts.
It was not a perfect text, but it did constitute a
first step towards ensuring accountability for the
use of chemical weapons in the Syrian conflict,
based on the conclusions of the third and fourth
reports (see S/2016/738/Rev.1 and S/2016/888) of the
Joint Investigative Mechanism, which established
responsibility for four out of nine alleged cases of
use investigated. The sanctions regime that we were
prepared to implement, like other Council sanctions
regimes in force, could subsequently have been
reviewed and improved upon by the panel of experts
that would have been established for that purpose.
We reiterate that these crimes must not go
unpunished, whether committed by the members of the
Government, the Syrian armed forces, terrorist groups
or non-State armed groups. We call on all members of
the Council to continue to seek consensus that would
allow us, as soon as possible, to adopt measures to
punish those responsible, and therefore to prevent new
incidents of chemical-weapon use against the already
hard-hit civilian population of Syria.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): Thanks
to the joint efforts by the international community, the
ceasefire in Syria has been generally preserved recently.
A new round of Geneva peace talks is under way. A rare
opportunity has emerged in terms of finding a political
solution to the question of Syria. Under the current
circumstances, the international community should
remain committed to a political solution, consolidate
the positive momentum through coordinated actions
and encourage the parties in Syria to maintain the
ceasefire and dialogue so as to find a way out that is
acceptable to all the parties as soon as possible.
The Security Council’s action on the question
of Syria should take into account the importance of

S/PV.7893

maintaining the ceasefire, finding a political solution,
working together to counter terrorism and providing
humanitarian assistance. That should be in the interest
of stabilizing the situation in Syria as soon as possible.
Anyone truly interested in the fundamental interests
of the people of Syria and the Middle East would do
nothing that ran counter to such interests. Regardless of
the rhetoric and no matter how elegant it might sound,
anything that runs counter to the fundamental interests
of the people of Syria and the region should not be
allowed by the Council.
China’s position on the issue of chemical weapons
is clear and consistent: we oppose the use of chemical
weapons by any State, organization or individual under
any circumstances, and call for punishing all instances
of chemical weapons use. China has itself been a
victim of the use of chemical weapons by other States.
The Chinese people are more justified than any other
party to express their opposition to the use of chemical
weapons. China is deeply concerned about and strongly
condemns the use of chemical as weapons that has
occurred within Syria.
With regard to the use of chemical weapons in
Syria, the Council has in the past achieved important
results in terms of destroying the stockpile of chemical
weapons in Syria. At present, investigations on the use
of chemicals as weapons are ongoing, and it is therefore
too early to reach a final conclusion. The Council
should preserve its unity and continue to support the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism so that it
can carry out its investigations in a professional matter,
based on objective and fair criteria and in accordance
with the mandate that was conferred to it by resolution
2319 (2016). Relevant conclusions must be based on
accurate, detailed and solid evidence that can truly
stand the test of history.
As we all recall, the purported existence of weapons
of mass destruction was used in the past to unleash a
war that has brought untold suffering to the people in
the Middle East. Countries in the Middle East remain
beset today by the legacy of that war. The lessons of
history must be learned. Only in that way can mistakes
be avoided in the future.
The draft resolution (S/2017/172) is based on
conclusions on which the parties continue to have
differences. It was forced through to a vote, although
Council members still had serious differences. That is

17-052889/17

S/PV.7893

The situation in the Middle East

in no way helpful to finding a solution to the issue of
chemical weapons in Syria, and it is not conducive to
the peace talks in Geneva and the political process on
the question of Syria in general.
China has been working tirelessly to help bring
about a solution to the issue of Syria, supports the
United Nations as the major player in terms of good
offices and has been facilitating finding a settlement
among the parties that is acceptable to all through
peaceful negotiations and based on the principle of a
Syrian-owned and -led process. China will continue to
play a constructive role in finding a political solution to
this issue with a view to arriving at a comprehensive,
fair and appropriate solution to the question of Syria.
I would also like to take this opportunity to point
out that the Security Council is the core of our collective
security regime. Every Council member bears the
sacred responsibility of maintaining international
peace and security and should define its national
position in accordance with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and on the merits
of the case under discussion. Unprovoked and distorted
attacks against the solemn position of other members
represent a very irresponsible action. In the words of
the representative of the United Kingdom, it is really
absurd. In and of itself, that serves as a good example
of how certain countries are using rhetoric as a means
of last resort and with ulterior motives.
What all Council members should do is deeply
reflect on the situation in Syria and the Middle East,
on how it has been allowed to deteriorate to its current
level, and on the role that each and everyone of us has
played — and on whether that role should or should not
be praised. It is only by doing so that we can be regarded
as acting responsibly with regard to the people of Syria
and the region. Dealing with people solely through
rhetorical flourishes is complete hypocrisy.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): As a sponsor that voted in
favour of today’s draft resolution (S/2017/172), Italy
regrets that the Security Council was unable to adopt
the text submitted by France, the United Kingdom
and the United States. We thank those delegations for
their efforts.
Of course, we had hoped that the unity of the Council
would be preserved in support of the draft resolution,
and my delegation had worked in that direction during
negotiations and consultations. The initiative is about
ensuring a meaningful follow-up to the reports of an
10/17

28/02/2017

impartial instrument that the Council established,
supported and renewed unanimously, thereby clearly
backing its methodology, professionalism and
impartiality. Looking ahead, we are encouraged that the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM)
is about to resume its activities. We remain strongly
committed to supporting it and upholding the findings
of its future. Investigations. Italy voted in favour of the
draft resolution for three main reasons.
First, in the light of our long-standing position
on non-proliferation issues, which must be kept
separate from other more political considerations, we
strongly condemn the use of any chemical weapon or
toxic chemical anywhere, by anyone and under any
circumstance, whether by State or non-State actors.
Today more than ever, we must uphold the values and
principles of international law and of the international
non-proliferation regime and avoid its weakening,
which would encourage anyone willing to resort to a
barbaric form of warfare and aggression.
Secondly, we voted in favour of the draft resolution
to show our credibility and the deterrence role of the
JIM. We continue to support the work of the Joint
Investigative Mechanism and its staff, whom we
commend for their dedication and professionalism. It
is an essential instrument in attributing responsibility
for such heinous attacks. The Council established the
JIM because it felt the need to see the responsibility
for chemical-weapon attacks attributed to those behind
such horrific attacks. As its reports indicate, the JIM
has done just what the Council had asked it to do, while
abiding by the standards that the Security Council had
set out. Its task was to identify to greatest extent feasible
those who were perpetrators of chemical-weapon
attacks. Today’s draft resolution was meant to ensure
meaningful follow-up to work of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism.
The third, and final, reason that we voted in favour
relates to accountability. Simply identifying which
party is responsible is not enoug; those who planned,
ordered and executed the attacks must face justice. The
Council has a shared responsibility to uphold the work
of the JIM and ensure meaningful follow-up in terms of
holding individuals and/or entities accountable for their
unacceptable and criminal acts.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Bolivia reiterates its strongest and
17-05288

28/02/2017

The situation in the Middle East

most absolute condemnation and rejection of the use
of chemical weapons and toxic substances, regardless
of who uses them or their reasons for doing so or
where such acts are perpetrated. Those responsible
must be duly investigated, tried and punished to the
fullest extent. The use of chemical weapons violates
obligations under international law.
Bolivia voted against the draft resolution
(S/2017/172) put forward today, which proposed a
sanctions mechanism on the Government of Syria for
using chemical weapons. Moreover, however, the draft
resolution included an annex with a list of people and
companies subject to the sanctions. None of the lists
annexed to the draft resolution was compiled by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism, which
was established to investigate the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. The names of the people and
companies mentioned in the draft resolution did not
come from the Panel of Experts of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism. That list therefore violates the right to due
process. A few years ago, in this very Chamber, socalled proof of weapons of mass destruction was found
in that same region of the world. That ended with a
country being invaded and left approximately 1 million
people dead. Allow us, therefore, to challenge the
information presented to us in today’s draft resolution.
In the same vein, we believe that it is important that
the Joint Investigative Mechanism be given more time
to complete its work. We hope that its future reports
will be completed with the highest level of transparency
and political independence and that they can shed more
light on developments.
It is also important to point out that the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), which we chair, is a body that addresses
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and chemical, biological and nuclear weapons by
non-State actors. In that regard, its work is in no way
related to the issue of imposing sanctions on Syria. Its
focus is on ensuring that groups such as Islamic State
do not possess such weapons.
We believe that those reasons were enough to vote
against the draft resolution. I nevertheless believe that
it is the Security Council’s duty to look at the political
context and situation above and beyond the contents
the draft resolution. Bolivia has paid great attention to
the comments made by Special Envoy of the Secretary-

S/PV.7893

General Staffan de Mistura, who stated that the region’s
current ceasefire, which has indisputably led to a
considerable reduction in violence, is one of the few
remaining glimmers of hope for a political process and
a path to peace in Syria.
At the same time, we believe that these types of
initiatives — which, I reiterate, are not based on sufficient
concrete facts or on the outcome of full, independent,
impartial and conclusive investigations — threaten
the ceasefire and, much more important, threaten the
peace process being conducted under the auspices of
the United Nations.
In that regard, we believe that it is important to
ask ourselves why this type of draft resolution was
presented to the Council when everyone knew that it
would be vetoed. Why were more extensive negotiations
not conducted to ensure that members of the Council
could participate fully and contribute to the text of the
draft resolution? What are the reasons for insisting that
the draft resolution be put before the Council — to
be vetoed, might I add, once again? The most logical
answer that we can find to those questions is that the
draft resolution presented today was simply an attempt
to use the Security Council for political purposes. The
goal was not to seek peace in Syria or to independently
and objectively identify those responsible for the use of
chemical weapons in the region; rather, it was to launch
a political media offensive on members of the Council
that voted against the draft resolution.
We believe that it is important to highlight that
there were three abstentions and three votes against
the draft resolution. We believe that that sends a very
strong signal that, unfortunately, when faced with such
types of draft resolutions, things are not functioning as
they should in the Council.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We are
all aware of the magnitude of the crisis that the Syrian
people have been facing under the yoke of a conflict
that has now entered its seventh year. The conflict
has claimed hundreds of thousands of victims and left
millions displaced. We all know that achieving swift
justice is an integral part of the efforts to reach a final
settlement and to put an end to the suffering of Syrians,
reuniting them under the flag of a country with control
over its territory and that fulfils the hopes its people
have for freedom and democracy.
That is why Egypt has advocated, and will always
advocate, the notion of accountability in Syria in order

17-0528811/17

S/PV.7893

The situation in the Middle East

to achieve justice, in particular with regard to crimes
that could be considered war crimes, regardless of their
perpetrators, and to instances in which it has been
proven that chemical weapons have been used against
Syrian civilians by more than one party, as stated in the
report of the Joint Investigative Mechanism, established
pursuant to resolution 2235 (2015). The mandate of the
Mechanism was renewed by resolution 2319 (2016).
The application of the notion of accountability,
in Syria or elsewhere, means having a number of
elements in place. If one or more of those elements is
absent, such accountability would become a politicized
measure that would end up deepening the crisis in
Syria and having an adverse effect on the prospects
for the political process. Despite the fact that the draft
resolution (S/2017/172) put before the Security Council
today purports to ensure accountability and achieve
justice, for unknown reasons it ignores one of the main
elements that I have mentioned, that is, evidence.// Let
me remind Council members ....
Let me remind Council members that the common
practice when introducing sanctions against individuals
or entities implicated in specific crimes as serious
as those we consider today is to establish a sanctions
committee through a Security Council resolution. Such
a committee would evaluate the evidence provided in
connection with the individuals or entities accused of
using chemical weapons. The names of those entities or
individuals would then be included on the sanctions list.
Those steps are aimed at guaranteeing the transparency
of justice.
What we have before us today is supposedly not a
political measure to impose sanctions on a given country,
but rather accountability for explicit accusations
against individuals because of their implication in
clear crimes. Nevertheless, we are surprised that those
usual steps have been skipped. The proposed draft
resolution includes in its annexes a pre-identified list of
individuals and entities that would be subject to those
sanctions and whom the co-sponsors perceive to be
primarily responsible for the use of chemical weapons
in Syria.
We see that as a premature judgment of the reports
of the Joint Investigative Mechanism, which has not
levelled any accusations against the individuals and
entities whose names are included on the annexed list.
The co-sponsors of the draft resolution have also not
provided any evidence whatsoever of that culpability, nor
12/17

28/02/2017

have they deferred to any sanctions committee, which,
according to the very same draft resolution, ought to
be established to verify such serious accusations. Such
actions run counter to the basic notions of transparency
concerning information and its sources, on the basis of
which names have been included on the annexed list.
We have also noted that the draft resolution
conflates two notions that very clearly are different. We
understand, however, as we all support the imposition
of sanctions against those who have been established to
be implicated in the heinous crime of using chemical
weapons. Nevertheless, the draft resolution went far
beyond by imposing the same sanctions on a matter
that is perceived by many as being very technical: the
relationship between the Government of Syria and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and the assessment of the credibility of the preliminary
Syrian declaration on its chemical-weapon programme.
Over the past couple of months, we have repeatedly
explained our viewpoint regarding the imbalance in
the draft resolution that supposedly seeks to establish
justice, particularly as it relates to the lack of evidence.
Despite our repeated readiness to support Council
sanctions on those responsible for the use of chemical
weapons, through the standard procedures we have
identified, in the interest of ensuring full justice, we
were surprised to see an incomprehensible insistence
on proceeding with the draft resolution without any
modifications to address such imbalances. That is why
we were compelled to abstain in the voting on the draft
resolution today — in order to express that we support
the notion of justice and accountability in general but,
at the same time, oppose the levelling of arbitrary
accusations against specific individuals and entities on
issues that could amount to being war crimes.
In conclusion, allow me to express our regret that the
proposed draft resolution gives the perception that the
Security Council is divided when it comes to the danger
of chemical weapons in Syria. That particular subject
has always enjoyed consensus in the Council since
the adoption of resolution 2118 (2013), on the Syrian
chemical-weapon programme. I would also note our
surprise that we must take such a step, but all members
know that the draft resolution is doomed to fail. Such
failure could negatively impact the momentum in the
political process and the prospects for achieving justice
and accountability in Syria in the future.
17-05288

28/02/2017

The situation in the Middle East

We therefore call on all the members of the
Council to get back to work as soon as possible in
order to restore mutual trust among members in order
to support the political process in Syria and avoid
any indifference and political convenience, which do
not always convey the real situation in Syria and will
lead only to negative consequences in that country.
We also call on the international community to give
due importance to the establishment of a region free
of weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East by
following a comprehensive approach, and to engage
actively in addressing the risk of non-State actors using
and manufacturing such weapons, and sharing that
knowledge with one another.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): At the outset, let me make
it very clear that we have a firm and uncompromising
policy against the use of chemical weapons, born of our
own experience. We have no reason for laxity on that
issue. We believe that the use of chemical weapons, for
any reason and under any circumstances by any party,
is not only abhorrent but also violates international
law. That is why we condemn, in the strongest possible
terms, the use of chemical weapons in Syria, as
reported by the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons Fact-Finding Mission in the Syrian
Arab Republic. We believe that those responsible for
the use of chemical weapons in Syria, whether State
or non-State actors, whether individuals or entities,
should be identified based on conclusive findings
and must be held accountable. That is why we attach
great importance to the work of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM).
Since we joined the Security Council, we have been
carefully examining the draft resolution (S/2017/172) on
the use of chemical weapons in Syria with a great sense
of responsibility. In that connection, we have been very
frank and open in raising questions on the third and
fourth reports of the Joint Investigative Mechanism
(see S/2016/738/Rev.1 and S/2016/888), which the draft
resolution used as a basis for proposing a sanctions
regime. We came to realize that, due to a number of
constraints, the Joint Investigative Mechanism could
not find “highly convincing evidence”, “substantial
evidence” or even “sufficient evidence”. As the
Joint Investigative Mechanism made clear in its
report, what it was able to find was only “sufficient
information” — and I want to underline that. Of course,
we understand the JIM’s real constraints. It was not

S/PV.7893

under ideal circumstances that it was called upon to
undertake that onerous task.
Therefore, when we affirm that its current
conclusions are not yet firm enough to make the kind of
decision proposed, it is not intended to cast aspersions
on the work done by the JIM, which, in our judgment,
was carried out with objectivity and a high level of
professional responsibility. We nonetheless believe
that we have the obligation to point out areas that
are in need of further clarification and investigation
to determine the specific individuals and entities
responsible for those acts. That is to say that we are
only stressing that making a decision on a very vital
matter, such that which had been proposed attributing
responsibility for the use of chemical weapons, should
have been based on convincing and robust evidence.
Whoever is responsible for such abhorrent acts must
be explicitly identified and accordingly punished. That
requires establishing clear and unambiguous evidence.
Thus far, the JIM has not come up with a specific and
detailed list of persons or entities that fully corresponds
to the annex of the draft resolution.
In resolution 2319 (2016), the Council renewed the
mandate of the JIM for one additional year. As we heard
just this past Friday from the Head of JIM, Ms. Virginia
Gamba, a new investigative team with better skills
has been formed and is ready “to examine additional
information and evidence that was not obtained or
prepared by the Fact-Finding Mission”. It would have
been only appropriate and logical to allow the JIM to
continue its work and come up with an unambiguous
conclusion. That, we thought, would have contributed
to ensuring the unity of the Council, which is critical
with regard to very weighty issues such as the one
at hand.
I should say parenthetically that one of the most
successful arms control agreements was concluded in
September 2013 with the aim of removing or destroying
Syria’s chemical weapons. By comparison, we feel that
it would have been much easier to move together this
time around. Nevertheless, we remain fully confident
with regard to the work of the JIM. We understand that
it has not received the necessary support commensurate
with the unprecedented responsibility given to it by the
Council. We believe that, as it resumes its important
work, it is absolutely important to provide all the
necessary support to the JIM and protect its professional
independence. It is also vital that we use the important
work of the JIM and the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission

17-0528813/17

S/PV.7893

The situation in the Middle East

in the Syrian Arab Republic to address the proliferation
of chemical weapons in Syria, the magnitude of which
experts tell us is indeed downright scary, with the
potential to affect and endanger the wider region.
Criminal groups are having a field day in that regard.
We need to get our act together before it is too late, as
happens on too many occasions.
Finally, the Syrian people have been going through
unspeakable suffering and pain over the past six years.
I should like to therefore conclude by once again
expressing our support for ongoing Syria peace talks
in Geneva under the auspices of the United Nations,
which, we believe, should be the most important focus
of the Council to end the suffering of the Syrian people.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan has
always opposed the use of chemical weapons, as well
as any other kind of weapon of mass destruction. In
that regard, we consider the facts pertaining to the use
of chemical weapons in Syria to indicate a flagrant
and inhuman act that cannot be justified. Given the
extreme importance of the complete and immediate
cessation of the use of chemical weapons and bringing
the perpetrators to justice, we stand for the unanimous
adoption of measures that would truly lead us to the
cessation of the use of chemical weapons in Syria and
the ultimate goal of ending the bloodshed. Today’s
meeting, however, shows the inability of the Security
Council to adopt a coherent and mutually acceptable
solution on this important issue, which will prolong the
suffering of the Syrian people and is not conducive to
resolving the crisis in that long-suffering nation.
The issue requires a coherent, balanced and
meaningful approach. We believe that we cannot place
responsibility on only one side of the conflict for the
use of chemical weapons and that it is fundamentally
important to make concrete punitive decisions only on
the basis of strong, clear and irrefutable evidence with
clear facts and complete conclusions. It is therefore
necessary to continue the work of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism, and we fully support it.
Finally, given the aforementioned and the fact
that the lack of consensus on the draft resolution
exacerbates the situation in Syria and is not conducive
to strengthening the Security Council’s efforts in the
pursuit of peace and security, my delegation abstained
in the voting.
14/17

28/02/2017

Mr. Skau (Sweden): Until today, the Security
Council had stood united in its demand on all parties
to refrain from the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
The Council has consistently confirmed that the use
and proliferation of such weapons of mass destruction
constitute a threat to international peace and security.
With the adoption of resolution 2209 (2015), the Council
committed itself to holding those responsible for any use
of chemicals as weapons in Syria, including chlorine
and other toxic chemicals, to account. The Council
has thus far failed to deliver on that commitment and
respond to the conclusions the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM).
The conclusive findings of the JIM are clear. The
Syrian Armed Forces have used chemical weapons
on at least three occasions, and the terrorist group
Da’esh has used mustard gas at least once. The Council
cannot remain passive in the face of confirmed
non-compliance with its own numerous resolutions and
the first confirmed case of non-compliance by a State
party to the Chemical Weapons Convention. To demand
accountability is not politicization but our common
responsibility. That the Council was not able to honour
its commitments owing to the use of the right to veto
of two of its permanent members is indeed deplorable.
Sweden condemns in the strongest terms all use
of chemical weapons in Syria and elsewhere and will
continue to do so. We trust that the Council will be
able to once again show a united front against such
international crimes. The Council’s work to ensure
accountability for chemical weapons used in Syria
does not stop here. We strongly support the JIM’s
continued efforts to reach independent and technically
underpinned conclusions with regard to the perpetrators
of chemical weapons use in Syria.
Sweden will be making a voluntary contribution
of approximately $220,000 in response to the appeal
of the fifth JIM report (see S/2017/131), and we look
forward to future JIM reports. We will continue to
work with all members towards helping the Council to
assume its responsibility again. We owe that to all of
those who have suffered the inhumane consequences of
toxic chemicals used as weapons. It must be clear that
there will be no impunity for those crimes.
In conclusion, over the past six years the Council
has been divided on too many occasions on how to end
to the conflict and the needless human suffering in
17-05288

28/02/2017

The situation in the Middle East

Syria. We fully support the ongoing United Nationsled talks in Geneva. A renewed process geared towards
lasting peace in Syria is our joint responsibility.
Mr. Seck (Senegal): (spoke in French): Senegal
would like to take its turn in recalling that nothing can
or must be used to justify something as horrific as the
use of chemicals as weapons, including during conflicts
and against civilians who undergo unspeakable
suffering as a consequence.
The draft resolution that was voted on today
(S/2017/172) begins by recalling the Protocol for
the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating,
Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological
Methods of Warfare. It also recalls the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on
Their Destruction (CWC). And I wish to stress the
words “stockpiling” and “use”.
In 2013, when Senegal was not yet a member,
the Council, by resolution 2118 (2013), welcomed the
decision of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) to send a fact-finding
mission to investigate the use of chemical weapons in
Syria. Two years later in 2015, at which time Senegal
was still not yet a member of the Council, the latter,
by resolution 2235 (2015), created the OPCW-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM), which
built on the work of the Fact-Finding Mission to, among
other objectives, identify the persons, entities or groups
that had perpetrated, organized, ordered or in some
way participated in the use as weapons in the Syrian
Arab Republic of such substances as chlorine gas or
other toxic chemicals.
These are the reasons why Senegal, which remains
faithful to its position of principle and is a party to
the CWC, voted in favour of the draft resolution that
was submitted today. Having said that, given the three
votes against, the three abstentions and the nine votes
in favour, the Council can only accept that the draft
resolution did not enjoy consensus. Therefore, after the
encouraging dialogue in Astana, it is essential during
the talks in Geneva that the Council support the JIM,
in which we have placed our renewed trust. Those
who used chemical weapons — and they were indeed
used — must be brought to account. The Council must
show unity to ensure that justice is done and in order
to finally resolve the ongoing Syrian crisis, which has
gone on for far too long.

S/PV.7893

Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
deeply regrets the inability of the Security Council to
adopt draft resolution S/2017/172 in spite of the support
of the majority of members. The draft resolution
was subject to far-reaching discussions in good faith
with our partners. Thanks to the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM), we had enough
information to take the necessary measures. We had
everything necessary to shoulder our responsibility,
to which we were unanimously committed. We are
therefore disappointed by the voting, of course, but
certainly not discouraged. We do not have the right to
be discouraged. We do not have the right to turn our
backs and give up. We do not have the right to resign
ourselves to the unthinkable — accepting the use of
weapons of mass destruction without reacting with the
necessary firmness.
That is why France, as underscored by Minister of
Foreign Affairs Jean-Marc Ayrault, will not give up.
The work of the JIM will continue. Other cases will
be transferred to it and we will once again be required
to take a position. Sooner or later, the perpetrators
will be held to account. My country will remain fully
mobilized with its partners. France is therefore more
determined than ever to break the stalemate by drawing
upon all appropriate international institutions to ensure
these crimes are punished. I hope that when the time
comes we will be able to come together. Our most
fundamental values, as is our security and that of our
children, are at stake. And all these things are simply
far too important.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ukraine.
We are disappointed by the results of the voting on
the draft resolution on chemical weapons use in Syria
(S/2017/172). Ukraine co-sponsored and voted in favour
of the draft resolution and, in that regard, I wish to
reiterate some elements of our position on the subject.
Against the background of increasing challenges
and threats to international peace and security, Ukraine
advocates strict adherence to the provisions of key
international instruments in this field, including the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction (CWC) and the 1925 Geneva
Protocol. The use of chemical weapons in Syria,
confirmed in the reports of the Organization for the

17-0528815/17

S/PV.7893

The situation in the Middle East

Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism, is a blatant violation of
international law, and all responsible for such crimes
should be brought to justice.
Ukraine therefore supports the introduction of
further restrictive measures by the Council, under the
provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations, in response to the violation of the CWC and
Security Council resolution 2118 (2013). The inability
of the Council to address breaches of the Convention
will lead to further impunity and is a matter of grave
concern to my delegation.
Despite the results of the voting, I commend the
efforts of those delegations involved in the preparation
of the draft resolution, which sought to impose new,
targeted, sectoral sanctions against the Syrian regime for
the use of toxic chemicals as weapons, and to redouble
international efforts to prevent the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant from using chemical weapons in
future. The ongoing firm stance of those delegations
in defending and restoring respect for international law
is indispensable and will not be in vain. Let us remain
mobilized. The time for justice will come.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): First, I would like to express our most heartfelt
condolences on the passing of Mr. Vitaly Churkin,
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation, a
friendly State. We will always remember him and his
positive spirit and wisdom, which we feel in every room
of the Organization. May he rest in peace.
We are not at all surprised to see that the triangle,
composed of the United Kingdom, the United States
and France, continues to pursue the same politicized
and dangerous practices within the Security Council in
order to undermine the Government of my country and
subject us and our allies to the worst forms of blackmail.
They are ready to put to the vote draft resolutions that
draw from unprofessional reports that are unable to
come to definitive conclusions and that draw on the
false, fabricated eyewitness accounts of members of
terrorist groups that are supported by those very same
countries.
16/17

28/02/2017

We know that the majority of these terrorists reside
in Turkey, the first country to support terrorism in
Syria. It is no secret that draft resolution S/2017/172 is
based on reports written under unprecedented pressure.
It is our impression that the missions that draft such
reports do so before having even begun their work.
The Syrian Arab Republic’s position remains
unchanged with respect to chemical weapons and
weapons of mass destruction. We are against the
use of such weapons; they are unacceptable and
deeply unethical. That is why my country acceded to
the Chemical Weapons Convention, with a view to
making the Middle East a zone free of all weapons of
mass destruction.
However, despite all of our efforts, it is clear
today that the three States concerned proposed the
draft resolution (S/2017/172) simply so as to protect
Israel’s nuclear, chemical and biological stockpiles.
My country’s Government has on numerous occasions
warned about the threat posed by the use by armed
terrorists of such chemical weapons against civilians, in
particular groups affiliated with Da’esh, the Al-Nusra
Front and Al-Qaida. We have addressed 87 letters to
the Security Council, I repeat, 87 letters. We have also
communicated with the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and
with the highest disarmament authorities, as well as
the Joint Investigative Mechanism. We also contacted
the Counter-Terrorism Committee and provided
corroborated information regarding the use, with the
support of certain Governments, of toxic chemical
substances by terrorist armed groups against civilians.
Unfortunately, these issues were not discussed or
even considered. We know that there were intentional
attempts to ignore our efforts, and that some of these
chemical substances have been burned on board vessels,
in particular United Kingdom and United States ones.
Now, what are we to do given the insistence of
those three countries on putting the draft resolution
to the vote? Our Government has repeatedly denied
having using such chemical weapons, in particular
chlorine. Our Government has tried to be as transparent
as possible and has cooperated fully with all of the
commissions and international missions that have come
to us since 2014. We have facilitated their work so as
to ensure that they could successfully conduct credible
investigations. What we saw is that terrorist groups
17-05288

28/02/2017

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7893

have fabricated certain so-called testimony regarding
the use of such chemical weapons.

such weapons; it does not believe in such weapons as
they are simply unethical.

My country deplores the fact that some Council
members are trying to use for political ends the reports
of various United Nations mechanisms. No logical or
scientific consideration has been given to these reports,
which should be read on the basis of the strictest
criteria, including legal and scientific criteria. We have
seen that the Joint Investigative Mechanism itself is
not complying with the tools and methods of work that
had been set out for it since the very beginning. There
is no specific, precise or objective proof regarding the
use of chlorine in particular. We can see, therefore, that
the Mechanism has worked in a deplorable manner and
lacks professionalism, and that it has failed to comply
with the strictest criteria laid down by the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.

The three States concerned attempted to submit the
draft resolution to the Security Council, although it runs
counter to all ethical principles. They are not interested
in Syria or in the suffering of the Syrian people. Instead
of supporting and endorsing the political process that
is under way today in Geneva, they prefer to erect all
possible obstacles in the way of a political solution to
the conflict.

Here I would cite a few examples. In some of the
Mechanism’s reports, it is stated that the Mechanism
will draw upon credible, corroborated evidence. It is
supposed to specify in each case when the weapons were
used, the date, the time, the climate, the temperature,
the type of weapon used, the nature of the damage
incurred and the ensuing medical impact. However,
the mechanism drew upon eyewitness accounts that
lack all of these elements. We also note that some of
the evidence was moved to one location to another by
armed terrorist groups and that the Mechanism was
unable to analyse these practices, which are of course
aimed at manipulating the readers of such reports and
masking the truth.
Allow me, therefore, to put a very simple question
to the Council and to ask it to respond transparently.
The question, obviously, is not being posed to the
representatives of France, the United Kingdom or
the United States, because these States have chosen
to obscure reality and to further certain agendas. My
question is the following: what is the point of using
chemical weapons against a limited number of armed
persons when conventional weapons could have
achieved the same results without needing to resort
to chemical weapons? Why did we not use chemical
weapons when terrorist groups attacked airports, large
cities or military bases in numerous areas of Syria? My
answer is very simple. Syria would never have used

My country’s Government denies all of the
accusations made in the reports of the Joint
Investigative Mechanism. We remain committed to all
of our obligations, including those stemming from the
Chemical Weapons Convention.
Finally, on behalf of my country, I would like to
thank the friendly delegations that voted against the
draft resolution, the Russian Federation, China and
Bolivia, as well as the States that abstained, that is,
Egypt, Ethiopia and Kazakhstan. I thank all of those
States for upholding international law and the principles
of the United Nations, because they know that all of
this can undermine the credibility of our international
efforts and threaten international peace and security by
compounding the suffering of our peoples.
The President: Before adjourning the meeting,
as this is the last scheduled meeting of the Council
for the month of February, I should like to express the
sincere appreciation of the delegation of Ukraine to the
members of the Council, especially my colleagues the
Permanent Representatives and their respective staff, as
well as the secretariat of the Council for all the support
that they have given to us.
It has been a busy month indeed and one in which we
rallied to consensus on several important issues within
our purview. We could not have done it alone or without
the hard work, support and positive contributions
of every delegation and the representatives of the
Secretariat, as well as all relevant Conference Services
officers and interpreters.
As we end our presidency, I know that I speak on
behalf of the Council in wishing the delegation of the
United Kingdom good luck in the month of March.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

17-0528817/17
