United Nations

S/PV.4635 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-seventh year

4635

th meeting
Tuesday, 29 October 2002, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Belinga-Eboutou . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Cameroon)

Members:

Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Tafrov
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Levitte
Mr. Traoré
Mr. Corr
Mrs. Napaul
Mr. Aguilar Zinser
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Karev
Ms. Lee
Mr. Wehbe
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Rosenblatt

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on women, peace and security (S/2002/1154).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

02-66477 (E)

*0266477*

S/PV.4635 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 11.20 a.m.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Japan. I invite her to take a seat at the Council table
and to make her statement.
Ms. Saiga (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
express my appreciation for this opportunity to present
the views of Japan at this open meeting to
commemorate the second anniversary of the historic
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). I also pay tribute
to the President of the Security Council, Ambassador
Belinga-Eboutou of Cameroon, for demonstrating his
commitment to this agenda item by convening today’s
meeting.
I welcome the report of the Secretary-General on
women, peace and security, as well as the study
prepared by his Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
the Advancement of Women in cooperation with the
Inter-agency Task Force on Women, Peace and
Security. The recommendations contained in the study
will provide useful general guidance in strengthening
international efforts for the protection of women and
girls in armed conflict, the promotion of women’s
participation in peace-building, and the integration of
gender perspectives in peace processes and conflict
resolution. I also look forward to the field-based
assessment by the two independent experts under the
auspices of the United Nations Development Fund for
Women, to be issued later this week.
Today, I would like to offer three general
comments on the Special Adviser’s study.
First, I would like to underscore the importance
of education, training and capacity-building, which is
repeatedly stressed in various contexts throughout the
study. Education and public awareness are key to
preventing violence against women and girls, and the
training and capacity-building of women are critical to
increasing their participation in various aspects of a
peace process. Japan’s strong belief in women’s
education is reflected, for example, in the economic
assistance it has provided to Afghanistan for the
rehabilitation of a damaged girls’ elementary school in
Kabul last April and for the construction of a
vocational training centre for women.
The second point I wish to make is that, while the
78 recommendations in the study provide useful
general guidance, it is necessary to formulate detailed

2

strategies for translating them into concrete actions and
for following them up on a regular basis. This will
require ongoing discussion by Member States and the
Secretariat. Japan, for its part, would like to suggest
that the Security Council, in consultation with
interested Member States, formulate a road map
identifying which agencies are to assume responsibility
for what kinds of actions, in which areas and according
to what timetable.
Thirdly, it is my delegation’s view that, since the
recommendations cover such a wide range of areas,
implementation and follow-up should not be left solely
to the Security Council, but should involve the United
Nations system as a whole. My delegation therefore
hopes that the Inter-agency Task Force on Women,
Peace and Security will continue its efforts to
strengthen coordination and collaboration among the
various United Nations agencies.
At the same time, let us not forget that the issue
of women, peace and security is intricately intertwined
with two other issues – children in armed conflict and
the protection of civilians in armed conflict – which the
Council has considered in recent years. Japan therefore
believes that the Council, the United Nations primary
organ for the maintenance of international peace and
security, should address all three of these issues in an
integrated manner. At the same time, the offices within
the Secretariat responsible for these issues – the Office
of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and the
Advancement of Women, the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary- General for Children
and Armed Conflicts and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs – should
collaborate more closely and identify best practices
among their activities.
Today’s open meeting demonstrates the
importance which the Security Council attaches to the
issue of women, peace and security, and provides us
with a valuable opportunity to exchange our views on
the issue. But the issue of gender mainstreaming in
peace and security is too important to be considered
just once a year on a special occasion. Indeed, it should
be integrated into ongoing discussions and activities
throughout the United Nations system, including in the
Security Council. Japan would therefore like to engage
other interested Member States, as well as the
Secretariat, in substantive discussions aimed at
implementing the recommendations contained in the
study.

S/PV.4635 (Resumption 1)

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of India, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nambiar
(India), took a seat at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Bangladesh. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): We applaud you,
Sir, for organizing this open debate on so important a
topic. We also thank the Secretary-General for
according it importance through his presence yesterday
and his opening remarks.
Bangladesh deemed it a privilege to have been
the delegation to propose in the Council, during its
presidency in March 2000, that a statement be issued
on women, peace and security. The presidential
statement contained in press release SC/6816 of 8
March 2000 recognized some of the following
premises.
First, peace is inextricably linked with equality
between women and men. Second, the equal access and
full participation of women in power structures and
their full involvement in all efforts for the prevention
and resolution of conflicts are essential for the
maintenance and promotion of peace and security.
Third, while entire communities suffer the
consequences of armed conflict, women and girls are
particularly affected. Fourth, women constitute the
majority of the world’s refugees and internally
displaced persons. Fifth, although women have begun
to play an important role in conflict resolution,
peacekeeping and peace building, they are still
underrepresented in decision-making in regard to
conflict. Sixth, if women are to play an equal part in
security and in the maintenance of peace, they must be
empowered politically and economically and

represented adequately at all levels of decision-making,
both at the pre-conflict stage and during hostilities, as
well as at the point of peacekeeping, peace-building,
reconciliation and reconstruction. Seventh, there must
be no impunity for war crimes against women and
girls. Eighth, it is important to promote an active and
visible policy of mainstreaming a gender perspective
into all policies and programmes while addressing
armed or other conflicts.
Two years later, those premises remain valid. We
worked further on those objectives with fellow Council
members. The outcome was the landmark resolution
1325 (2000), with Namibia taking the lead. That
resolution provided the legislative mandate for
immediate attention and for defining further actions.
I wish now to refer to the report of the SecretaryGeneral, which we deeply appreciate; in particular, the
proposed set of 21 actions. We are also in considerable
debt to Angela King, Carolyn Hannan and others for
the very substantive inputs they provided in defining
the tasks. Acknowledgement is further owed to the
contribution of Noeleen Heyzer and the Inter-agency
Task Force on Women, Peace and Security in
connection with the process.
Bangladesh hopes that the Security Council will
examine those proposals with a view to approving
them. The Secretary-General should have the necessary
mandate for their early implementation. We also place
emphasis on a few specific areas.
First, the Security Council must demand of all
parties to armed conflict that they comply fully with
international law applicable to the rights and protection
of women and girls. The legal obligation must also
extend to women and girls under occupation in
Palestine and in other occupied Arab territories.
Secondly, the Security Council must add its voice
to ensuring that there is no impunity for gender-based
crimes. There have been allegations of violence against
women, including rape, as weapons of war.
Thirdly, the Council should consider, where
appropriate, the establishment of gender advisers or
units in multidimensional peacekeeping operations.
Fourthly, to facilitate greater contact with
women’s groups and networks, a database of gender
specialists, as well as of women’s groups and networks,
in countries and regions in conflict has to be
established.

3

S/PV.4635 (Resumption 1)

Fifthly, it is heartening to learn that some
progress has already been achieved in incorporating
gender perspectives into peacekeeping operations —
the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina,
the
United
Nations
Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo and the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor, to
cite a few.
Finally, efforts are needed to achieve greater
representation of women in formal peace negotiations.
We have seen the positive contribution of women to the
inter-Congolese dialogue that set an example.
The experience of gender advisers and gender
units in United Nations missions in East Timor,
Kosovo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Sierra Leone have amply
vindicated our conviction about the role of women in
peace and security. Not only in peacekeeping missions,
but also at the grassroots and community levels,
women have organized resistance to militarization and
have created space for dialogue and moderation. By
bringing their experience to the peace table, women
can inject into the peace process a practical
understanding of the various challenges confronted by
women in times of conflict.
Amartya Sen has warned, “When a nation allows
a lower status for its women in any sphere of human
activity, it does so at its own peril”. In consonance with
Bangladesh’s positive attitude towards the effective
mainstreaming of gender in all walks of life and as part
of our commitment to strengthening the role of women
in peace and security, we have begun to associate
women with United Nations peace operations across a
broad spectrum of missions.
Bangladesh is a member of the Group of Friends
of resolution 1325 (2000), formed at the initiative of
Canada. We remain engaged in the implementation of
that resolution. We look forward to a positive decision
on the Secretary-General’s recommendations. We see
those as a forward movement, not just in gender
equality - though also that - but mainly in the forging
of a harmonious cooperation between the sexes to
advance the interests of this Organization and the
aspirations common to all humankind.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Egypt. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.

4

Mr. Aboul-Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
report of the Secretary-General, submitted to the
Council today, refers to the fact that women do not
enjoy equal standing with men in any society.
Moreover, in societies where the culture of violence
and discrimination against women and girls prevails,
prior to the outbreak of internal conflict, the situation
deteriorates during the course of such conflict. If
women do not take part in decision-making in a given
society, they are not likely to share in decision-making
concerning the conflict itself or the establishment of
peace after the conflict.
In that regard, Egypt wishes to express its
profound concern at the increasing rate of violence
against women and children during armed conflict and
the negative economic, social, psychological and
physical consequences of such violence. That is why
Egypt wishes to contribute effectively to eliminating
all injustice against women. Last September, Egypt
convened and hosted a conference at Sharm el-Sheikh
in order to establish a new international movement for
women and peace under the auspices of Mrs. Suzanne
Mubarak, the First Lady. Several prominent
international personalities took part in the conference.
The conference was aimed at launching a series of
activities with a view to convening a general
international conference in 2004 that will deal with the
issue of women and peace. The conference affirmed the
need to recognize women as an effective element in
settling disputes and their contribution to efforts to
establish peace.
Several positive steps have recently been taken
that have helped focus attention on the needs and the
status of women in areas of conflict through the
development of special units, which have been
included in United Nations peacekeeping operations,
particularly in Africa. We thus appreciate the positive
role played by the gender units in the United Nations
Mission Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL). We
hope to see that role expanded with the deployment of
phase III of MONUC in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Furthermore, we
hope that the units will be maintained when the
Security Council reduces the size of UNAMSIL after
the establishment of security and stability in Sierra
Leone.

S/PV.4635 (Resumption 1)

As we deal today with ways and means of
protecting women during conflict and promoting their
role and participation following the settlement of
conflicts, we cannot ignore the cries of help from
Palestinian women living in the most dire and inhuman
circumstances. We refer here to the suffering of
Palestinian women and their deteriorating status under
occupation. This matter is very important to us in
Egypt. Palestinian women — wives, mothers and
daughters — are not only killed alongside men as a
result of Israeli military action; they are also wounded
as a result of indiscriminate shooting by both the Israeli
occupation army and settlers.
Moreover, they are subject to the loss of their
means of livelihood, to oppression and intimidation,
and they must endure the consequences of changes in
social relations and structures as a result of the death of
family members.
That is why the Egyptian delegation deems it
imperative that the Security Council deal with the
situation of Palestinian women under occupation by
stressing the imperative need for total Israeli
withdrawal from the occupied Palestinian territories
and for the restitution of the land to its rightful owners,
within the framework of a just and comprehensive
peace based on United Nations and internationally
binding resolutions and on the principle of land for
peace.
I wish once again to reiterate Egypt’s firm stance,
which we have often expressed before the Council, on
the importance of protecting women and children
during armed conflict within a broader context — that
of the protection of all civilians.
In this respect, I would like to underline two
important points.
First, the Council must maintain the delicate
balance between its own work and that of the other
bodies of the United Nations, in keeping with the
Charter of the Organization, particularly the need to
respect the fundamental role of the General Assembly
in dealing with humanitarian, economic and social
questions and human rights issues, including those
related to women.
Secondly, we would like to reaffirm that
international humanitarian practices must not
contradict the principle of respect for and
implementation of the principles of the Charter of the

United Nations or the provisions of international
humanitarian law.
While we welcome the Council’s readiness to
respond rapidly in cases where civilians are targeted
and where deliberate action is taken to block the
delivery of urgent humanitarian assistance to those in
need, we would like to reaffirm that such action should
be taken within the framework of the provisions and
the articles of the Charter.
In this respect, if the Council is unable, for
reasons beyond its control, to assume its
responsibilities, perhaps we could benefit from the
General Assembly resolution entitled “Uniting for
peace”.
We would like also to reiterate the importance of
respecting the various international conventions and
agreements relating to women when we discuss the
issue of women, peace and security. Foremost among
these instruments is the Fourth Geneva Convention of
1949 relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War and its two Additional Protocols of 1977,
which together represent the legal basis for the
protection of women and girls during armed conflict.
Also important are the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the
outcome of the Beijing Conference and its Platform of
Action. Together, these conventions constitute the basis
for international efforts to include the gender
dimension in every aspect of the work of the
Organization and to recognize the vital role of women
in the establishment of international peace and security.
Egypt welcomes the fact that the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) includes the
gender dimension in its articles. Thus its definition of
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide
includes gender-based violence,
rape,
forced
prostitution, trafficking in persons, and torture and
other forms of inhuman and degrading treatment,
including enslavement.
Egypt also welcomes the fact that the Statute of
the ICC has ensured gender-sensitive justice that
includes the adoption of necessary measures to protect
victims and witnesses, equitable representation of male
and female judges, and the availability of legal
expertise on such specific issues as violence against
women.

5

S/PV.4635 (Resumption 1)

The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of the
Philippines. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.

protect women and girls from violence. Basic goods
and services as well as access to social and economic
programmes must be made available to this vulnerable
group.

Mr. Manalo (Philippines): Allow me to join
others in commending you, Mr. President, for
convening this important meeting on women and peace
and security, on the basis of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000). In this regard, my delegation
renews its commitment to enhancing the role of women
in resolving and preventing conflicts as well as in
peacekeeping and peace-building efforts.

In the Philippines, the plight of women in conflict
has received greater attention with our 25-year plan for
women. It contains gender-responsive peacekeeping
and peace- building programmes, including genderresponsive peace education. Specifically, our Plan for
Gender-Responsive Development includes strategies to
integrate women in peace consultations as well as to
institutionalize the participation of women in conflictresolution, unification and reconciliation processes.

My delegation also wishes to express its
appreciation of the efforts of the Office of the Special
Adviser on Gender Issues and the Advancement of
Women, which worked in close cooperation with the
Inter-agency Task Force on Women, Peace and
Security in undertaking the study on women, peace and
security.
That study recognizes, among other things, that
after an armed conflict situation, women and girls face
the formidable task of rebuilding their lives, a situation
which is worsened when they also have to deal with
intimidation, physical threats and domestic violence.
It has been two years since Member States
reaffirmed the Beijing Platform for Action, and much
remains to be done in mainstreaming gender in
peacekeeping and disarmament. If progress is to be
made towards a gender perspective in relation to peace
and security, Governments must learn from the
experiences of women and girls during armed conflicts.
Armed conflicts have often led to the perpetration
of rape and sexual violence, and women and girls are
usually the victims. In the process, some have become
infected with HIV/AIDS. Aside from sexual violence,
women and girls have also been victims of abduction,
forced prostitution and trafficking imposed by military,
paramilitary and other groups.

My Government looks to the Security Council to
provide the momentum for promoting the involvement
of women in finding solutions to armed conflict and in
peacekeeping and peace-building. In the report of the
Secretary-General, concrete recommendations for
practical and workable mechanisms for gender
mainstreaming in peace and security have been put
forth.
Regarding the Secretary-General’s recommendations
on reconstruction and rehabilitation, the Philippines
has been working towards mainstreaming women and
children’s peace agendas, including socio-economic
reforms in programmes for grass-roots peace
movements. These include sensitizing government to
the gender concerns of women through dialogue,
organizing and strengthening women’s organizations
and reviewing gender responsiveness of legislation,
policies and programmes related to peacekeeping and
peace-building. Finally, we hope that the Council will
be able to examine closely the Secretary-General’s
recommendations at the earliest opportunity.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Australia. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.

The experiences and sufferings of women and
girls as victims of armed conflict will be helpful in
addressing the root causes of conflict, and it is also
important that their participation in peace processes,
whether formally or informally, be considered as
essential and important.

Mr. Tesch (Australia): I would like to thank you,
Sir, for allowing me the opportunity again to address
the Council under your presidency and, in particular, to
speak on behalf of the Australian delegation on this
very important topic. We also greatly appreciate the
personal introduction by the Secretary-General of his
report.

Adequate measures and mechanisms must also be
taken by United Nations agencies and other relief
organizations assisting in humanitarian operations to

Two years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), no one can seriously question how central

6

S/PV.4635 (Resumption 1)

gender issues are to preventing and resolving conflict
and to rebuilding communities after conflict. At a time
when too many resolutions and statements languish on
shelves, that is no small achievement. The study on
women, peace and security — a large measure of the
funding for which Australia was pleased to provide —
and the Secretary-General’s report on the study
maintain the momentum of resolution 1325 (2000) and
are both to be welcomed.

those mandates. The experience of our region — the
Solomon Islands, Bougainville and East Timor — gives
ample testimony to the vital difference that women can
make to the course of a conflict. I shall not go into the
details of those regional experiences here, as they are
set out in the written text of my statement. They are
also discussed in the statement by the representative of
Fiji, who spoke on behalf of the Pacific Island Forum
group of countries.

The detailed information contained in those two
documents should leave us in no doubt that, if we are
serious about conflict resolution, we must be serious
about gender perspectives on conflict. Gender
perspectives are neither marginal nor optional; they
cannot and should not be an afterthought. Rather, new
patterns of conflict, and the fact that women and girls
are too often the chief victims of conflict, mean that
gender is central to much that this Council and United
Nations peacekeeping operations do.

I should say, however, that Australia’s
development cooperation programme recognizes the
social and gender dimensions of conflict, and therefore
supports the goal of increasing women’s participation
in decision-making and their access to and control over
resources. It is working to ensure that women play an
equal role in political structures and in community
decision-making.

The recommendations and the presentation of
facts in the study and the Secretary-General’s report
speak
for
themselves.
Together
with
the
complementary study produced under the auspices of
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), they provide us with a valuable and
sensible guide to how we can further implement
resolution 1325 (2000) and how we can ensure that
women’s and girls’ perspectives are systematically
incorporated into all of our efforts to preserve and
restore peace.
I would like to highlight two of the many
important observations of the studies. The first is that
pre-conflict inequities and disregard for women’s rights
become worse during conflict. Indeed, such inequities,
and in particular the lack of empowerment and
participation on the part of women, reduce the capacity
of communities to avoid conflict. A clear focus on
empowering women before conflicts break out,
therefore, should be a key element of a strategy of
conflict prevention — which, after all, should be our
primary objective.
Secondly, we need to see women as important
contributors to peace and not simply as victims of
conflict. We must be diligent and creative in giving
women a role in peace processes. Here, the Council can
play an important leadership role, particularly in
designing its mandates and ensuring that the necessary
resources are made available to ensure the fulfilment of

In June this year Australia launched its peace,
conflict and development policy. The policy provides a
framework for improving the ability of our
development cooperation programme to address
conflict and instability. This means there will be a
greater emphasis on conflict prevention and peacebuilding, alongside the aid programme’s more
traditional missions of humanitarian relief and
reconstruction. Given the importance of ensuring the
active engagement of women in peace-building
processes, the development cooperation programme
will improve the integration of gender principles into
all aid responses.
In future, we will also support those elements of
society which work for the peaceful resolution of
disputes and grievances. The role that women can play
as peace-builders will be a particular focus, and we
look forward to continuing to contribute to this very
important issue.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Chile. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Valdés (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to commend you, Sir, for your decisive and
outstanding performance as President of the Security
Council during a particularly demanding month, and to
thank you for giving me the opportunity to take part in
this debate.

7

S/PV.4635 (Resumption 1)

Just three months ago, in this very Chamber, we
had an opportunity to reflect on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security, which reaffirmed the important role of women
in the prevention of conflict, in peace-building and in
post-conflict reconstruction. Today, we have another
important element to enrich our discussion: the report
of the Secretary-General on women, peace and
security. Because of its comprehensiveness and the
aptness of its recommendations, we consider it to be a
core document for the future treatment of this
important subject.
We would also like to acknowledge the
contribution of the independent experts of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women, Ms. Ellen
Johnson-Sirleaf and Ms. Elizabeth Rehn, and we
welcome the statement to be made later by the
representative of Austria, on behalf of the Human
Security Network, of which Chile is a part.
The Fourth World Conference on Women is
considered to have laid the groundwork for future
discussions about the role of women in conflict
resolution and the maintenance of peace at all levels.
Since then, the international community has witnessed
a sharp and steady increase in multilateral initiatives to
empower women so that they can play a more
important role in decision-making with regard to
conflicts. Although useful, those initiatives are still
insufficient. We would therefore like to recall the
Secretary-General’s
statement
that
peace
is
indissolubly linked to equality between women and
men and to development.
Even as I deliver this statement, entire
communities are suffering from the consequences of
armed conflict and terrorism. Women and girls in
particular are affected, because of their status in society
and their gender. Their human rights are systematically
violated to a degree that can only be guessed at.
There are a number of measures that we can take
to prevent this from continuing. As we stated on a
similar occasion in this very Chamber, these include
effective steps to remove the barriers that prevent
women from effectively participating in decisionmaking and from gaining access to the circles of
power. In this connection, my country supports the
view that mainstreaming a gender perspective into
peacekeeping operations must be given priority in
governmental agendas.

8

We agree with, and consider it necessary to
highlight, the point made in the report of the SecretaryGeneral that the mainstreaming of a gender perspective
in peacekeeping operations is a key requirement for
promoting gender equality in a sustainable manner over
time. The Secretary-General clearly states that this lays
the foundation for rebuilding societies after conflict
and commonly determines the political, civil, economic
and social structures in post-conflict situations. We also
agree that this is a responsibility incumbent upon all of
us, men and women alike.
We reiterate our view that it is essential to
increase the number of women appointed as special
representatives or envoys of the Secretary-General to
undertake peace missions, and we call for a greater
presence of women as military observers, as members
of civilian police forces and as humanitarian and
human rights personnel.
Chile believes that the promotion of the role of
women in society, particularly political participation, is
a State priority. Our country has actively participated in
all the international debates on this topic and has
fulfilled out all the commitments it has undertaken. It
is in this context that it welcomed with great
enthusiasm and renewed optimism the Council’s
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and that it today
endorses the report of the Secretary-General because of
its validity.
The time has come to bridge the gap between
intentions and reality. In our many and extensive
discussions, we have touched upon practically all
elements related to the mainstreaming of a gender
perspective in the various phases of all peace
processes. We already have a great deal of information
on the problems of women and children on the ground
and on their strengths and weaknesses. We have
pledged to adopt a series of measures, and we have
succeeded in creating a solid international legal
framework. However, in practice, we still have not
been able to implement all of those measures.
This is a task for Governments, the United
Nations system and civil society alike. We cannot fail
to mention the role that has been recognized as
belonging to civil society, particularly to the networks
of women’s organizations working on the ground. That
is very clearly stated in the report of the SecretaryGeneral. Chile’s work in these and other areas is of
particular importance, as demonstrated by our

S/PV.4635 (Resumption 1)

numerous activities in conjunction with civil society.
organizations
In the framework of our discussion on the need to
work towards implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), we welcome the concrete proposal made
yesterday by the representative of the United Kingdom:
each year to request a member of the Council to
supervise the implementation of our decisions on the
mainstreaming of a gender perspective, working with
the relevant entities of the Secretariat to achieve that
goal.
Lastly, we reiterate our hope that the international
Conference on Women in Peace Operations, which will
be held in Chile on 4 and 5 November, and which we
have organized together with the Presidency of the
European Union — as the representative of Denmark
mentioned yesterday — will open new avenues for the
practical implementation of the item under discussion.
Similarly, we hope that the report before the Council
today and the important debate in which we have
participated will serve to enrich those discussions.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Pakistan. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Allow me to begin by
expressing our appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s open debate on this item. We
welcome this discussion on an issue that we consider of
great importance. We also look forward to the
independent expert assessment on the impact of armed
conflict on women and the role of women in peacebuilding. We view the present initiative as an important
opportunity to reflect on the plight of women in
conflict situations as well as on their role in conflict
resolution, conflict prevention and peace-building.
The plight of women in armed conflict has a
history which is as long as the history of warfare. The
American writer Kate Richards O’Hare wrote almost a
century ago: “It is the women ... who pay the price
while war rages, and it will be the women who will pay
again when war has run its bloody course”. There are
specific injunctions — in the Geneva Conventions and
in human rights instruments — proscribing torture,
violence, rape and other ill-treatment of women during
conflicts. Unfortunately, those injunctions have been
honoured more in the breach than in the observance.

The march of civilization has not reduced the
suffering and special vulnerabilities of women in
situations of armed conflict. Crimes against women
have been frequent in several recent and ongoing
conflicts. Systematic rape has been used to terrorize
populations, force displacement and demoralize
adversaries — as in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In
Afghanistan’s two decades of conflict, the destitution
of hundreds of thousands of women was a pervasive
consequence.
In the ongoing freedom struggle in Jammu and
Kashmir also, rape and the humiliation of women and
girls have been used by the occupation army as an
instrument of war. Human rights organizations have
testified since 1992 that in Jammu and Kashmir “rape
and ill-treatment of women are usually reported to have
taken place during counter-insurgency operations” by
Indian forces. Asia Watch and Physicians for Human
Rights documented the extensive use of rape by the
occupation forces designed “to punish and humiliate
the entire community.” Amnesty International has
reported that “harassment, abduction, rape and
deliberate and arbitrary killings perpetrated by [proIndian] ‘renegades’ in ... Kashmir” are also carried out
“with the support of the [Indian] security forces”.
Destitution of women is another manifestation of
the conflict in Kashmir. There are thousands of women
who have been widowed, or whose husbands have been
maimed, have disappeared or are in detention. We urge
the
United
Nations
and
non-governmental
organizations to prepare a survey of the number of such
destitute Kashmiri women. The international
community should take appropriate measures to
provide help and compensation to those Kashmiri
women. We urge humanitarian agencies, specially the
International Committee of the Red Cross, to act as the
instrument and avenue for such relief distribution.
Political considerations should not stand in the way of
international humanitarian agencies responding to the
plight of Kashmiri women and children suffering from
the long and bloody conflict in their homeland.
In April 2000, the Security Council adopted its
landmark resolution 1325 (2000) on women and armed
conflict. The Beijing Declaration and the Platform of
Action also contain comprehensive recommendations
on women and armed conflict. The Security Council
must strengthen the processes for the observance and
implementation of the principles of international
humanitarian law and human rights in international

9

S/PV.4635 (Resumption 1)

conflicts, including those relating to the protection of
women.
We believe that the Council must not only ensure
prompt and effective responses to crisis situations,
irrespective of their geographical location, but also
avoid selectivity in the implementation of its
resolutions. The Charter contains provisions, including
those in Chapter VI, which can be utilized to promote
implementation of Council resolutions.
In the international experts assessment and the
Secretary-General’s report several relevant proposals
have been submitted to the Council. The Pakistan
delegation further suggests the following measures for
the Council’s consideration.
First, the Council should adopt a declaration that
the targeting of women, especially the use of rape as an
instrument of war, will be considered a war crime,
susceptible to national and international punishment.
Secondly, a study of recent and ongoing conflict
situations should be initiated to identify crimes
committed against women, with a view to seeking
redress and compensation for the victims.
Thirdly, current and future United Nations
peacekeeping operations be required to monitor, and
regularly report to the Security Council on, the
situation of women and girls in their mission areas.
Fourthly, the fullest possible participation of women in
peace processes and in post-conflict peace-building
should be encouraged, including the reintegration,
reconstruction and rehabilitation of societies in the
post-conflict phase.
Fifthly, the United Nations specialized organs and
agencies should be asked to develop ways to address
the special needs of women and girls affected by
conflict, including health and psychological care.
Sixthly, the Security Council may involve other United
Nations bodies, as well as representatives of the civil
society, perhaps using the Arria formula, for a
comprehensive
discussion
to
promote
such
recommendations and actions.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Canada. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Laurin (Canada) (spoke in French): Thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this important
open debate. It is now two years since the passing of

10

resolution 1325 (2000). This resolution was a
watershed in acknowledging the different impacts of
war on women and girls and the critical and unique
contributions women make to peace-building and
reconstruction. We recognize, though, that while the
United Nations system has made progress, we are
closer to the beginning of our work than to the end.
This week’s release of the much anticipated
report of the Secretary-General on women, peace and
security reminds us that full implementation of this
important resolution is crucial. Canada supports the
Secretary-General’s call for stronger integration of
gender considerations throughout the work of the
Security Council and the United Nations system. As
France said, we believe that the members of the
Council should request and make use of information on
the situation of women and girls in its consideration of
particular conflict situations. The Council should
ensure that gender aspects are seriously considered in
its analysis and are reflected in its decisions. This
approach must become just as routine as financial
probity.
The limit to the Secretary-General’s reports
should not prevent the integration of gender
perspectives.
(spoke in English)
The Council should be carefully looking at
implementation mechanisms. In this regard, we
strongly support Colombia’s suggestion that a plan of
action be prepared. We also welcome the United
Kingdom’s proposal to identify each year a member of
the Security Council to oversee the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and work with the appropriate
parts of the Secretariat to achieve that. We join the
representative of the United States in looking forward
to having dialogue with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and with the Department of
Political Affairs on how they mainstream a gender
perspective in their activities.
Canada welcomes the Secretary-General’s report,
and we share his concerns, as women and girls
continue to be severely targeted in and negatively
impacted by armed conflict. We are pleased to see the
comprehensive and wide-ranging recommendations for
action in the study and the report. The
recommendations, we hope, will cause Member States
to move beyond words to action.

S/PV.4635 (Resumption 1)

Canada, as we stated at the open meeting on 25
July 2002, continues to actively implement the
commitments we made at the time of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), and we call upon all Member
States to do likewise. We refer to the March 2002 aidememoire adopted by the Council and stress that the
issue of women, peace and security needs to be
considered as part of the agenda on the protection of
civilians.
We also call for explicit reference to gender
considerations in the mandates of all the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General. We
encourage the Council to take advantage of the
appearances of Special Representatives in this forum to
hold them accountable on these aspects of their
missions.
Integration of gender perspectives in peace
support operations is vital. In this regard, we look
forward to the upcoming report of the SecretaryGeneral requested by the Fifth Committee of the
General Assembly on the gender mainstreaming
strategy for all of the Organization’s peacekeeping
activities and the associated resources required to
achieve this. We will again urge our Fifth Committee
colleagues to authorize the resources needed to
strengthen the capacity of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations specifically to address gender
issues.
Gender advisers in the field deserve proper
support from Headquarters, as recommended by the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. This
support is essential to their success.
Canada also wishes to underscore the need for
continued efforts in the post-conflict reconstruction
phase. The Security Council, the United Nations and
Member States have every interest in ensuring that the
rights of women and girls are not set aside in
reconstruction situations, such as Afghanistan.
The signing of a formal peace agreement does not
necessarily eradicate violence in communities and
families. Domestic violence must be addressed in the
building of sustainable peace for all — women, men,
girls and boys. We are encouraged to see the
recognition of the link between women’s security and
domestic violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations.

Canada shares the view expressed by the
representative of Liechtenstein on the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court. My Government
welcomes the emphasis the Secretary-General placed
on the importance of the continued expansion of the
international legal framework to address particular
crimes experienced by women in armed conflict. Given
the extremely serious gender-based crimes that
occurred during the decade long civil war in Sierra
Leone, we commend the prosecutor of the Sierra Leone
special court for appointing two gender advisers. His
action is important progress.
My delegation would like to join the voice of
delegations calling for a better gender balance
throughout the United Nations system. We refer
specifically to the message expressed last week by the
Third Committee of the General Assembly in adopting
the draft resolution sponsored by Canada, Australia and
New Zealand on the improvement of the status of
women in the United Nations system. By this text,
more than one hundred and twenty-five co-sponsors
expressed concern that only one out of fifty-one special
representatives or envoys of the Secretary-General is a
woman, and that the percentage of women assigned to
peace operations has decreased. The draft also urged
the Secretary-General to redouble his efforts to realize
significant progress towards the goal of 50 per cent in
the near future.
We look forward to the release of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM)
report and to further collaboration with other Member
States, including the Friends of Women, Peace and
Security and our human security network partners, on
the follow-up work to be done.
Canada strongly and actively supports full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000). We thank you again, Sir, for providing a forum
for this important debate.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker is the representative of the Republic of Korea.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea): It has
been two years since a momentous development for
women was marked with the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000). Today, as much of the
attention here at the United Nations evolves around a
potential conflict with far-reaching implications for the

11

S/PV.4635 (Resumption 1)

world, it is all the more appropriate that we should,
even at this late date, take this day to explore how
peace may be strengthened, specifically by reaffirming
our resolve to turn the goals of the historic resolution
into reality, thus incorporating women into all matters
and efforts relating to peace and security.
The Secretary-General’s report is comprehensive
in its analysis and suggestions for action. Many of the
suggested actions contained in the report open up new
vistas for integrating gender perspectives and
increasing the participation of women in peace
processes, peacekeeping, humanitarian operations,
reconstruction and rehabilitation, and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. The concreteness of
the suggestions is most welcome.
In particular, I believe that the collection of data
related to peace operations disaggregated by gender
and age, as suggested in the report, should be a priority
action if other actions are to find relevance to the
reality on the ground.
Furthermore, the increased profile for women and
girls both as beneficiaries and participants in the initial
stages of humanitarian operations, as suggested in
recommended Action 14, would prevent women and
girls from falling victim to later abuses and violence
that prey upon their particular vulnerabilities in crisis
situations.
Indeed, prevention is a key aspect of any lasting
problem-solving effort. In this regard, I would like to
point out the relative lack of attention given to the role
women can play in preventing disruption of peace and
conflict.
In peacetime diplomacy, women already have a
significant presence, as our able female colleagues here
attest to. However, in conflict prevention or crisismanagement processes, the contributions of women are
rarely discussed.
If women have significant contributions to make
in building and strengthening a new peace, they would
also be effective facilitators and negotiators for
preserving a peace that exists. In this regard, reiterating
a point in the historic resolution, I urge that the
Secretary-General appoint more women as special
representatives and envoys on his behalf, and that
qualified women offer their names for inclusion in the
centralized roster.

12

Women’s role in conflict prevention may also be
expanded at the local level. Training programs for
women and women’s groups on peace processes should
include conflict prevention as well. By now, there is
enough evidence to show that the communication style
of women tends to be more flexible and consensusoriented than that of men. Without carrying the
generalization too far, I believe that the greater the
input of women, the greater the likelihood for conflict
to be averted as well as resolved.
In closing, I would like to reiterate the strong
commitment of my Government to the historic
resolution, and look forward to seeing the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations turn into action.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker is the representative of Namibia. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): When Namibia, during
its presidency of the Security Council in October 2000,
decided to place the issue of women, peace and
security on the Council’s agenda, it was well aware of
the tremendous and shocking hardships faced by
women in ordinary life, but even more so during times
of conflict.
We were also aware of the commendable
programmes already in place to address this dire
situation, such as the Beijing Declaration and the
Platform for Action. It was however, disappointingly
clear that progress was too little and too slow and that
the changing nature of conflicts resulted in a
deterioration in the situation of women and girls. We
therefore saw the urgent need to step up efforts, and
hence the Security Council debate that resulted in the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
Resolution 1325 (2000) was hailed as a landmark
decision and became a strong instrument with which
the rights of women and girls could be negotiated and
protected. In some cases, it served as a strong deterrent
to halt further violence and abuse against women and
girls.
Today, we are meeting here on the second
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) and we thank
you for the initiative to convene this meeting. We have
before us a detailed and well-researched study on
women and peace and security, and the report by the
Secretary-General which highlights the major findings

S/PV.4635 (Resumption 1)

and conclusions of the study. I thank the Special
Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women
for the excellent work on the study in cooperation with
the Task Force on Women, Peace and Security.
Furthermore, we commend the Executive Director of
UNIFEM for commissioning an assessment, by
independent experts, on the impact of armed conflict
on women, and women’s role in peace-building. We
look forward to that assessment.
The report before us presents in clear terms the
challenges that must be addressed if progress is to be
made in achieving gender equality in the area of peace
and security. More important, it includes a set of useful
recommendations which, if implemented, can
strengthen and accelerate the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and can have a profoundly
positive impact on the situation of women and girls in
conflict situations and in general.
The study and other reports show that a number
of measures have been taken to implement the
resolution. However, we also know that very little has
been achieved in practical terms to improve the plight
of women and girls, and that the odds stacked against
them remain as high as ever. Women continue to be
disproportionately affected by conflict. A large
majority of refugees and internally displaced persons
are women. They are still subjected to rape, sexual
exploitation, trafficking and other forms of
dehumanization, thus making them more vulnerable to
sexually transmitted diseases, especially HIV/AIDS.
Also, women are neither sufficiently nor appropriately
represented at all levels and stages of decision-making
in peace processes and peacekeeping operations.
There are unique and particular hardships faced
by women and girls under foreign occupation. They
have to cope with all the prejudices against women in
the most inhumane and oppresive conditions. It is our
hope that this issue will be addressed more
comprehensively in future, and that the Security
Council will one day commission a study on the plight
of women and girls under foreign occupation, with a
view to taking appropriate action. Similarly, we feel
that it is important that an analysis be done on the
impact of sanctions from a gender perspective.
In light of what I have said, it is clear that there
remains a critical need to strengthen our resolve and
resources to ensure that all provisions of resolution
1325 (2000) are fully implemented. We welcome and

support the Secretary-General’s call for further decisive
action by all concerned to ensure that the concerns of
women and girls are incorporated into all our efforts to
promote peace and security.
My delegation welcomes the entry into force of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
in which gender concerns were taken into consideration
when genocide, crimes against humanity and war
crimes were defined. Also important is the fact that the
International Criminal Court will have fair
representation of female judges, and that there will be
gender balance in all three organs of the Court.
Despite these positive developments, much more
must to be done to ensure gender-sensitive justice and
to address the specific needs of women. In that regard,
my delegation attaches great importance to
recommendations pertaining to the appointment of
judges and advisers with legal expertise on specific
issues, such as violations of the rights of women and
girls, including gender-based and sexual violence, in
future ad hoc tribunals created by the Security Council.
My delegation fully supports all efforts aimed at
increasing the participation of women in all aspects of
peace operations, in particular at the highest levels of
decision-making. Women are perfectly capable, and in
many instances they possess special qualities that can
be of benefit to peace operations. The full involvement
of women in negotiations of peace agreements at
national, regional and international levels has to
become common practice.
Furthermore, gender perspectives have to be
explicitly incorporated into the mandates of all
peacekeeping missions. At the same time, gender
representation at Headquarters and in missions should
be strengthened. In this regard, we hope that a gender
unit will be established at Headquarters, in line with
the recommendation of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations.
We commend the efforts of the Secretary-General
and welcome his renewed undertaking to set concrete
targets for the appointment of women as special
representatives and special envoys in order to reach a
50 per cent target by 2015. My country is also well on
its way to achieving a 50:50 ratio between men and
women as soon as possible and at all levels and in all
branches of Government.

13

S/PV.4635 (Resumption 1)

In order to ensure durable peace after
peacekeeping operations have ended, and to prevent
gender inequalities from persisting or deepening during
the post-conflict period, the rehabilitation and
reconstruction processes should also benefit from
strong gender perspectives. The participation of women
in post-conflict rehabilitation and reconstruction
processes has to be strengthened by, among other
things, incorporating women’s needs in initial project
appraisals and by developing targeted activities, with
adequate resources, which focus on specific needs of
women and girls. Multilateral organizations which
provide assistance after conflict can play an important
role in establishing these standards.
Finally, I believe that we have all the information
we need on this issue. In the first place, we have
resolution 1325 (2000). We have the reports and
recommendations of the Secretary-General. We have
the study on women and peace and security. We also
have all the necessary legal instruments. We have
heard, through the Arria formula, the voices of women
who experience hardship on a daily basis, and we are
awaiting an assessment by the independent experts.
What is required now is effective implementation
by all of us: Member States; parties to conflicts; the
United Nations system, with the Security Council
taking the lead; non-governmental organizations; civil
society; and all other stakeholders. We must leave this
Chamber with a renewed sense of urgency, dedication
and commitment to seriously address the plight of
women and girls in armed conflict and to ensure the
active participation of women in peace processes and
post-conflict peace-building activities.
I wish to reaffirm my delegation’s resolve to
continue to play an active role in the efforts of the
international community to achieve that goal.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker is the representative of Morocco. I invite him
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Bennouna (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
am pleased to congratulate you, Sir, on your successful
presidency of the Security Council at a very difficult
time. But it is by facing challenges that personalities
become known, and your personal reputation has
preceded you in this forum, as you have presided over
other bodies with success. I should also like to thank

14

the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for the
excellent report (S/2002/1154) he submitted this year.
We have before us the subject of women, peace
and security, a critical topic. It is heartening to note
that the Security Council
attaches the requisite
importance to it and that the Council is also according
increasing importance to the humanitarian dimension
of conflicts, particularly to the protection of the most
vulnerable persons: women, children and the elderly.
That importance is fully justified, given the fact that
they are also the innocent victims of and unwilling
participants in conflicts throughout the world,
particularly in Africa.
Speaking before the Council, I cannot fail to
mention the particularly tragic situation of Palestinian
women, who face daily insecurity and a lack of means
of subsistence imposed by the Israeli occupation.
Two years ago in this forum, the international
community considered in depth the problems that
women face during armed conflicts and the necessary
measures to address them. We also debated the duty of
the international community to integrate women into
all efforts to promote and maintain international peace
and security. That debate culminated, as the Council
will recall, in the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
within the framework of the Security Council’s
mandate of maintaining international peace and
security, including prevention, the settlement of armed
conflicts and the protection of civilians. Likewise, the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) reaffirmed the
Council’s firm determination to give due consideration
to the humanitarian aspects of each dispute and to
commit all the parties to a conflict to respect the
provisions of international law, most particularly those
concerning women and children.
Unfortunately, we must note that, despite all the
efforts that I have just cited, women and girls are the
principal victims of armed conflicts, where they are
faced — we hear this every day — with all forms of
violence, particularly sexual violence and exploitation.
In addition, women and girls are forced to participate
in hostilities or to serve in camps where they are the
victims of various cruelties. Sometimes, when they are
subject to refugee status — and a very important code
of conduct must be formulated on that subject —
women are separated from their daughters, who
undergo forced indoctrination. They ultimately serve as
cheap labour, far from their families and from their

S/PV.4635 (Resumption 1)

homes. Moreover, the deaths and the disappearances
caused by armed conflicts give extra responsibilities to
women, so they are easily recruited into illegal
activities such as drug trafficking and prostitution for
criminal networks.
In that respect, training personnel for
peacekeeping operations is crucial in order to sensitize
them to the vulnerable situation of women and girls in
situations of armed conflict, in addition to a plan for
gender parity in all activities of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. The proposal to create the
position of gender parity adviser within the Department
is truly welcome, and Morocco supports it.
In order to strengthen respect for the rights of
women and girls in conflicts, it is important that
peacekeeping operations integrate women into all
activities so that they can make an equal contribution
to the reconstruction of affected countries. Maintaining
a lasting peace after hostilities is possible only if
women participate fully in all negotiations and in the
resulting structures. Nevertheless, the full integration
of women into development requires as a precondition
the strengthening of the rule of law, respect for human
rights and the establishment of democratic institutions
whereby women can express their concerns and their
ambitions and can participate in decision-making.
Mindful of women’s valuable contribution to the
development process and to the consolidation of
democracy, my country took the initiative to allot a
quota to female candidates for the legislative elections
held in September, which enabled us to elect 35
women — we began with two women and ended with
35, which is quite remarkable progress — of various
political viewpoints in our Parliament.
We believe that every post-conflict reconstruction
effort essentially requires the consideration of genderspecific aspects in all programmes and activities
undertaken, particularly in social, educational,
economic and budgetary policy, and also the
strengthening of women’s presence in all spheres of the
State and at all decision-making levels, which would
necessarily balance society.
The international community has at its disposal
an impressive legal arsenal — it is not that there are
too few laws, but sometimes that there are too many
laws — designed to protect the rights of women, to
promote gender equality and to help us combat all
forms of discrimination. But those laws must be

implemented. The General Assembly, by virtue of its
universal composition, has an essential role to play in
reminding the world of all of those legal advances,
which are also achievements of civilization.
The Kingdom of Morocco unequivocally
condemns all attacks on the fundamental rights of
women and girls, particularly in wartime, and we call
on all parties to conflicts to respect the relevant
provisions of international humanitarian law. Any
violation of those fundamental rights must be
continuously denounced and opposed with the greatest
vigour. We are speaking of binding rules of law that
cannot be waived by referring to specific agreements or
by any kind of legal hair-splitting.
Those who exploit women and children in
competitions for power and who sometimes use them
as hostages by objectifying them for political ends will
have to account for their crimes before the international
community. Today, we are witnessing the globalization
of certain networks that are prone to violence and
sometimes to terrorism, and it is only through the rule
of law, within the framework of the United Nations,
that we will be able to face them, in respect for the
values set out in the preamble of the Charter of San
Francisco.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Morocco for the very kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of New Zealand. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): New Zealand is
pleased that the issue of women, peace and security is
once again on the agenda of the Security Council. The
debate in the Council two years ago that led to
resolution 1325 (2000) was a milestone, and we now
welcome the Secretary-General’s comprehensive study
mandated by that resolution and look forward to
working towards the full implementation of the
constructive recommendations contained in the study.
In recognition of the study’s importance, New Zealand
has contributed to assisting with its development.
This study highlights the particular impact of
armed conflict and its aftermath on women and girls as
victims of violence, including sexual violence; as
refugees and internally displaced persons; as caregivers trying to provide for their families; and as the

15

S/PV.4635 (Resumption 1)

victims of an often intensified discrimination and
marginalization during times of conflict. The study has
rightly acknowledged the need for on-the-ground
information about the particular situation of women
during armed conflicts in order for the relevant
agencies involved to be able to effectively deliver
assistance.
Importantly, this study promotes the need to
eliminate impunity for crimes committed during
periods of armed conflict. We welcome the study’s
acknowledgement of the significant advances in the
international legal framework — in which genderbased crimes such as rape, enforced prostitution,
trafficking and enslavement have now been recognized
as war crimes, crimes against humanity and, indeed,
components of the crime of genocide. New Zealand is a
strong supporter of the establishment of the
International Criminal Court and urges States to ensure
that gender balance, as well as appropriate expertise on
the human rights of women and on violence against
women, is reflected in the appointment of
investigators, prosecutors and judges to the
International Criminal Court.
New Zealand also fully endorses the need to
involve women in the negotiation of peace agreements
at all levels. We are already aware of the constructive
role that women have frequently played in the
development of informal peace processes, often
creating a groundswell towards peace. In the Pacific
region we have commended the helpful role that
women played, at the grass roots level, in the
resolution of the secessionist crisis in Bougainville.
The role of the Leitana Women’s Group, for example,
received recognition from the Secretary-General for its
part in the promotion of peace in Bougainville.
Similarly, women’s groups were actively involved in
promoting peace in the Solomon Islands. Obviously, in
the interests of sustainable peace, there is much to be
gained from involving women in such a key decisionmaking process, including in the formal negotiations.
We encourage the Security Council and States to take
this into account.
The need for gender sensitivity and the inclusion
of women are critical elements of successful
peacekeeping operations. New Zealand has long
recognized the importance of involving women in our
defence forces. This year, New Zealand celebrated 25
years of the integration of women into the New
Zealand Defence Forces, following the disbandment of

16

separate women’s services. This has ensured that New
Zealand women have participated actively in
international peacekeeping operations — for example,
in the Sinai, Cambodia, Bosnia, Timor-Leste and
Bougainville. In both Bosnia and Timor-Leste, women
served as troop commanders. Women have comprised
between 8 and 10 per cent of each New Zealand
battalion group deployed in Timor-Leste, and make up
a significant proportion of the air force personnel
deployed there. These women are deployed in diverse
roles, including crews, logistics and administration. All
members of the New Zealand Defence Forces are
expected to adhere to a strict code of conduct that
recognizes the importance of gender equality and
sensitivity to gender perspectives.
New Zealand has also focused on the role of
women in the United Nations system, particularly in
the area of peacekeeping, and in our Third Committee
draft resolution on the status of women in the United
Nations system, submitted jointly with Canada and
Australia. In that draft resolution we have called for the
Secretary-General to appoint more women as special
representatives, especially in matters relating to
peacekeeping,
peace-building
and
preventive
diplomacy. We are pleased that the Secretary-General’s
study also emphasized this point.
The study also highlights the importance of
humanitarian operations, including refugee agencies,
attending to the specific needs and priorities of women
and girls affected by armed conflicts and displacement.
We also welcome this development.
In rebuilding societies it is imperative that
women are involved at every level and that the
interests of women are taken into account at this
critical stage of development. We have welcomed, for
example, the growing participation of women in
Afghanistan’s political, economic and social life,
particularly the inclusion of women in the Afghan
Interim Administration and the establishment of the
Afghanistan Ministry for Women’s Affairs. We hope
that Afghanistan will continue to promote and protect
the human rights of women in the ongoing process of
reconstruction.
Similarly, in Timor-Leste, the inclusion of women
in the new Constituent Assembly and the recognition of
the economic contribution of women are very positive
developments. As clearly identified in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, we urge States and United Nations

S/PV.4635 (Resumption 1)

agencies to ensure that gender perspectives are
incorporated into rehabilitation and reconstruction
programmes.
I would like to thank you very much indeed,
Mr. President, for scheduling this debate and for the
opportunity to comment on this important study.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Austria. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): I am speaking today in
Austria’s capacity as the current Chair of the Human
Security Network (HSN), an interregional group of
countries also comprising Canada, Chile, Greece,
Ireland, Jordan, Mali, the Netherlands, Norway,
Slovenia, South Africa, as an observer, Switzerland and
Thailand. The aims of the Network are to increase
awareness of human security at the political level, to
add real value to the international debate and to
improve the implementation of existing standards in
the field of human security through concrete actions.
The adoption of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), on women, peace and security, in October
2000, was a landmark decision that prompted HSN
countries to work on the implementation of concrete
measures to ensure that the needs of war-affected
women and girls are taken into account and that
women are full and equal participants in all aspects of
conflict resolution and post-conflict reconstruction. A
concrete action undertaken in this field by the Network
was the workshop on gendering human security, held in
Oslo in January 2001.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his excellent report, which highlights important aspects
regarding the roles and experiences of women and girls
in armed conflicts and its aftermath.
From the point of view of the Human Security
Network, I would now like briefly to focus on four
issues. The first is human rights education.
The report of the Secretary-General recognizes
the need for adequate training and education in several
areas, including multidimensional peacekeeping
operations and reconstruction and rehabilitation
processes. Human rights education is one of the two
priority issues on Austria’s agenda as the Chair of the
Human Security Network. For its next ministerial
meeting, which will be held at Graz in May 2003,

Austria will draft a document regarding the principles
of human rights education, as well as a manual on
understanding human rights, that will contain
substantive elements on the human rights of women.
Second is the special needs of girls. The second
priority of the Human Security Network this year is
children affected by armed conflict, with a particular
emphasis on the special protection needs of girls. A
common human security network support strategy is
being developed involving an alarm function, support
for monitoring activities and training of monitors and
rehabilitation experts for children. We welcome the
Secretary-General’s recommendation to increase the
number of programmes for child soldiers and to fully
incorporate attention to the specific situation and needs
of girl soldiers.
Third is the protection of women from sexual
exploitation and trafficking. The report of the
Secretary-General reflects the grave consequences of
violence, including sexual abuse in the context of
armed conflict, on the physical and mental health of
women and girls, such as the increased threat of
contracting sexually transmitted diseases and
HIV/AIDS. Therefore, the Human Security Network
calls on all parties to armed conflict to take special
measures to protect women and girls from genderbased violence, particularly rape and other forms of
sexual abuse, and all other forms of violence in
situations of armed conflict. These forms of violence
clearly undermine human security, the upholding of
which is a fundamental aspect of peacekeeping
operations. The Human Security Network welcomes
efforts to strengthen early warning capacities in this
respect, including concerning the trafficking in
persons.
Fourth is the protection of and assistance to
displaced women. Women and children constitute the
vast majority of the world’s refugees and internally
displaced persons. As pointed out in the report of the
Secretary-General, the differential impact of armed
conflict and the specific vulnerabilities of women and
girls can be seen in all phases of displacement. The
Human Security Network is therefore committed to
enhancing the protection of and assistance to displaced
women during their displacement and upon their return
to the communities of origin.
Today’s debate provides an important opportunity
to evaluate the impact of armed conflict on women and

17

S/PV.4635 (Resumption 1)

girls. We need to ensure that the security and the rights
of women are protected, that any violations are
prosecuted and that those responsible are brought to
justice. But women are not only victims in situations of
armed conflict; there are also many examples of
women making a critical difference in the promotion of
durable peace and in creating more equitable societies
in the aftermath of conflicts. We therefore share the
concerns of the Secretary-General that there is an
urgent need to enhance the involvement of women in
peace negotiations and their participation in United
Nations peace operations. We will do our utmost to
identify and nominate qualified women for upcoming
vacancies in this regard, and we will actively support
the full implementation of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) on women, peace, and security.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
South Africa. I invite her to take a seat at the Council
table and to make her statement.
Ms. Ndhlovu (South Africa): The full text of my
intervention will be distributed and I will confine my
intervention to a few paragraphs.
It gives me great pleasure to see you, Sir,
presiding over the Council at this, our third open
debate on the impact of armed conflict on women and
girls and the role of women in peace-building.
My delegation would wish to express our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
contribution to the debate and for his report on women,
peace and security, contained in document
S/2002/1154. In addition, the contributions to this
report and presentations on this important topic by the
Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women, Ms. Angela King; the Executive Director of
the United Nations Development Fund for Women, Ms.
Noeleen Heyzer; and the Inter-Agency Task Force on
Women, Peace and Security should be commended.
My delegation fully associates itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Austria on
behalf of the Human Security Network.
In Africa, enhanced efforts are being made to
achieve peace, democracy and development. With the
launch of the African Union and its new institutions,
such as the Peace and Security Council and the African
Peer Review Mechanism, African leaders have
acknowledged the need to strengthen the mechanisms

18

necessary to prevent, manage and resolve conflicts and
to ensure the accountability and transparency of
African Governments.
South Africa, in addition, has embarked on peacebrokering efforts to find durable solutions to the human
suffering of citizens, in particular women and girls,
highlighted by the interventions of President Thabo
Mbeki in his capacity as Chairperson of the African
Union. As an African State, South Africa plays its
modest role in the Great Lakes region, particularly in
Burundi. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
peace process is advancing at an accelerated pace with
our facilitation of the Pretoria Agreement of 30 July
2002 between Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. As required by the Pretoria Agreement,
South Africa is working with the United Nations to
monitor and guarantee the implementation thereof.
The African Union acknowledges that special
attention should be paid to women in view of their role
in and potential contribution to the peace process. It is
against this background that the African Women
Committee for Peace and Development was established
in 1998 by the Organization of African Unity, in
collaboration with the United Nations Economic
Commission for Africa, to ensure the participation of
women in decision-making and related initiatives. The
Committee also serves as an advisory body to the
Chairperson of the African Union on issues relating to
gender, peace, security, stability and development in
Africa, and works closely with the Union’s Mechanism
for Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution.
As an example, the African Union, the African
Women Committee for Peace and Development and
associated organizations organized a solidarity mission
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo in December
2001 to support the women in their preparations for
effective participation in the inter-Congolese dialogue,
hosted in South Africa early in 2002.
As we enter the new millennium, we are mindful
that, while there is much hope for the regeneration of
our continent in the context of the African Union and
the New Partnership for Africa’s Development, Africa
has a lot of work to do. One of the most critical of
these challenges is to bring an end to the civil wars and
conflicts that have ravaged our continent. We should
aspire to having a genuine integration of all peoples,
and more especially women, into the new era of peace,
reconstruction and development on the continent.

S/PV.4635 (Resumption 1)

However, this is easy to say and much more difficult to
implement.
This is also a time when women and girls face
danger. In conflict situations, women and girls become
the targets of renewed gender-based violence, in their
homes and in the streets. Another time of danger faced
by women is the transition period from war to peace,
when the demobilization of armies and the
demilitarization of personnel take place. At a time of
tension, roles are defined by the masculinity of war,
with little emphasis on the human rights of women and
girls. That approach is not easily resolved during
periods of ceasefire and transition, especially if the
conflict has been brutal.
The goals outlined in the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development (NEPAD) are consistent with the
United Nations Millennium Development Goals. For
example, both prioritized combating HIV/AIDS and
promoting girls’ education and, if successfully
implemented through strategies such as NEPAD, they
would be powerful examples of successes to follow in
Africa. The empowerment and the education of women
and girls enable them to become part of the future of
their countries. They have the potential to elevate girls
later in their careers and personal lives, enabling them
to advocate for the elimination of all forms of violence
against women and girls, particularly in situations of
armed conflict, and to play a role in peace-building
efforts.
In that regard, during the past two years, the
United Nations Division for the Advancement of
Women organized seminars in the subregion to enhance
women’s capacities and skills for participation in
negotiations and peace-building in Africa. That was a
fruitful venture, as our women reported that they have
long been seeking guidance and special expertise to
enable them to make critical interventions within their
specific countries in order to prevent and manage
conflicts.
The gender dimensions of peace processes and
conflict resolution cannot be overlooked. Women play
a critical role in addressing peace and security issues.
A conscious effort is needed by Member States to
ensure that women’s negotiation skills are utilized. It is
necessary to recognize that the objective of this debate
is to work towards a society in which everyone has a
role to play in creating new democratic institutions.
That means insisting that there is a new partnership

between men and women for peace, security and
development. That partnership should be mainstreamed
at all levels of society and in Government or State
institutions. It is also a partnership with nongovernmental organizations and civil society to
advocate the importance of the role that women play in
times of conflict.
In conclusion, it is abundantly clear that the
Security Council and, indeed, all relevant organs of the
United Nations and Member States must join in a
cooperative venture to face the challenges of armed
conflict and global security.
Women’s voices and their influence in peace,
security, democracy, training and development, at the
national and international levels, will prove to benefit
all.
The report of the Secretary-General is testimony
to our collective and unwavering resolve to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). My delegation believes that the
21 actions highlighted in the report will serve as a
useful guide for eliminating the untold suffering of
women and girls caught up in armed conflict and in
ensuring the active participation of women in peace
processes.
Women deserve to be victors with men in
building peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Venezuela. I invite her to take a seat at the Council
table and to make her statement.
Ms. Pulido Santana (Venezuela) (spoke in
Spanish): I wish at the outset to express our gratitude
to the members of the Council for allowing us to take
the floor at this important meeting. I congratulate the
President of the Council, Ambassador Martin BelingaEboutou, for his very positive work in conducting the
proceedings of this important organ. I also wish to
express our appreciation to the Secretary-General, to
Ms. Angela King, Special Advisor on Gender Issues
and the Advancement of Women, and to the Secretariat
staff who have worked on the development of this
important report.
We are pleased with the holding of this meeting,
given the great importance Venezuela attaches to the
item on women and the inclusion of the gender
perspective in all activities aimed at contributing to the
pursuit of peace and security, particularly those that

19

S/PV.4635 (Resumption 1)

relate to women’s participation and their contribution
to achieving sustainable development through equal
opportunity, based on the understanding that those
activities should also be viewed as conditions for the
achievement of peace and security.
While we note that considerable time has elapsed
between the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and the
recent submission of this important report, we must
also acknowledge that during that time there have been
new developments, and incorporation of the gender
perspective has been opening up new avenues. At a
time when peacekeeping operations and the treatment
of armed conflict are giving greater attention to the role
of women, the publication of this report is most timely
and welcome. We note today that the Organization has
provided more space for the gender perspective in most
of the priorities reflected in the Millennium
Declaration. That is an important step forward.
Venezuela believes that gender equality and the
advancement of women are topics whose treatment is
the task of the General Assembly and the Commission
on the Status of Women of the Economic and Social
Council. However, we welcome this initiative of the
Security Council to take up, pursuant to resolution
1325 (2000), the specific item of women, peace and
security, because we understand that this initiative falls
within the spirit of cooperation among the main organs
of this Organization and that it is part of the broad
implementation process of one of the 12 critical action
areas identified in the Beijing Platform for Action,
adopted by the international community in the
specialized conferences on women.
The report before us today is concise and specific
in its recommendations. It is a valuable and important
source of guidance for understanding the present
position of women and girls as persons particularly
affected by situations of armed conflict, and to identify
areas that require special attention, given their status as
women and girls. The report is a useful listing of the
various areas in which the United Nations should
expand and adopt specific measures.
In this regard, we believe that the implementation
of some of these recommendations will undoubtedly
make it possible to discourage the culture of violence
and discrimination against women and girls as they are
gradually incorporated into the process of planning,
policy-making and implementation of all peacekeeping

20

operations, humanitarian activities and post-conflict
reconstruction activities.
In this context, and in the framework of the
process of increased awareness of and greater respect
for human rights, we attach particular importance to
the need to provide a legal basis for offenses related to
violence against women, and to the possibility of
providing compensation to women and girls affected by
sexual violence. We value highly the recommendations
pertaining to the role of women in the reconstruction
and rehabilitation stages, as well as in the processes of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, in the
light of the fact that women, as active players in postarmed-conflict
situations,
can
increase
their
contribution to such processes.
Clearly, the implementation of all of these
recommendations implies the strengthening of
coordination and greater integration among the organs
involved in all of these initiatives relating to the
consolidation and maintenance of peace, humanitarian
operations and reconstruction processes.
We should also strengthen and pay due attention
to the structures and mechanisms provided for in the
framework of the United Nations that aim to ensure
that the gender perspective is systematically
incorporated in all activities relating to peace and
security. This should include, as the SecretaryGeneral’s report repeatedly stresses, the compilation of
data on various situations involving violations of the
rights of women and girls, which would make possible
an analysis that closely reflects the real situation,
identifying those areas in which training and better
preparation are needed in order to achieve the goals of
the report.
Against that backdrop, we regret that the
International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women (INSTRAW), despite its being
the only United Nations organ that has a specific
mandate to address gender issues and the training of
women, was not consulted in the elaboration of the
report of the Secretary-General. We believe that,
because INSTRAW has a specific mandate in these
areas, its valuable work should be taken into account
and it should be strengthened, given adequate resources
and enabled fully to reach its goals with respect to the
role of women in the achievement of the broader goal
of peace and security.

S/PV.4635 (Resumption 1)

The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Jamaica. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Neil (Jamaica): Mr. President, my delegation
would like to commend you for arranging this
discussion on the issue of women, peace and security,
which was previously brought before the Council on 25
July this year under the presidency of the United
Kingdom. This no doubt speaks to the importance
which the Security Council now attaches to the gender
dimensions of conflict, an aspect which for years had
been overlooked.
It has been two years since the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women,
peace and security, a milestone in the recognition of
women’s contribution to the maintenance and
promotion of peace and security and in addressing their
specific concerns, particularly in the context of armed
conflict. My delegation was therefore pleased to
receive the recently completed study on women, peace
and security and expresses its appreciation to the
Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women, Ms. Angela King, for her role as coordinator,
as well as to the Inter-Agency Task Force on Women,
Peace and Security. We also look forward to the
assessment report which will be produced by the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) on women in peace-building.
The second anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) is an opportune moment for a
critical analysis of how far we have come in
implementing its goals. Resolution 1325 (2000) is a
yardstick by which the Security Council is held
accountable to the international community at large in
its efforts to effect change; its effectiveness is
integrally related to the extent to which it is being
operationalized.
In this regard, Jamaica supports the proposal
made by the delegation of Colombia for a plan of
action for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).
I will elaborate on a few aspects of the report
which my delegation deems to be of particular
importance.
First, the international legal framework for
women’s human rights is crucial in ensuring their

protection, especially in relation to crimes against
women and girls during armed conflict. The report
states that over the past decade the international legal
framework has expanded to address most of the
particular crimes experienced by women in armed
conflict. We note that the statutes of the two ad hoc
international Tribunals in Yugoslavia and Rwanda, as
well as that of Sierra Leone, all include gender-based
violence and have issued indictments related to sexual
violence. My delegation supports the recommendations
made by the Secretary-General in his report and
supports the view that future ad hoc tribunals created
by the Security Council should include provisions
which build on existing statutes and include judges and
advisers with legal expertise on specific issues such as
violation of the rights of women and girls, including
gender-based and sexual violence.
Turning to the question of increased participation
of women in conflict resolution and peace processes,
we fully support the view that the participation of
women and girls and the inclusion of a gender
perspective in peace processes are strategic moves in
ensuring that political, social and economic institutions
facilitate the achievement of gender equality between
men and women. Nowhere is this more important than
in post-conflict peace-building. As past experience has
shown, women can make a significant contribution in
promoting peace, particularly in preserving social order
and educating for peace.
We are pleased to note that there has been some
progress in this area in terms of increased awareness.
The instrumental role of women’s groups in brokering
peace in Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Kosovo, Sierra Leone and East Timor are
positive examples of how effective women can be in
the peace process. Despite these achievements, there is
still more to be done in integrating women in all stages
of peace consolidation. We should even aim to go a
step further by ensuring that there are more formal
mechanisms which facilitate women’s groups in
political decision-making. As the report clearly
highlights, efforts are needed to achieve greater
representation in formal peace negotiations. Women’s
capacities as participants and leaders need to be further
enhanced. We fully support the ongoing United Nations
cooperation with women’s groups in the field,
especially through increased training, and we anticipate
further recording of these achievements in subsequent
reports.

21

S/PV.4635 (Resumption 1)

The incorporation of a gender perspective into
United Nations peacekeeping operations was an
important objective of resolution 1325 (2000). We
commend the Security Council for its efforts in
supporting informal peace initiatives of women’s
groups and networks, including the holding of Arriaformula meetings with women’s representatives. While
the fact that peacekeeping mandates now entail a
gender dimension is welcome, we remain concerned
that the institutional support at Headquarters is
inadequate to meet the needs in the field. The sterling
contribution of gender advisers in Kosovo, East Timor,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sierra Leone
and Bosnia and Herzegovina provides a vivid example
of the effectiveness of gender units, which can serve as
models for the replication of such units elsewhere. My
delegation therefore continues to advocate the need for
adequate capacity at Headquarters to support gender
advisers in the field so as to ensure the necessary
sharing of policy advice and prior to their formulation,
the incorporation into peacekeeping mandates, of a
gender perspective.
Finally, while we are encouraged by the positive
steps taken in implementing Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000), we believe that more needs to
be done in making gender mainstreaming in peace
operations a reality. In implementing its own
resolution, the Security Council should take the lead in
ensuring that in its missions to regions of conflict it
makes contact with women’s groups, and that their
concerns be fully taken on board when considering
peacekeeping mandates.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Indonesia. I invite her to take a seat at the Council
table and to make her statement.
Mrs. Wahab (Indonesia): The delegation of
Indonesia would like to express its appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for having convened this important open
debate on women and peace and security, barely one
week after the report of the Secretary-General was
issued. In our view, this is a reflection of the
importance that this subject deserves.
Appreciation is also due to the Secretary-General
for his detailed report, pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000), on this issue, and in particular
for his 21 far-reaching recommendations towards

22

strengthening and accelerating the implementation of
the objectives contained in that resolution.
We have come here today eager to participate in
this debate, not only because of our complete faith in
resolution 1325 (2000) and its commitment to
improving the lot of women and girls during armed
conflict, but because the advancement of women is
accorded great importance as one of the priority
national policies of Indonesia.
As a signatory to the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, Indonesia fully and willingly assumes
responsibility for participating actively in international
efforts to end discrimination against women. We have
also continued to demonstrate our opposition to
trafficking in women and girls and to violence against
women migrant workers.
Many of these issues are particularly difficult to
deal with after conflict has already broken out, but we
believe that, if policies are already in place, it is easier
for the international community to deal with any
violations of established law. In this connection, we
agree with the Secretary-General that there is a failure
on the part of the international community to convert
what is already known about the impact of conflict on
women and girls into specific policies and planning
and implementation processes in all peace operations,
humanitarian activities and reconstruction efforts.
While recognizing the importance of considering
the efforts being made by the Secretary-General on this
issue, the delegation of Indonesia underlines the fact
that such efforts and those already being undertaken in
the Commission on the Status of Women are mutually
reinforcing.
Similarly, not only is the contribution of women
and girls in the promotion of peace and peace processes
becoming increasingly important, but it is also
achieving greater recognition, and my delegation is
happy to observe that development. The open support
of the Security Council for the involvement of women
and girls, as well as for the peace-oriented grass-roots
organizations in which they are playing key roles, will
go a long way to enhancing their political status and
relevance.
In this connection, our delegation is of the view
that the ninth recommendation for action, which calls
for the full involvement of women in the negotiation of

S/PV.4635 (Resumption 1)

peace agreements at the national and international
level, including through the provision of training for
women and women’s organizations on formal peace
processes, merits further consideration by the
international community.
On a related issue, we offer our support for the
expressed intention of the Secretary-General to
establish a database of gender specialists and women’s
groups and networks in countries and regions in
conflict. We share his encouragement, extended to
Member States, donors and civil society in this regard,
to provide financial, political and technical support for
women’s peace-building initiatives and networks. As
an extension of that idea, we urge the SecretaryGeneral, using the existing extensive network of
United Nations resources, to establish such a database
throughout the developing world, so that it is ready to
be tapped when needed, and not only during periods of
conflict.
The commitment of Indonesia to the advancement
and protection of women in times of both peace and
conflict is reflected in our national policies. Towards
that end, we fully encourage the progress being made
in the integration of a gender perspective into all
aspects of the work of the United Nations, including
within the Secretariat, as well as in peace processes,
peacekeeping and humanitarian operations and
reconstruction and rehabilitation efforts. We urge the
Council to make a more conscious effort to integrate
gender consciousness and perspectives into its
decisions and resolutions.
Needless to say, the contribution of all members
and segments of society is required, if peace is to be
maintained and conflict avoided. The involvement of
women and girls is critical not only for any efforts in
that direction, but also for the maintenance of the
family, which remains the basic unit of society and,
therefore, of social harmony. Any investment of
resources in the education and protection of women is
therefore an investment in the education and protection
of society.
Our delegation shares the view of the SecretaryGeneral that it is essential for the international
community to increase its awareness of the differential
impact of conflict on women and girls and to address
this issue in a comprehensive manner so as to enable it
formulate a better strategy for specific responses.

It is two years this week since the Security
Council passed resolution 1325 (2000), a powerful,
well-intentioned resolution that was received with
appreciation throughout the world. The report of the
Secretary-General — called for by the Council in the
resolution — has now taken the process forward by
bringing a set of 21 recommendations for action before
the Council. It is our hope that the Council will move
this process forward with appropriate pace and
wisdom.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
India. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Nambiar (India): We are pleased to see you,
Sir, presiding over this meeting of the Council. The
subject under discussion in the Security Council today
is one of great importance, in view of the increasing
number of conflicts in which women and children find
themselves involved.
Let me begin by referring to the report of the
Secretary General (S/2002/1154) pursuant to resolution
1325 (2000), adopted unanimously in October 2000.
The Secretary-General made a very pertinent point
when he said that women suffered the impact of
conflict disproportionately but also that they held the
key to the solution of conflict.
The various action points listed in the report
provide practical recommendations that are designed to
ensure the full and equal participation of women in all
stages of conflict resolution, peacekeeping, peacebuilding, peacemaking and the reconstruction process
following conflict.
As do many other delegations, we support the
proposal to integrate gender perspectives in the
planning and mandates of peace processes. We are
happy to note that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations is developing concrete measures to help
mainstream these perspectives into the daily work of
mission components. While there have been calls for a
gender balance in the composition of peacekeeping
forces, we have some doubts about the overall
desirability of such a move. Would it be in the interest
of either peace or gender equality for women to
embroil themselves in conflict, even if it were in the
cause of the United Nations? We would, instead,
support a greater role for women as special
representatives, within the Department of Peacekeeping

23

S/PV.4635 (Resumption 1)

Operations and in negotiations for settling conflict, as
provided for under resolution 1325 (2000).
We see the logic of the establishment of gender
offices or focal points in field missions. That action
would undoubtedly contribute to increasing gender
mainstreaming in peacekeeping missions. Also
important is the inclusion of women, girls and child
soldiers
in
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration (DDR) programmes, which could be
applied to all future missions involving DDR
programmes.
A very pertinent point about the fact that in
conflict situations women and girls are the victims of
all forms of violence, particularly sexual violence and
exploitation, has been brought out in the report. This
element in conflict situations requires careful attention,
and is one in which the international community would
need to seriously consider remedial measures.
Reintegration of women is another important element
which requires due attention. Any peace agreements
under the sponsorship of the United Nations should
automatically incorporate the gender perspective,
including the role women play.
While women bear a disproportionately large
share of the burden of conflict, they have only a
marginal say in matters of war and peace. As was
mentioned in the debate yesterday, in the First World
War, 80 per cent of those who died were men, while in
today’s conflicts 80 per cent of the victims are
civilians, mainly women and children. My delegation
has, in the past, drawn attention to the fact that gender
imbalances in our societies, as reflected in positions of
power and influence, are an important factor
contributing to the existing situation.
Clearly, another reason for the increasing
instances of civilian casualties in today’s conflicts is
the increasing number of incidents of terrorism
worldwide. The attacks of 11 September 2001 were one
of the worst and most manifest forms of terrorism
witnessed by modern society. However, this phase of
terrorism was not unfamiliar to countries such as my
own or to many others. India has been the victim of
unrelenting terrorism, which primarily targets women
and children, for the past 20 years, resulting in almost
60,000 casualties.
In recent months, the world has been witness to
the most heinous instances of terrorism, whether in
Moscow, New York, Bali, parts of Jammu and

24

Kashmir, Gujarat or even New Delhi. The difference
between incidents in many other parts of the world and
those in India is that while many recent international
incidents have been perpetrated by nebulous groups
operating in secrecy and disclaiming State support,
those in India are the product of a carefully crafted,
hard-nosed strategy directed against us. Terrorism has
been used to conduct low-intensity conflict aimed at
soft targets, namely, women and children and unarmed
civilians. That policy perhaps had served its purpose
until the international drive against terrorism took root
in the aftermath of 11 September and came to be
enshrined in resolution 1373 (2001).
It must be understood that one can no longer
profess to be a part of the global coalition against
terrorism on the one hand and sponsor terrorism on the
other. It is no longer possible to run with the hare and
hunt with the hounds.
Two of the most reprehensible terrorist crimes
committed recently, mainly against women and
children, occurred in India. Both were attacks aimed at
provoking instability, fear and the prospect of a
backlash. I am referring to the Kaluchak massacre
perpetrated by terrorists on 14 May 2002 in the state of
Jammu and Kashmir, when three terrorists
indiscriminately opened fire on the passengers of a
transport bus, then moved to the family quarters of an
army unit in the area and once again fired
indiscriminately on army family members present on
the premises. As a result, 28 civilians were killed and
35 wounded, most of them women and children. In a
more recent instance designed to ignite communal
violence in the state of Gujarat, terrorists entered a
place of worship, systematically firing into the large
numbers of peaceful worshippers on the premises,
resulting in the deaths of more than 30 innocent men,
women and children and the wounding of hundreds of
others.
The women and children in our lives assure our
future. They must live in security. They must also be
assured a life of dignity. At the height of the Taliban
terror, a famous Pakistani poet, Kishwar Naheed, wrote
a lovely poem that began “Those who felt threatened
by girl children”. There has to be a change of mindset
regarding women and children, the girl child in
particular.
While there is much talk of the need to safeguard
the interests of women and children, there is less talk

S/PV.4635 (Resumption 1)

of cooperative efforts to ensure sustained economic
growth, which alone can eradicate the poverty and
deprivation which is at the root of their exclusion. The
renowned economic philosopher Amartya Sen speaks
of the right of people to “seek our identity as we
choose”. It is that identity which should be assured to
all, irrespective of gender, if we are to create an
environment of peace and security for all in our
interconnected world.

The President (spoke in French): The poetry
which has just been read to us will continue to sound in
our ears. Those who feel threatened cannot live in
dignity.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.50 p.m.

25
