S/2021/601

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 June 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 24 June 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the
Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Deborah Lyons, Special Representative of the Secretary -General for Afghanistan and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, Ghada Fathi Ismail
Waly, Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
Director-General of the United Nations Office at Vienna, and Mary Akrami,
Executive Director of Afghan Women’s Network, as well as the statements delivered
by Eva-Maria Liimets, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Estonia, Simon Coveney,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defence of Ireland, Subrahmanyam Jaishankar,
Minister for External Affairs of India, Linda Thomas-Greenfield, Permanent
Representative of the United States and Member of President Biden’s Cabinet, Audun
Halvorsen, Deputy Foreign Minister of Norway, Lord Tariq Ahmad of Wimbledon,
Minister of State for the Commonwealth, the United Nations and South Asia of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and by the representatives of
China, France, Kenya, Mexico, the Niger, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Tunisia and Viet Nam in connection with the videoconference on
“The situation in Afghanistan” convened on Tuesday, 22 June 2021. A statement was
also delivered by Mohammad Haneef Atmar, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan.
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members for this
videoconference, the following delegations and entities submitted written statements,
copies of which are also enclosed: Australia, Germany, Indonesia, Islamic Republic
of Iran, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Pakistan, Poland and Tu rkey.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID -19)
pandemic, these briefings and statements will be issued as a document of the Security
Council.
(Signed) Sven Jürgenson
President of the Security Council

21-08609 (E)

010921

*2108609*

S/2021/601

Annex I
Briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan, Deborah Lyons
I welcome the level of interest on Afghanistan, as shown by this meeting taking
place at the foreign minister level today. There could be no better time for this
attention.
I cannot overstate to the Council my concern regarding the present situation in
Afghanistan. All of the major trends – politics, security, the peace process, the
economy, the humanitarian emergency and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) – all
of these trends are negative or stagnant. If there is a sense of hope, it indeed resides
in the fact that previous worst-case predictions did not materialize. But the relentless
spirit of the Afghans and their incredible resilience is being severely tested and the
possible slide towards dire scenarios is undeniable. What happens in Afghanistan
remains of global consequence and the Security Council needs to be fully informed
of the gravity of the present situation.
The mid-April announcement that all international troops will be withdrawn in
the coming months sent a seismic tremor through the Afghan political system and
society at large. The withdrawal decision was expected but its speed – with the
majority of troops now already withdrawn – was not. All actors have had to adjust to
this new reality that is unfolding.
The withdrawal is one of four parts of the February 2020 agreement between
the United States and the Taliban that has indeed been acknowledged by the Council.
The agreement generated hope that it would create the space for a peace to be made
among Afghans. The foreign troops would be gone, and therefore, rather than fighting
one another, Afghans would have the opportunity to come together and find a pa th to
peace. But instead, actions on the battlefield have been far greater than progress at
the negotiating table.
And at this critical time, the Afghan public and the diplomatic community in
Kabul have been alarmed at the lack of political unity among Af ghanistan’s political
elite. While some of the shortcomings in Government are part of a legacy of putting
politics above governance, the lack of unity must be addressed or risks contributing
to further Taliban territorial advances. We are cautiously encour aged, however, by
recent moves by President Ghani and his Government and the other political leaders
to come together to discuss pressing security issues and demonstrate unity. The real
test will though be on whether unity in Kabul serves to further reinfo rce the peace
process and strengthen state institutions.
The Council has heard me speak of the continuous increase in violence over the
past year, even as the peace talks began in Doha in September. The Taliban’s recent
advances are even more significant and are a result of an intensified military
campaign. More than 50 of Afghanistan’s 370 districts have fallen since the beginning
of May. Most districts that have been taken surround provincial capitals, suggesting
that the Taliban are positioning themselves to try and take these capitals once foreign
forces are fully withdrawn. This military campaign runs directly counter to recent
statements by the head of the Taliban Political Commission that, and I quote, “We are
committed to forging ahead with the other sides in an atmosphere of mutual respect
and reach an agreement.”
For the Taliban to continue this intensive military campaign would be a tragic
course of action. It would lead to increased and prolonged violence that would extend
the suffering of the Afghan people and threaten to destroy much of what has been
built and hard won in the past 20 years. It should be emphatically clear that any efforts
2/60

21-08609

S/2021/601

to install a militarily imposed government in Kabul would go against the will of the
Afghan people, and against the stated positions of the regional countries and the
broader international community.
We had hoped to accelerate the stalled negotiations in Doha through a
conference in Istanbul in April that would have been co -hosted by Turkey, Qatar and
the United Nations. The Republic’s team was prepared to attend the conference;
however, the Taliban never did officially respond to the invitation. The United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) continues to work within our
mandate and, in cooperation with Member States, to find ways to move forward in
the negotiations. But the drivers of conflict seem for now to overwhelm the reasonable
and hoped-for modalities of negotiation.
Even without the conflict dynamics I have described, Afghanistan would be a
country facing multiple crises. Almost one third of Afghans face emergency levels of
food insecurity, while this year’s drought worsens, and internal displacements
increase. The World Bank has estimated that as a result of the conflict, and the severe
third wave of COVID-19, the drought, the weakened social fabric and other factors,
Afghanistan’s poverty rate could rise from 50 per cent to more than 70 per cent. This
frightening prospect highlights the importance of humanitarian aid provided from all
countries. However, in spite of recent contributions, the $1.3 billion humanitarian
appeal for 2021 is still only 30 per cent funded.
As always, it is ordinary Afghans who pay the heaviest price. As fighting
intensifies, the situation for civilians is ever worsening. Civilian casualties increased
by 29 per cent in the first quarter of 2021 compared with the same period last year.
Notably, and sadly, women casualties increased by 37 per cent and child casualties by
23 per cent. Parties must immediately take steps to further implement civilian
protection measures. Civilians are deliberately and routinely targeted in clear
violation of international humanitarian law.
Given the enormous suffering, UNAMA stresses the importance of putting
victims and their needs at the forefront of the peace negotiations. This must include
specific protections for minorities. The ongoing, frequent attacks against the Hazara
community in Kabul are a terrible reminder of how the overall conflict is being used
to target certain groups.
As the Council knows, preserving the rights of women remains a paramount
concern and must not be used as a bargaining chip at the negotiating table. Men’s
rights are not negotiable. Women’s rights are not negotiable. Human rights are not
negotiable. Who knows this better than the Council? The international community
and the regional countries, in particular, must reiterate the importance of these rights
in the peace negotiations.
Afghanistan’s young people – now the most educated generation in the history
of the country – are being deprived of their future, a future which they are seeking to
build through education to contribute to their country’s development. Instead, they
are drawn into war.
Let me illustrate with three examples. Amid the rising viole nce, three attacks
stand out that expose the tragic nature of this conflict and the heightened urgency of
ending it. First of all was the 8 May attack on girls who were making their way home
after a day at school in a majority-Hazara area of Kabul that killed nearly 100 young
female students. The conscience of the world was rightly shocked. Grown men with
bombs attacked little girls with schoolbooks. Earlier this month, 11 humanitarian
deminers were killed and 15 injured in Baghlan Province. A week later, individual but
coordinated attacks in Nangarhar targeted polio vaccinators, killing five and injuring
more. These are not just attacks against the individuals, but these are attacks against
21-08609

3/60

S/2021/601

the very future of Afghanistan – against girls who want to educate themselves, against
experienced deminers who simply want to clear the land to allow people to farm
without fear, and against vaccinators risking their lives to combat the scourge of polio
so Afghan children do not suffer.
So, what is to be done?
There is still time, barely but still time, to prevent the worst -case scenario from
materializing. Enough has been built in Afghanistan to allow further building – if only
there can be peace. One of the key objectives of UNAMA during this period of
uncertainty is to continue to work with all partners to ensure the continuity of those
institutions that support the well-being of all Afghans. Any future Government that
results from a negotiation cannot start from nothing. It is my sincere hope that the
Taliban understand this as much as the Government in Kabul does.
UNAMA has also heard the many voices that are urging us to play a greater role
in the peace process, and we are prepared and equipped to do so if the parties commit
to real negotiations and together agree on a role for the United Nations.
We are also working more closely and intensely with the regional countries. In
my discussions within the region over the past year, and particularly at the recent
Heart of Asia Summit in Dushanbe, it was clear that the regional countries share grave
concerns about an extended and fragmented conflict in Afghanistan. These concerns
include refugee flows, migrant movement, increased drug smuggling, terrorism, and
lost opportunities for economic connectivity and mutually benef icial trade. But these
problems will not be relegated to the region alone. As we have all painfully learned,
a fragmented conflict creates a more permissive environment for terrorist groups to
recruit, finance, plan, and conduct operations with a global re ach.
We must accept the reality – increased conflict in Afghanistan means increased
insecurity for many other countries, near and far.
Regional countries have an important role to play in helping Afghanistan to
stabilize and integrate more fully into the region. I welcome the appointment of Jean
Arnault as the Secretary-General’s Personal Envoy on Afghanistan and Regional
Issues and have been working very closely with him. As well as the existing regional
formats, such as the extended troika, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the
Heart of Asia Process and others should all be further galvanized to reinforce a
political and peaceful pathway for Afghanistan.
We can all agree that any future Government of Afghanistan will need, for itself
and its citizens, international engagement and support. The contributions of donors
will be essential to support the ongoing development and humanitarian needs. This is
not the time to weaken our resolve or, worse, to contribute even inadvertently to the
ongoing signals of despair.
I have reassured Afghans that the United Nations will not abandon them and
will stay the course.
Certainly, every effort must be made now by all of us to avoid the country going
down the path of more bloodshed and suffering. Surely there has been enough.
There is only one acceptable direction for Afghanistan – one acceptable
direction – away from the battlefield and back to the negotiating table. The Security
Council, with the support of the regional countries, must do all it can to push the
parties in that direction. The tragic history of conflict need not repeat itself – but left
to its own and our inertia it just might.

4/60

21-08609

S/2021/601

I very much appreciate the participation of senior people from the capitals, and
I look forward once again to the guidance of the members of the Security Council to
help this wonderful country.
UNAMA supports the Afghan people and Government to achieve peace and
stability. In accordance with its mandate as a political mission, UNAMA backs
conflict prevention and resolution, promoting inclusion and social cohesion, as well
as strengthening regional cooperation. The Mission supports effective governance,
promoting national ownership and accountable institutions that are built on respect
for human rights. UNAMA provides “good offices” and other key services, including
diplomatic steps that draw on the Organization’s independence, impartiality and
integrity to prevent disputes from arising, escalating or spreading. The Mission
coordinates international support for Afghan development and humanitarian priorities.

21-08609

5/60

S/2021/601

Annex II
Statement by the Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, Ghada Fathi Ismail Waly
It is an honour to join Special Representative of the Secretary -General Lyons at
this briefing on the situation in Afghanistan at this challenging time, and I am grateful
to the presidency of Estonia for inviting me.
Firstly, I would like to thank the Security Council for resolution 2543 (2020),
which recognized enhanced cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), with the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and in
support of the Government of Afghanistan, as a priority going forward.
The resolution further highlighted the importance of regional cooperation,
governance and the rule of law, including through the fight against corruption – all of
which represent the building blocks for an Afghanistan at peace.
A cornerstone action to achieve this aspiration is a well-integrated and balanced
strategy to counter the illicit drug trade.
Addressing drug threats is also necessary to tackle the crime-terrorism linkages
that have conspired to keep Afghanistan the State with the highest number of
terrorism victims in the world.
Taxes on opium, paid by poppy farmers mostly to the Taliban, were valued at
$14.5 million in 2019, based on farm-gate prices. Taxes on the much more lucrative
manufacturing and trafficking of opiates may have generated eight times as mu ch.
Income from opium cultivation and production has been estimated at 11 per cent
of Afghanistan’s gross domestic product.
The total area under opium poppy cultivation in 2020 increased by 37 per cent
over the previous year, to an estimated 224,000 hectares, which is the third largest
area ever measured. The opium poppy harvest was mostly unaffected by the
pandemic, and potential production is estimated at 6,300 tons, accounting for 85 per
cent of the world’s production.
Farmers are cultivating more and more opium poppy, but incomes have hit rock
bottom. The average farm-gate price at harvest time was $42 per kilo, compared with
peak prices of $275 per kilo in the last decade.
The opium threat has been further compounded by Afghanistan’s growing role
as a regional source for methamphetamine.
In Iran, seizures of the drug originating from Afghanistan have risen from less
than 10 per cent of the total in 2015 to more than 90 per cent in 2019. Seizure data
also suggest that manufacture has continued during the pandemic.
As Special Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons said in her briefing
to you in March, we know from history and from other peace processes that illegal
narcotics and the illicit economy threaten peace and security.
Opium poppy cultivation is also an economic dead end.
UNODC asked Afghan farmers where they spend their illicit poppy incomes,
and the top three answers are food, medical bills and paying off debt.
Now opium prices are at their lowest level since the beginning of systematic
monitoring, leaving desperate people unable to meet basic necessities.
Determined steps are needed to find a more sustainable path.
6/60

21-08609

S/2021/601

Renewed political will and international support are prerequisites to empower
healthy lives and livelihoods free from violence and crime, backed by a solid
commitment to the rule of law and the integrity of public services.
UNODC support to the Government builds upon integrated mandates on drugs,
crime, corruption and terrorism, and we are ready to elevate our assistance as part of
collective efforts to sustain a fragile peace.
Firstly, we must work together to enable more farmers to shift to viable, licit crops.
Opium prices are at historic lows, while the coronavirus disease (COVID -19)
crisis has pushed up the prices of agricultural products. This has made alternative
development more profitable than illicit opium cultivation, and we need to take this
opportunity to decisively expand our support.
UNODC promotes alternative development in 20 provinces for more than 60,000
households, which represents 1 out of 4 households involved in drug cultivation.
Our programme has created nearly 28,000 jobs in four years, generating licit
income of more than $15 million; 48 per cent of the beneficiaries have been women.
These are positive steps and we need to scale up by integrating alternative
development into broader, long-term investment and support.
Secondly, we need to make evidence-based prevention and treatment a priority.
Youth in Afghanistan are endangered not only by the world’s largest supply of opiates,
but by a growing array of synthetic drugs.
UNODC provides assistance and tools for science-based drug prevention,
treatment and rehabilitation, but increased support is urgently needed.
Funding shortages have reduced the number of drug treatment centres in the
country from 107 to 86, including the closure of 5 centres for women and children
early last year.
Thirdly, I urge the Government and donors to devote greater resources and
increase operational capabilities to disrupt drug trafficking.
Police reform and the mentoring, training and advisory services that UNODC
provides to law enforcement and judicial authorities have become all the more
imperative in the context of the withdrawal of international forces.
UNODC continues to support the Counter-Narcotics Police of Afghanistan, and
our work is accelerating. We have trained more officers in 2021 than in all of 2019, in
some 20 activities reaching more than 600 officers over the past two and a half years.
Our training mainstreams human rights and gender issues, and we have helped
the Ministry of Interior Affairs develop its code of conduct.
Our Office has also been working with the Government to set up the first
anti-drug canine unit, with operations due to start in November.
Fourthly, counter-narcotics responses must go hand in hand with action to tackle
corruption, secure public revenue and develop an entrepreneurial licit economy that
can generate jobs and innovation.
Related action to counter money-laundering and the financing of terrorism is
also needed to deprive criminal networks and terrorist actors of funds.
At the start of June, at the first-ever General Assembly special session against
corruption, Member States adopted a political declaration, which invites UNODC, the
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the Department of Peace
Operations to strengthen the rule of law and anti-corruption in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts.
21-08609

7/60

S/2021/601

UNODC is ready to meet this request by reinforcing our long-standing support,
including to the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre and the Office of the Attorney General.
Fifth, we need to strengthen regional cooperation to protect people, stop
criminal and terrorist exploitation of legitimate trade and prevent spillover effects.
Drug trafficking and illicit cash flows, as well as crimes such as migrant smuggling
and human trafficking, pose dangers within and beyond Afghanistan’s borders.
Addressing regional and global dimensions is also essential to stop the flow of
precursors into the country and to disrupt flows of opiates trafficked out of the region
on the southern, northern and Balkan routes.
In response, UNODC brings together Afghanistan with its neighbours through
integrated country, regional and global programmes that support mechanisms and
platforms for law enforcement coordination and cooperation.
Furthermore, we have helped to equip and train an interre gional network of
customs authorities and port control units, including at Afghanistan’s airports and
borders, to identify and intercept illicit goods, while facilitating legitimate trade.
Our Office has also established an asset recovery network for West and Central
Asia to clamp down on money-laundering and target illicit financial flows out of the
region.
We are seeking to further connect Afghanistan and neighbouring countries with
South Asia, the Gulf and Eastern Africa, by linking efforts with UNODC law
enforcement and judicial cooperation initiatives in these regions.
We are also taking forward our work under the “One United Nations” framework
for Afghanistan currently being finalized, with UNODC directly contributing to the
people, prosperity, peace and partnership priorities.
Sixth and finally, we need to ensure all of our support advances the hard -won
gains made by women and girls in Afghanistan, so they can play an active role in
shaping the future of the country.
UNODC alternative development work has a special focus on developing
women’s skills and capacities, and we are helping women recovering from drug
addiction to find jobs.
Our efforts to promote gender equality in law enforcement have resulted in an
equal number of women police officers in airport interdiction units, and in three
women serving on the new canine handler team.
I urge Afghanistan and its partners to ensure that balanced counter-narcotics
responses that promote inclusion and empower women and girls are integrated across
efforts to negotiate, build and sustain peace.
A peace process that enables alternative development, drug control and health
responses to be implemented in all areas of the country, including those outside
government control, could help to make decisive progress against the illicit drug
economy, to secure the future of Afghanistan.
I would like to conclude by thanking and commending all my colleagues in the
United Nations team in Afghanistan for their dedication to the e ssential mission of
the United Nations.
UNODC stands in solidarity with the Government and people at this difficult
and decisive moment, in full commitment to achieving the lasting and just peace that
Afghanistan truly deserves.

8/60

21-08609

S/2021/601

Annex III
Briefing by the Executive Director of the Afghan Women’s
Network, Mary Akrami
I welcome the report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
that was shared with this body in April of this year. Sadly, since the release of that
report, violence has increased and has claimed the precious lives of several hundred,
the majority of them being professional women and schoolchildren and youth.
Thousands have been displaced from their homes.
What was said to be a peace process that started between the United States and
the Taliban ended up being a deal between the United States and the Taliban. For
Afghan people, that deal has brought nothing but increased violence, deteriorated
security, political instability, a worsened economic situation, displacement a nd more
uncertainty.
The parties to the peace negotiations should not negotiate peace and commit
violent offensives at the same time. This duality only serves to undermine the peace
process and lower the level of confidence people have in the peace proces s. A
ceasefire should not be the goal of the peace talks but, instead, a ceasefire should pave
the way for the peace process.
This is why Afghan civil society, particularly women, have called on all sides
to agree on a ceasefire. Our plea has not only been dismissed by the Taliban but,
instead, the Taliban have also launched a killing campaign against professional
women, journalists and peacebuilders and have intensified their violent attacks on
educational institutions and public and private properties.
Like me, millions of Afghans have lived and grown up in war. My generation and
the young generation of today have not lived in peace. Imagine waking up every morning
thinking you may not come back home to your family alive. We are tired of war. We are
tired of attending funerals of our friends and relatives. We want an end to this war.
We welcome any effort by Afghan or international actors to pave the way for a
peaceful resolution of the ongoing conflict. However, we have been clear that we
want a dignified and just peace, not a surrender to the Taliban or another violent
extremist group.
Peace is not just the absence of war. Peace means freedom from all forms of
violence and coercion, respect for human dignity, justice and human rights and
equality for women and all citizens. It also includes economic and social development
and the ability to live in harmony. While we want negotiations to succeed in bringing
an end to violence, as women we are deeply concerned that women’s rights do not
become the price to be paid for peace.
Afghanistan is the conflict in which the centrality of women cannot be denied
or overlooked. People from around the world will be watching to see if national,
regional and international actors supporting the Afghan peace talks live up to their
international commitments on the women and peace and security agenda; and to the
protection of democracy, human rights and freedom of expression as an outcome of
the peace process and in line with their commitments to international conventions
they are signatories to.
Let me also tell you that, despite the enormous challenges, Afghan people are
resilient. Our youth continue to organize and mobilize for peace, donate blood and
volunteer to help those in need.

21-08609

9/60

S/2021/601

Our elders continue to encourage us to stand up for what is right. Our mothers
remind us to not allow ourselves to be treated as second-class citizens, and our Afghan
Women’s Network continues to raise the voices of women throughout Afghanistan
and the world.
Sustainable peace can only be achieved through an inclusive peace, and the only
way to secure a sustainable peace is through an inclusive process in which Afghan
society is asked to participate and engage. The Afghanistan Mechanism for Inclusive
Peace is an example of many initiatives working for an inclusive peace process.
We encourage the United Nations to support Afghan civil society, women’s
groups and youth initiatives in their efforts to build peace from grass roots up and
improve social peace.
We will continue our efforts for peace and justice, but you all know the war in
Afghanistan is not a domestic one. It is a war among great powers, regional powers.
Finally, it is a war fuelled by drugs and illegal mining.
My urgent message and that of civil society is that our call for a ceasefire is
urgent!
The United Nations at the highest level, including the Security Council, must
compel the Taliban and the Afghan Government to commit to a permanent ceasefire.
Without a ceasefire, the Afghan people will continue to be killed and in jured, our
women widowed and our children orphaned.
We call on this body to not be a spectator. Do not allow a Rwanda-type genocide
to take place under your watch in Afghanistan.
A politically stable, economically empowered and self-reliant Afghanistan
where rule of law, justice and human rights are respected and citizens’ rights are
protected and guaranteed will benefit the region and the world. All this will only be
possible when there is security and a peaceful resolution to the ongoing conflict.

10/60

21-08609

S/2021/601

Annex IV
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Estonia,
Eva-Maria Liimets
It is an honour to welcome you to this Security Council quarterly debate to
discuss the situation in Afghanistan. We called for high-level attendance today in
order to reaffirm the international community’s continued c ommitment to the
Afghanistan peace process and to Afghan people.
I would like to start with special thanks to Ms. Akrami for her enlightening
personal description of the current situation in Afghanistan. The brave work that she
and her fellow civil society organizations do is of great value for the future of the
people of Afghanistan. Hearing today about the difficulties faced by women and youth
and the dangers threatening human rights defenders was most troubling.
I would like to thank Special Representative Lyons for all her tireless work and
today’s briefing that truly put into perspective the reality on the ground. Despite the
people yearning for peace and stability, they are instead faced with extreme levels of
violence, targeted killings, a worsening humanitarian situation and an alarming rise
in coronavirus disease (COVID-19) infections.
The violence on the ground constitutes the most serious threat to peace efforts.
A 38 per cent increase in civilian casualties in the six months since the start o f the
peace negotiations is deeply tragic and works directly against hopes for reunification
and reconciliation. We reiterate the call for an immediate and comprehensive
ceasefire to save the Afghan people from more meaningless suffering. Only a
negotiated political solution can lead to a sustainable peace in the country, as well as
stability in the region.
We condemn in the strongest terms the recent terrorist attacks and targeted
killings. Targeting students, health-care personnel, civil servants, journalists,
humanitarian workers and human rights defenders is an attack against people who
should rebuild Afghanistan; it is an attack against peace. The humanitarian situation
is worsening, with nearly half of the population in need of humanitarian aid and
COVID-19 infections undergoing an alarming rise; Afghans need and deserve
international support. Estonia has donated vaccines to the COVID -19 Vaccine Global
Access (COVAX) Facility to help all countries badly hit by the pandemic. Interference
with humanitarian access is unacceptable and prolongs the suffering of vulnerable
people. We call on all parties to end the violence and protect their fellow countrymen.
Moreover, we draw attention to the commitments taken by the warring sides in
February 2020 and call for constructive engagement in the peace negotiations. Estonia
stands firm in its belief that no further concessions to the Taliban should be made. In
line with Security Council resolution 2513 (2020), an easing or lifting of sanctions
will be considered when the conditions are met. Extensions of the travel ban
exemptions to certain members of the Taliban have had a clear purpose – to advance
the peace process. The Taliban must demonstrate a credible c ommitment to peace.
We, in the Security Council, must help keep the Afghanistan peace negotiations
vigorous, as it is the only way to reach an inclusive political settlement. An equally
important task for us is to ensure that every woman and girl, every st udent and every
member of civil society or a minority knows that they can have a peaceful future in
their home country and that they can take on a role they choose for themselves.
Afghanistan has come a long way in the last two decades: democracy,
fundamental freedoms and human rights, especially women’s rights, have become an
essential part of the society. These achievements must not come under threat. Even as
our forces leave the Afghan soil, our commitment to Afghanistan remains steadfast.
21-08609

11/60

S/2021/601

We wish to see that the outcome of the peace process preserves constitutional
protections for women’s and minorities’ rights. We will continue our political and
financial support, conditional upon the preservation of the country’s human rights and
democratic achievements.
Grave food insecurity makes it particularly worrying to witness the continued
widespread prevalence of narcotics cultivation in Afghanistan. I would like to thank
Ms. Waly and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for their latest overview
on this. Drug trafficking is a serious issue and it is crucial to stop criminal networks
from perpetuating and profiting from the illicit economy.
In the next few months, we in the Security Council must all decide on the future
role and presence of the United Nations in Afghanistan. Estonia and Norway will be
engaging with you and our partner organizations in discussions on the best way to
strengthen the mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), keeping in mind the needs of the Afghan people. The good offices of
UNAMA and Special Representative Lyons have been vital for international support
reaching the people on the ground, and we intend to seek a solution to continue their
commendable work in Afghanistan. We welcome the appointment of Jean Arnault and
wish him success in his work. We also welcome the renewed diplomatic efforts by
Afghanistan’s neighbours and regional powers to accelerate the peace process.
I believe Mr. Atmar can agree with me that Afghanistan today is at a crossroads,
and Afghans themselves need to define its future. We believe that Afghanistan, like
all countries, deserves economic development and growth that provides new
opportunities for its citizens, where their rights are upheld and where everyone,
including women, as well as children and members of marginalized groups, feel
protected.

12/60

21-08609

S/2021/601

Annex V
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister for
Defence of Ireland, Simon Coveney
I would like to thank Special Representative Lyons and the Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Ms. Waly, and in particular
Ms. Akrami for her remarks and her personal experience.
I would also like to acknowledge the presence of my colleague, the Foreign
Minister, Mohammad Haneef Atmar, and also thank him for his contribution.
Given the magnitude of the challenges facing Afghanistan, the Council must
ensure that the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has the
backing necessary for its critical work.
Ireland looks forward to working with the Special Representative and with
Council members on the UNAMA mandate renewal over the coming months.
I would like to make three points, if I may, on today’s debate.
My first point is to express our concern at the lack of progress in the peace
process.
Violence is causing or exacerbating the many challenges facing Afghanistan,
making it the most dangerous country in the world for civilians today. Continued
conflict and instability in Afghanistan also threaten regional peace and security.
Recent months have seen deliberate and sickening attacks against journalists,
civil society actors, human rights defenders and humanitarian and medical workers,
as well as minorities.
We have seen abhorrent violence directed towards schoolchildren, adding to the
already high level of grave violence committed against Afghan children.
It is deeply disturbing that women and girls are being specifically targeted to
sow fear about the exercise of their fundamental rights.
I utterly condemn these attacks and their intent, and our thoughts are of course
with the victims and their families.
The people of Afghanistan have repeatedly made clear their strong desire for
peace. Those engaged in violence – including the Taliban – must respect this desire.
A ceasefire and a serious engagement in peace negotiations are the only way to end
the cycle of violence.
Ireland and our European Union partners are also clear that any easing of
sanctions and restrictions can only be considered when genuine progress is
demonstrated on reducing violence and in advancing the peace negotiations, in
accordance with resolution 2513 (2020).
The Doha negotiations have the full support of the international community, and
I thank Qatar for facilitating these negotiations.
The peace process must remain Afghan-owned and Afghan-led, but Ireland
supports an enhanced role for the United Nations in facilitating and supporting the
parties.
I urge Afghanistan’s neighbours and regional partners to use their influence to
promote a sustainable peace, and welcome the engagement of the Secretary -General’s
Personal Envoy in building regional consensus for peace initiatives.

21-08609

13/60

S/2021/601

It is also crucial that Afghanistan never again be used as a base for international
terrorism or as a centre for illicit drug production that finances and fuels terrorism
and organized crime.
My second point is that all Afghans, and especially women, need to be
meaningfully engaged in peace negotiations and the protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms.
For Ireland, ensuring women are at the table in all peace talks and processes is
not empty rhetoric. It is a position that has been informed by lived experience on our
own island.
Globally, the evidence speaks for itself. Women’s participation in peace
processes contributes to stronger outcomes and to better and more enduring peace
agreements.
Afghan women are demanding to be heard. Yet they continue to be severely
underrepresented in, and excluded from, peace negotiations. This is unacceptable and
must be remedied. Participation is their right.
The peace process in its substance must also protect the rights of women. The
international community cannot support any rollback of the rights of more than half
of the Afghan population. Women’s rights cannot be the price of peace.
Fair and inclusive representation also means ensuring the participation of
Afghanistan’s young people, civil society and minority groups.
When I spoke at the Afghanistan Conference last November, I set out our
position on current and future support to the Afghan Government, which relies on
adherence to the principles set out in the Afghanistan Partnership Framework.
Minorities in Afghanistan must be able to live in peace and security.
All Afghans must be afforded equal rights to reach their own potential.
My third point is on the need for a response to the rapidly deteriorating human
rights and humanitarian situation in Afghanistan.
Some 14 million Afghans are experiencing severe food insecurity. Half of all
children under the age of 5 are suffering from malnutrition.
Ireland will support the Afghan Government in addressing the country’s urgent
humanitarian and security needs. Humanitarian actors are needed in Afghanistan now
more than ever and must be protected and supported.
I condemn in the strongest terms the recent attacks on vaccination workers and
against Halo Trust employees, whose demining work was helping local communitie s
to live and farm safely.
While having made little contribution to climate change globally, Afghanistan
is particularly at risk from the impacts of climate change.
Compounding this are the decades of conflict, which have prevented the
necessary adaptation and mitigation measures from being taken, further increasing
the country’s vulnerability.
Ireland, as co-chair of the Informal Expert Group on Climate and Security, will
work to ensure that the Council does more to understand the impact of climate -related
security risks, which undoubtedly are contributing to an already difficult and unstable
situation in Afghanistan.
In conclusion, I call again on the Taliban to rejoin and constructively engage in
the Doha process, which clearly has not been happening.
14/60

21-08609

S/2021/601

Doing so is essential to building peace. It is essential to determining
Afghanistan’s governance and its future. And it is essential to addressing the urgent
humanitarian and development needs of the Afghan people.
We as a Council must stand with Afghanistan and its people.
We will continue to support their desire to build a fair and sustainable peace and
a stable and prosperous future for all Afghans.

21-08609

15/60

S/2021/601

Annex VI
Statement by the Minister for External Affairs of India,
Subrahmanyam Jaishankar
We have noted the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Afghanistan issued last week. The report is clear that the intra-Afghan talks have not
resulted in a reduction of violence in Afghanistan. On the contrary, violence has only
increased, especially after 1 May. The country has been witnessing targeted attacks
on religious and ethnic minorities, girl students, Afghan security forces, Ulemas,
women occupying positions of responsibility, journalists, civil rights activists and
youth.
It is therefore crucial that the international community and, in particular, the
Council press for a permanent and comprehensive ceasefire to ensure an immediate
reduction in violence and protection of civilian lives.
A durable peace in Afghanistan requires a genuine “double peace”. That is,
peace within Afghanistan and peace around Afghanistan. It requires harmonizing the
interests of all, both within and around that country.
India has been supportive of all the efforts being made to accelerate the dialogue
between the Afghan Government and the Taliban, including the intra -Afghan
negotiations. If the peace process is to be successful, then it is necessary to ensure
that the negotiating parties continue to engage in good faith, eschew the path to
finding a military solution and fully commit towards reaching a political solution. A
tangible demonstration of this commitment is required.
India welcomes any move towards a genuine political settlement and a
comprehensive and permanent ceasefire in Afghanistan. We support a leading role for
the United Nations, since that would help improve the odds for a lasting and durable
outcome.
I would like to reiterate our support for an inclusive, Afghan-led, Afghan-owned
and Afghan-controlled peace process. Any political settlement in Afghanistan must
ensure that the gains of the last two decades are protected and not reversed. It should,
therefore, preserve the constitutional democratic framework and ensure the protection
of the rights of women, children and minorities.
For enduring peace in Afghanistan, terrorist safe havens and sanctuaries must
be dismantled immediately and terrorist supply chains disrupted. There needs to be
zero tolerance for terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, including the cross border one. It is equally important to ensure that the territory of Afghanistan is not
used by terrorist groups to threaten or attack any other country. Those providing
material and financial support to terrorist entities must be held accountable. We, as
an international community, must ensure that our commitments to Afghanistan,
including to its various institutions, are maintained.
For Afghanistan’s economic development, it is important to have unhindered
access to the high seas. The international community should work towards the
removal of artificial transit barriers imposed on Afghanistan and ensure full transit
rights guaranteed to Afghanistan under bilateral and multilateral transit agreements
without any hindrance.
India remains committed to steadfastly supporting Afghanistan during its
transition. Our development partnership, including more than 550 community
development projects covering all 34 provinces, is aimed at making Afghanistan a
self-sustaining nation. Additionally, we have recently signed a memora ndum of

16/60

21-08609

S/2021/601

understanding with the Government of Afghanistan for building the Shahtoot dam,
which would provide safe drinking water to the residents of Kabul city.
To provide greater regional connectivity, India has operationalized air freight
corridors and the Chabahar port. India also extended humanitarian assistance of
75,000 metric tons of wheat to Afghanistan through the Chabahar port to overcome
food insecurity in view of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
Furthermore, as a part of our endeavour to help Afghanistan tide over the
COVID-19 pandemic, we have supplied made-in-India vaccines to Afghanistan, both
bilaterally and through the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility.
India continues to stand with Afghanistan in ensuring the restoration of
normalcy through a legitimate democratic process that is essential for the long -term
stability of Afghanistan and the region. India will continue to provide all support to
the Government and people of Afghanistan in realizing their aspir ations for a
peaceful, democratic and prosperous future, free of terror, so as to protect and
promote the rights and interests of all sections of Afghan society.

21-08609

17/60

S/2021/601

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Linda Thomas-Greenfield
I thank Foreign Minister Liimets and Estonia for hosting this very important
meeting. I also thank Special Representative Lyons for her very sobering and frank
assessment of the situation in Afghanistan. I than k Ms. Akrami for her briefing and
her commitment to women and girls. I also would like to thank the Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Ms. Waly, for her
discussion on the important work of UNODC, which is of critica l importance to
Afghanistan and its neighbours. And finally, I welcome Foreign Minister Atmar.
President Biden announced in April, after 20 long years, that the United States
will be withdrawing all troops from Afghanistan. Let me stress that this was not a
decision that was taken lightly. It was made after close consultation with our allies
and our partners. And I stress also that our commitment to Afghanistan’s safety and
security endures. We will use our full diplomatic, economic and assistance toolkit to
support the peaceful, stable future the Afghan people want and deserve. And we will
continue to support the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces in securing their
country. To that end, today I would like to talk about three aspects of Afghanistan ’s
security: providing humanitarian aid, stopping violence and drug trafficking and
supporting the peace process.
First, as part of our commitment to Afghanistan’s future, the United States is
providing more than $266 million in new humanitarian assistanc e. That brings total
United States humanitarian aid for Afghanistan to nearly $3.9 billion since 2002 – on
top of the $36 billion in civilian development assistance we have also provided since
that time. Some 18 million people in Afghanistan are in despera te need – and more
than 4.8 million are internally displaced. Add on increased food security and a surge
of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) cases, and it is clear that Afghanistan needs
humanitarian support. So, we strongly encourage other donors to support Afghanistan’s
immediate humanitarian needs.
Second, we have now seen months of unacceptable violence, often directed
towards ethnic and religious minorities and innocent women and young girls. In other
words, the country’s most vulnerable people are being attacked. And I want to extend
my deepest condolences to these victims and their families, and in particular the
Hazara community that has been so acutely impacted by these attacks. All Afghans –
all Afghans – deserve the opportunity to go about their days – doing their jobs,
attending schools, shopping in markets – without fearing for their lives. In particular,
we need to preserve the progress Afghan women and girls have made by protecting
their rights and freedoms, moving forward. So, we are encourage d to see the
Secretary-General’s Personal Envoy on Afghanistan and Regional Issues, Jean Arnault,
travel to the region. We look forward to hearing his assessment when he returns.
Everyone who can influence the parties involved – including Afghanistan’s
neighbours – should step up now to secure the region and promote peace and stability.
Like us, Afghanistan’s neighbours want to ensure terrorists can never use Afghanistan
to threaten the security of any country. An Afghanistan at peace with itself and its
neighbours can link the economies of South and Central Asia and provide safety and
security for all. So, it is also in everyone’s interest to stop the flow of drugs into
regional and international markets. The cultivation of opium poppy, and the drug
trafficking it spawns, can be devastating to families and communities inside and
outside Afghanistan. The United States is therefore proud to support Afghan farmers,
including women, to create sustainable livelihoods as alternatives to poppy cultivation.

18/60

21-08609

S/2021/601

Third and finally, the parties to this conflict must press forward on a peaceful
resolution in Afghanistan which protects the gains of the last two decades. We have
all heard Special Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons’s appeal. We must push
for meaningful and inclusive negotiations – with the full participation of women – that
will lead to a permanent and comprehensive ceasefire and a just and durable political
settlement. To the Taliban, we reiterate that the military path will not lead to
legitimacy. As many of us have stated, including my colleagues on the Council from
Europe, Russia and China, there is no military solution in Afghanistan. The world will
not recognize the establishment in Afghanistan of any government imposed by force,
nor the restoration of the Islamic Emirate. There is only one way forward: a negotiated
and inclusive political settlement through an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned process.
To close, I would like to thank our partners and allies working to maintain
international civilian and diplomatic operations in Afghanistan. These efforts reflect
an important consensus that we must sustain support for peace efforts and continue
providing needed civilian and humanitarian assistance. And in the meantime, we urge
Afghans themselves to remain resolute in their efforts to achieve a peaceful future for
their country. The international community is behind you.

21-08609

19/60

S/2021/601

Annex VIII
Statement by the State Secretary at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
of Norway, Audun Halvorsen
Let me initially express my gratitude to Foreign Minister Liimets and the rest
of our Estonian co-penholders on the Afghanistan file for their able work in preparing
for this meeting. I also wish to take this opportunity to salute the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Lyons and her dedicated staff for the relentless efforts they make
to address the demanding issues confronting Afghanistan.
We also express our support to the United Nations Office on D rugs and Crime
(UNODC) on Afghanistan’s narcotics situation. This is important as the UNODC
Afghanistan opium survey documented a 37 per cent increase in areas under opium
poppy cultivation in 2020. And I would like to thank Mary Akrami of the Afghan
Women’s Network for the insightful presentation that she shared with us.
Afghanistan is at a critical juncture. The international military withdrawal is
proceeding at phase. The level of violence is high, aggravated by numerous targeted
attacks against civilians, including aid workers, human rights defenders and
minorities. This calls for an immediate and meaningful reduction in violence and
progress in the peace process. We are hopeful that the negotiations in Doha will yield
results. The Afghan parties must own the process and recognize their responsibility
in leading the way to peace. Simultaneously, the international community must do
more to demonstrate solidarity and support to the Afghan people in their efforts at
ending four decades of conflict.
The humanitarian situation is grave. In addition to suffering from conflict and
growing poverty, Afghans may once more face dreadful consequences of drought and
food insecurity. The continuing high level of violence in Afghanistan and its impact
on civilians are appalling. We strongly condemn the targeting of humanitarian aid
workers, most recently against mine clearers in Laghman Province and vaccine
providers in Nangarhar.
Threats and killings of media workers and human rights defenders also give
ground for deep concern.
Targeted attacks create a climate of fear and undermine the work towards
sustainable peace, democracy and protection of human rights, like freedom of
expression.
Attacks must be investigated, and perpetrators held to account. The Sec retaryGeneral’s report on children and armed conflict shows that Afghanistan remains
among the countries most affected by attacks on schools and hospitals.
A horrific example was the May assault on a school in a Hazara district in Kabul.
Furthermore, the conflict and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
fuel absenteeism and school closures. Children are deprived of access to education,
which increases other protection risks, including the recruitment and use of children
in armed conflict. Recent reports regarding the detention of children for alleged
association with armed groups cause concern.
We urge the Afghan Government, United Nations agencies and donors to
urgently establish appropriate reintegration programmes to facilitate their return to
civilian society. The violence across the country underlines the need for rapid
progress in the peace process. Norway remains committed to supporting this process
in any way the parties desire. Again, we wish to underscore the importance of creating
20/60

21-08609

S/2021/601

an inclusive peace process, where various groups of society have a voice and proper
representation.
The full participation of women in all phases and aspects of peace and security
processes should be emphasized. Women have a right to participate and to have a say
in their own future. We must also listen intently and centre the needs and concerns of
civil society in Afghanistan, and in women’s groups, for whom violence is not abstract
but a daily reality, and ensure that women peacebuilders, human rights defe nders and
media workers can safely continue their work.
We urge the United Nations and UNAMA leadership to exercise their influence
in ensuring that Afghan women are not on the sidelines in any peace process, but have
particular dedicated seats at the negotiation table.
Afghanistan is entering uncertain and challenging times. This calls for renewed
support from the international community. Norway and Afghanistan have a long
record of partnership. This will continue even as the international military oper ation
ends.
Our substantial humanitarian and development assistance will be maintained, as
will our commitment to the Afghan peace process.
Our engagement is also visible in the Council and its role in supporting the
ongoing peace efforts. We see the UNAMA mandate renewal in September as a
milestone in this regard and look forward to engaging with you on the path towards
renewal in the coming weeks.

21-08609

21/60

S/2021/601

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
I thank Foreign Minister Liimets and Special Representative Lyons, the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Ms. Waly, and
the Executive Director of the Afghan Women’s Network, Ms. Akrami, for thei r
briefings. I also welcome the participation of Mohammad Haneef Atmar, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, at today’s meeting.
On 12 September, Afghans took a significant first step on the road to peace, with
the start of peace negotiations in Doha.
However, progress has been slow, and Afghans continue to suffer from
debilitating levels of violence, against a backdrop of humanitarian need exacerbated
by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
As the North Atlantic Treaty Organization Resolute Support Mission comes to
an end, I want to make clear that the United Kingdom remains fully committed to
Afghanistan.
We will continue our enduring partnership with the Government of Afghanistan
through our diplomacy and our development work, and we will continue to back its
efforts to counter terrorism with support for the security sector.
If Afghanistan is to become the peaceful, prosperous and stable country that the
Afghan people want and deserve, it is vital that the entire international commun ity
intensifies support for the country.
Today I want to emphasize three points.
First, that the United Kingdom condemns, in the strongest possible terms, the
unacceptable levels of violence that innocent Afghans continue to suffer.
We are particularly sickened by the ongoing spate of targeted assassinations.
These attacks on State officials, civil society activists, journalists, humanitarian and
health-care workers, as well as women in prominent positions, are heinous and they
undermine efforts to build peace.
Let us be clear. The Taliban are responsible for most of the violence acr oss
Afghanistan, and it is vital that we continue to leave them in no doubt: if the Taliban
want a part in Afghanistan’s future and the international community, then they must
end violence and respect the rights of all Afghans.
Second, the United Kingdom wants to work with you all to energize the Afghan
peace negotiations.
Only a negotiated and inclusive settlement will bring sustainable peace.
So the Taliban must engage meaningfully in peace talks and work towards a
political settlement that protects the progress made in the country, including
protections for women and minority groups. There can be no return to the intolerant
and barbaric Islamic Emirate of the 1990s.
The United Nations has an important role to play. The United Kingdom would
welcome an enhanced United Nations role in the peace process, including facilitating
talks if the parties agree.
We are pleased to see Jean Arnault take up his role as the Secretary -General’s
Personal Envoy.

22/60

21-08609

S/2021/601

We are confident he can build on the strong foundations laid by Special
Representative Lyons, and that together you can help create the space and opportunity
for negotiations to progress.
Finally, we look forward to working with Council members on UNAMA’s
mandate renewal in September.
The United Kingdom will support the continuation of UNAMA’s role leading
and coordinating international civilian efforts in Afghanistan.
The mandate must also give UNAMA full scope to continue to support the
Government and people of Afghanistan on the road to peace.
We are in no doubt about the challenges ahead, but we remain hopeful that
Afghanistan can become a more stable, peaceful and prosperous nation that respects
the rights of all Afghans, including women and minorities.
The United Kingdom stands ready to work with you all towards that goal.

21-08609

23/60

S/2021/601

Annex X
[Original: Chinese]

Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
I would like to thank Foreign Minister Liimets for presiding over the meeting,
Special Representative Lyons and Executive Director Waly for their briefings, and
Ms. Akrami for her statement. I also welcome the presence of His Excellency Haneef
Atmar, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, at today’s meeting.
The current situation in Afghanistan has reached a critical crossroads and is
entering a new stage filled with uncertainty. We can see that since the United States
announced its military withdrawal in mid-April, the internal negotiations among the
Afghan people have not advanced but retreated, the security situation has gone from
bad to worse, and the economic and humanitarian situation has become increasingly
grim. China is deeply concerned about this. We should seriously consider what has
led to the current situation in Afghanistan, and how is Afghanistan to achieve long
term stability in the next stage?
The fate of Afghanistan is in the hands of the Afghan people, and the future
political arrangements for Afghanistan should be decided by the Afghan people
independently. The international community should abide by the principle of “Afghan
led, Afghan owned”, scrupulously uphold fairness and justice, and contribute more
positive energy to promoting the peace and reconciliation process in Afghanistan. No
external force can seek narrow self interest in Afghanistan, nor can it regard
Afghanistan as an arena for geopolitical games.
All parties in Afghanistan should prioritize the interests of the country and the
people, consolidate the progress of peaceful reconstruction over the past 20 years,
and explore a governance model and development path in line with Afghanistan’s
national conditions. Although the progress of the Afghan peace talks is slow, it has
been hard won and cannot be cast away. It is hoped that all parties to the Afghan peace
talks will earnestly seek consensus and clarify the road map and timetable for
reconciliation as soon as possible. China welcomes the recent resumption of contacts
between the domestic negotiating team and the Taliban delegation in Doha, and hopes
that the two sides can restart a new round of negotiations as soon as possible. China
is ready to hold an inter Afghan dialogue at an appropriate time, and will facilitate
and support that effort.
Peace talks require a peaceful and stable environment. At pr esent, violent
incidents are occurring frequently in Afghanistan, with security incidents from
February to May increasing by nearly 30 per cent year on year. Since May, the
Security Council has issued three presidential press statements on violent attacks in
Afghanistan. China condemns all violent attacks against civilians and calls for a
ceasefire as soon as possible. We welcome the short-term ceasefire between the
Afghan Government and the Taliban during Eid al-Fitr, and hope that both sides will
create more favourable conditions and gradually expand the duration and scope of the
ceasefire.
For some time to come, the withdrawal of foreign forces will remain the biggest
external factor affecting the situation in Afghanistan. Foreign troops cannot simply
arrive and depart at will. China urges foreign forces to withdraw in a responsible and
orderly manner, fully consult with the Afghan Government on post withdrawal
arrangements, enhance transparency for countries in the region, and prevent the
security situation from deteriorating or even getting out of control. Terrorism is still
24/60

21-08609

S/2021/601

a serious challenge for Afghanistan and other countries in the region. All parties
should make greater efforts to crack down on Al-Qaida, Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, the Eastern Turkistan Islamic Movement and other terrorist organizations to
prevent the return of terrorist forces. China opposes any politicization of counter
terrorism or the application of double standards to it.
Lasting peace cannot be separated from strong development support. The
international community should continue to support the peace and reconciliation
process in Afghanistan, help Afghanistan promote regional cooperation, strengthen
its Internet connectivity, and enhance its capacity for independent development. We
should assist Afghanistan in implementing the National Peace and Development
Framework for 2021 to 2025 and resolving issues ranging from drugs and poverty to
refugees. Developed countries should earnestly fulfil their commitments and conti nue
to provide development and humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has played
an important role in supporting the peaceful reconstruction of Afghanistan, and its
mandate will expire in September this year. Under the current situation, there is great
uncertainty regarding the conditions under which UNAMA will operate in the future.
The United Nations should continue to play a role in Afghanistan, but its effective
duties remain inseparable from security. As for what form the United Nations
presence in Afghanistan will take after September, we ask the Secretary -General to
propose specific arrangements and a range of options for consideration by the
Security Council as early as possible.
As a friendly neighbour of Afghanistan, China has been actively supporting the
Afghan peace process and making efforts in this regard. In May, State Councillor and
Foreign Minister Wang Yi presided over the “China + Central Asia (C+C5)” Foreign
Ministers’ meeting, which issued a joint statement specifically focused on
Afghanistan. In June, State Councillor Wang Yi presided over the fourth trilateral
dialogue among Foreign Ministers of China, Afghanistan and Pakistan, putting
forward important suggestions on promoting peace and reconciliation in Afghanistan.
China also actively promotes a greater role for the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization on the issue of peace and reconciliation in Afghanistan. Currently, a
memorandum of understanding on joint Chinese and Afghan construction under the
Belt and Road Initiative is being implemented in an orderly manner, and China has
provided billions of yuan in grant aid to Afghanistan. Since the outbreak of the
coronavirus disease (COVID 19), China has also provided many shipment s of goods
and materials, as well as emergency food aid, to combat the epidemic in Afghanistan.
Some seven hundred thousand doses of COVID-19 vaccines arrived in Kabul in early
June, along with ventilators, anaesthesia equipment and other medical supplies.
China will do its best to continue to be a supporter, intermediary and facilitator
of the peace and reconciliation process in Afghanistan, with a view to helping
Afghanistan achieve peace, stability, development and prosperity at an early date.

21-08609

25/60

S/2021/601

Annex XI
[Original: French]

Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
We have heard from the speakers about the gravity of the situation in
Afghanistan today, on both the security and humanitarian levels. At the same time,
the peace process is continuing. It is incumbent on all of us to continue to support it.
In order to do so, we must take action on four priorities:
1.
Reject and condemn violence. We have already said this in this room. The
level of violence is unacceptable: every day the civilian population pays a heavy
price. On several occasions the Council has condemned the heinous attacks against
the men and women who are building the Afghanistan of tomorrow. We call for a
ceasefire in accordance with Security Council resolutions 2532 (2020) and 2565
(2021). We strongly condemn all violence against humanitarian personnel, like that
which recently took place at Jalalabad. Respect for international humanitarian law,
human rights and fundamental freedoms, including freedom of the press, by all parties
is non-negotiable. Those who are responsible for these terrible crimes must be held
accountable. There can be no impunity for them.
2.
Demand a sincere commitment from all the parties. Our expectation of the
Taliban is that they will truly engage in the negotiations. The Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) is in the process of
examining requests for extension of exemptions to the travel ban to allow their
negotiating team to travel to where the peace talks are being held. These exemptions,
as with any change to the list of sanctions imposed by resolution 1988 (2011), are
neither an automatic right nor a free gift. They are a concession made, not to the
Taliban, but to peace. Any change to this list can only be made on the basis of an
evaluation of the real investment in peace of those listed, and on a case -by-case basis.
If the Taliban do not respect their commitments, they must bear the consequences.
3.
No violation of our values and principles. We are su pporting a peace
process belonging to the Afghan people, who are responsible for it. The commitment
by the international community, whether the United Nations, the countries of the
region or those who welcome initiatives to promote peace, is essential. We commend
the work of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) as well
as the appointment of Jean Arnault. All initiatives to promote peace are welcome, but
they must be coordinated and based on the same principles: the full participation of
women as well as the preservation of democratic gains made over the past 20 years.
I would like to commend the statement by Mary Akrami, which outlined the essential
contribution of women and civil society to the peace talks. The world has changed
and so has Afghanistan; peace cannot be achieved by going backward.
4.
Take action against drug trafficking, which is a real poison and a hindrance
to peace. Peace cannot be sustainable without bringing an end to this scourge. As we
have heard from Ghada Fathi Waly, the situation is worsening. The increase in
trafficking has had and will have an impact on peace, the Afghan people and the
region. This is a subject of major concern. We welcome the new role of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and call on all Afghanistan’s partners to combat
this scourge.

26/60

21-08609

S/2021/601

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Martin Kimani
I congratulate Eva-Maria Liimets for convening this meeting and I thank
Deborah Lyons, Ghada Fathi Ismail Waly and Mary Akrami for their briefings.
I also welcome the participation of Mohammad Haneef Atmar, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan.
This debate is taking place at a defining moment in Afghanistan. We can all
recall the world-shaking events that led to the intervention in Afghanistan that is now
ending as the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) draws down.
Al-Qaida in Afghanistan is today a pale shadow of its former strength. Its ability
to plan, train for and carry out major global operations as it did in the United States
on 9/11 and had done in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998 has been comprehensively
undermined. For that, Kenya recognizes the valuable service that NATO has done for
the international community.
However, as the withdrawal gets under way, Afghanistan is in a precarious
security situation marked by frequent attacks on multiple targets by multiple groups,
including the Taliban. The peace process is stalled, and there is a mounting spate of
targeted attacks against civil society and religious and ethnic minorities.
There are credible concerns that the gains in women’s equity and inclusion in
multiple arenas of Afghan life will now be rolled back.
Kenya urges the Taliban and all other political and militant groups in
Afghanistan to make it clear that they will recognize the rights of women to education,
professional opportunity, freedom to choose their partners and safety from all forms
of gender-based and sexual violence.
Doing so will be key to Afghanistan building the opportunity, prosperity and
hope that allows it to build and sustain peace in this, and coming, generations.
Any review of the 1988 sanction measures targeted at the Taliban should be in
line with resolution 2513 (2020) and predicated on the Taliban ceasing its violent
activities and targeted attacks. In addition, any proposal to delist some of its members
should only be considered on merit and on a case-by-case basis.
Kenya supports conditions-based withdrawals of regional and international
peacekeeping and peace enforcement missions. Those conditions must be disciplined
and focused on the clear aims that led to the intervention in the first place.
For Afghanistan, this was the presence of Al-Qaida as an international terrorist
group with hostile designs against international peace and security that it had the
ability to put into practice in multiple theatres.
For now, this is no longer the case, meaning that the challenge now is to ensure
that the withdrawal does not lead to major enduring challenges to the peace and
security of Afghanistan and its immediate region.
It must also be made clear to all political parties and groupings in Afghanistan
that any resurgence of international terrorism in the country will meet with immediate
consequences.
In this regard, we should all be gravely concerned that attacks by Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant – Khorasan Province (ISIL-K) increased to 88 compared with
16 during the same period last year.
21-08609

27/60

S/2021/601

The Council must take a unified and unyielding stand against these acts of
terrorism that is consistent with its resolutions.
Kenya now calls for the international community to do its utmost to support
Afghanistan during this period of transition. That will require assistance and
partnership in strengthening the peace process, offering development assistance,
training and facilitating effective security and suppressing regional and international
criminal networks that operate in the country.
It will also call for major efforts aimed at the education and professional and
economic empowerment of women.
The peace process must remain Afghan-led and be all-inclusive. There must be
space at the negotiating table for all sectors of the population. Wo men should be
represented equitably in the High Council for National Reconciliation and should be
full, equal and meaningful participants at the negotiation table.
We call for the immediate cessation of hostilities. All the parties must heed the
calls for a renewed commitment to constructively engage in political dialogue.
International engagement must be coordinated, sustained and linked to
economic and financial aid that is designed to address fragility and is inclusive and
fair in its implementation. It should also be aligned to the priorities of the Afghan
Government.
We welcome and encourage the continued implementation by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) of the nine local peace
initiatives involving engagement with youth and religious scholars on peace and
mediation efforts in several provinces.
On the humanitarian aspects, we are gravely concerned that nearly half of the
population is in need of assistance due. The dire situation is compounded by the
effects of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
Kenya appeals to the international community to scale up emergency aid
contribution and assistance. We also call for assistance for vaccine access and
distribution.
The Government and all parties must also keep humanitarian corridors safe and
open for assistance.
I conclude by commending Deborah Lyons, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of UNAMA, her team and all United Nations personnel
in Afghanistan for their commitment to service despite the challenges.
I reaffirm Kenya’s unqualified support for an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
peace process that responds to the needs and aspirations of the entire population of
Afghanistan.

28/60

21-08609

S/2021/601

Annex XIII
[Original: Spanish]

Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations, Juan Ramon de la Fuente
We wish to thank Estonia for convening this debate. We welcome the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, Mohammad Haneef Atmar, as well as the senior
officials who have participated in this meeting, and thank Special Representative
Lyons for her report. We also welcome the participation of Ms. Akrami in today’s
debate as a representative of civil society.
Over the past two decades, Afghanistan has continued to be a subject of concern
to the Security Council. Mexico recognizes the resilience of the Afghan people and
notes that there has been significant progress, which must be preserved.
In light of the complex situation prevailing, we would briefly like to raise the
following points:
The parties must resume dialogue without delay. The peace negotiations were a
watershed and a major achievement in the reconciliation process. The resumption of
the negotiations depends to some extent on coordinated and effective action by the
international community. My country expresses its support to the initiatives at the
bilateral, regional and multilateral levels that have promoted progress in the peace
process. But it is not possible to understand the situation in Afghanistan without
listening to women, nor will it be possible to make progress without their participation
in all decision-making processes and giving them a seat at the table for any dialogue.
The future of Afghanistan must be democratic, inclusive and peaceful. It is
therefore essential to preserve the progress of the past 20, in particular the economic
and social rights of women, youth and minorities. We welcome the formation of the
High Council of State by President Ghani, and call for its membership to reflect a
plurality of Afghan voices.
The security situation in Afghanistan is very fragile. The increased activity by
terrorist groups like Al Qaeda and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant -Khorasan
is of concern. We condemn the deliberate attacks against the civilian population:
women, girls, students, humanitarian workers, the health sector and the
communications media.
The withdrawal of international troops should be orderly and coordinated. It is
essential to avoid any negative impact on regional dynamics or on the ability of the
Afghan armed forces to confront terrorism. The territory gained at enormous human
and economic cost in the fight against this scourge must not be lost.
The conditions must be created for improvement in the humanitarian situation.
Around half of the Afghan people require humanitarian aid. We recognize the
commitment of humanitarian workers despite the interference and aggression they
have suffered. Humanitarian operations must be able to act in an independent,
impartial, efficient and timely manner, and the role of the United Nations As sistance
Mission in Afghanistan in coordinating these efforts is essential.
In the coming months it will be crucial for the various key actors in the peace
process to maintain flexibility with regard to the work of the United Nations in their
country. We will be waiting for the reports on the activities of Mr. Arnault.

21-08609

29/60

S/2021/601

Annex XIV
[Original: French]

Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
First of all, I would like to thank Ms. Lyons for her very informative
presentation. Niger recognizes the important work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) on a daily basis to promote peace, good
governance and development in Afghanistan.
I would also like to thank Ms. Waly and Ms. Akrami for their contributions to
today’s debate.
After decades of war, destruction and desolation, today the only aspiration of
the Afghan people is for peace. This is a profound aspiration, which the Afghan people
have demonstrated by welcoming with high hopes the beginning of the intra -Afghan
peace talks in September 2020 at Doha.
In must be noted, however, that after many rounds of negotiations, the process
is at a standstill, at a time when Afghanistan is experiencing a resurgence of violence,
undermining hopes for a swift peace agreement. This cycle of violence must urgently
be brought to an end in order to achieve a peaceful settlement of the conflict.
My delegation wishes to reiterate its strong condemnation of the recent
indiscriminate attacks on civilian targets, in particular schools, hospitals and ethnic
and religious minority areas. The perpetrators of such acts must of course answer for
their actions to the competent authorities.
To have validity, any peace process must take into consideration the
constitutional rights of Afghan women and youth and the preservation of the gains of
the past two decades in terms of respect for the rights of minorities in particular, as
contained in the Afghan Constitution.
The post-conflict reconstruction period is just as important for Afghanistan. It
is imperative for the negotiations to cover the question of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants, as well as reform of the
security sector.
Peace cannot return to Afghanistan unless we find an urgent and durable solution
to the grave humanitarian crisis affecting the country. The effects of several decades
of conflict, coupled with climate change and the coronavirus disease (C OVID-19)
pandemic, have created a situation where over a third of the population, many of them
children, face some level of food insecurity. Resources must urgently be mobilized to
address this situation.
While the nations of Europe and America are entering the phase of reopening
their borders and lifting restrictions and other measures imposed related to
COVID-19, it must be noted that in most developing countries like Afghanistan, the
pandemic continues to pose major challenges to a health system that ha s already been
bled dry; vaccination coverage has barely reached 1 per cent of the target population.
In seeking a durable solution to the Afghanistan crisis, battling the pandemic as
well as an appropriate response to the security risks related to climate change are
challenges that must be met. Niger, which has been working closely with Ireland on
the issue of climate in relation to conflict, is of the view that it would thus be
appropriate for the Security Council to consider climate-related security risks in the
renewal of the UNAMA mandate this coming September.
30/60

21-08609

S/2021/601

In conclusion, while we are discussing the situation in Afghanistan, we should
keep in mind that it is first and foremost up to the Afghans to define their country’s
future, and the best way to help them is to listen to and support them. After many
years of war, with its toll of death and destruction, the Afghan people should finally
control their own destiny.

21-08609

31/60

S/2021/601

Annex XV
[Original: Russian]

Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, A. M. Evstigneeva
We thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
Deborah Lyons, for her observations and assessments of the situation in Afghanistan.
UNAMA plays an important role in coordinating international assistance to the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan. We listened attentively to the drug threat
assessments presented by the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Ghada Waly. We thank the Director of the Afghan
Women’s Network, Mary Akrami, for her statement. We welcome the participation of
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, Mohammad Haneef Atmar.
Today’s meeting is taking place against the backdrop of the announced
withdrawal of foreign troops from Afghanistan on 14 April. The deteriorating
situation is a cause for increased concern. The balance of power today looks
unpromising. Violence in the country is rampant.
As was the case more than two decades ago, the continuing terrorist threat in
the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan remains a serious challenge. Over the years, the
situation in that regard has deteriorated owing to the emergence of Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other terrorist organization s and related groups in the
country. Militants with sleeper cells in the north and east of the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan are building the capacity to consolidate their influence in the country and
for terrorist activity to spill over into the Central Asian region. ISIL-Khorasan’s
Afghan wing has not lost its ability to stage large-scale suicide and improvised
explosive device attacks in various parts of the country, including Kabul. Fresh
evidence of their atrocities is the heinous attacks on a girls’ school in May and on a
group of explosive ordnance disposal engineers in June. Attacks against religious and
ethnic minorities by ISIL fighters remain a sad trend. In addition to civilians,
including women and children, Afghan soldiers and police officers are dying every
day at the hands of terrorists. We pay tribute to their heroism and courage. The desire
to instil fear in, and a sense of continued violence among, ordinary Afghans is clearly
behind the actions of these thugs.
The terrorist threat and the narcotics problem are inextricably linked.
Unfortunately, despite the efforts being made, the situation with regard to drug
production and trafficking remains of grave concern. Afghan narcotics remain a
potent breeding ground for terrorism and a source o f revenue for militants. The rather
narrow coverage of the topic in the Secretary-General’s report is disappointing. We
find it unacceptable to gloss over or minimize the terrorist and drug-related challenges
in the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, especially in the current circumstances.
We remain committed to our obligations to promote a comprehensive response
to the drug threat, including in cooperation with UNODC. Our practical steps are also
in line with this approach, including through the Shanghai C ooperation Organization
and the Collective Security Treaty Organization. We will continue to contribute to the
training of narcotics police from Afghanistan, Pakistan and the countries of Central
Asia, in cooperation with many States around the world, including Japan. We will
continue to provide assistance and support to our Afghan friends, including within the
framework of the Paris Pact.

32/60

21-08609

S/2021/601

Against that backdrop, we regret to note that the peace process has stalled. We
see that attempts to organize an international meeting were not successful. We are
convinced that the key to the success of the event lies in working diligently with all
parties to ensure the participation of Government and Taliban representatives in the
event.
Russia has consistently supported the Afghan-led peace process. We are
sincerely interested in promoting the peace process and the resulting stabilization of
the country’s situation as quickly as possible. We believe firmly that everyone –
Afghanistan, its neighbours in the region and the world at large – wins when there is
peace, stability and national reconciliation.
We have done a great deal to initiate a national reconciliation process and direct
inter-Afghan dialogue. This remains the focus of the troika plus Pakistan’s efforts.
Unlike other previously established formats, the extended troika has repeatedly
proved its significance and relevance, as well as its ability to add momentum to the
peace process, not through words but through deeds. That is evidenced by the
meetings involving Government and Taliban delegations held in Moscow on
18 March, as well as the meeting held in Doha on 30 April. Both events resulted in
joint statements reflecting common approaches to a peaceful settlement and a future
political settlement with regard to Afghanistan, the sanctions regime imposed by
resolution 1988 (2011) and other substantive issues.
We note the growing global understanding of the importance of the regional
context for an Afghan settlement. Maintaining regional consensus remains a
tremendous help in facilitating a solution. We note the need to harness the potential
of established structures, first and foremost the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
We particularly wish to single out the revived mechanism of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization-Afghanistan Contact Group. We see good potential for
strengthening cooperation between Afghanistan and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization.
We are convinced that the consolidation of all international and regional efforts
is more important now than ever.
In conclusion, as a long-standing friend and partner of Afghanistan, we support
restoring the lasting peace that this long-suffering land has desired for so long. We
are convinced that this task requires strategic patience and a readiness to compromise
in order to achieve national reconciliation among all patriotically -minded political
forces and their subsequent unity around a platform of Afghan reconstruction.
Without this, the conflict will only worsen. Our common task is to maintain a united
and indivisible Afghan State where tolerance prevails and the many ethnic groups
coexist in peace and harmony.

21-08609

33/60

S/2021/601

Annex XVI
Statement by the Political Coordinator of the Permanent Mission
of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the United Nations,
Isis Gonsalves
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines commends Estonia for convening this
important meeting. We thank the Foreign Minister of Afghanistan and the briefers for
their remarks.
As Afghanistan faces increasing violence and uncertainty, the country requires
the continued support of the international community now more than ever. In the light
of the stalling of intra-Afghan negotiations, international partners need to intensify
efforts to broker a ceasefire and restart the peace talks. International and regional
actors should exert all diplomatic and political means to influence the situation in
Afghanistan in support of a lasting peace settlement and sustainable economic
development in the interest of all Afghans. Any peace agreement should protect the
rights of all Afghans, including women, youth and minorities. Moreover, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines remains committed to an Afghan owned and Afghan -led
process, with the full, equal and meaningful participation of women. We commend
regional players’ positive and constructive role in the Afghan peace and reconciliation
process, despite the many challenges.
We remain deeply concerned about the wave of violence against women, media
workers, civil society activists, government employees, children and health workers,
among others. We strongly condemn this violence, including the recent attack against
polio vaccinators in Nangahar Province and the bombing of schoolgirls in Kabul.
Furthermore, we urge the parties to protect civilians from the type of unspeakable
suffering that has been inflicted as a result of over 40 years of conflict. We must also
work together earnestly to eliminate terrorism and extremism in Afghanistan and the
wider region.
Also, the drug control problem in Afghanistan and the neighbouring region
requires consolidated effort and the commitment of all stakeholders. The relevant
parties should redouble efforts in striving to resolve this drug problem and its
resulting ills. In this connection, we must remain focused on combating illicit
production and trafficking in opiates.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic continues to expose
Afghanistan’s vulnerabilities. We are now deeply concerned that the pandemic is
spiralling out of control in Afghanistan. We must respond urgently, as an international
community, to limit the spread of the virus by providing resources to countries in
need. More specifically, we must ensure equitable access to vaccines.
In addition, climate change continues to increase insecurity in Afghanistan.
Existing threats to food security and livelihoods will be exacerbated by the high
likelihood of drought triggered by La Niña weather. The impact of climate change on
food insecurity will lead to new humanitarian crises. We commend the efforts of the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nation s through the Special Fund
for Emergency and Rehabilitation Activities ‒ Agricultural Inputs Response Capacity
window, in response to Afghanistan’s food and agricultural threats and emergencies.
The urgent humanitarian need calls for sustained and coordin ated donor support
to the underfunded 2021 Humanitarian Response Plan. We call on donors to support
the humanitarian response in Afghanistan. Such assistance is vital to scale up life saving activities across the country.

34/60

21-08609

S/2021/601

After the withdrawal of all foreign troops, Afghanistan would be in need of a
strong and unified resistance. Our policies on Afghanistan should be geared towards
stabilizing and protecting its political stability. Without continued international
support, Afghan security forces will collapse, and the country’s economic and security
morass will deepen and worsen. The role of the United Nations, particularly the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, and international partners will
continue to be extremely important following the drawdown of the international
military forces.
In closing, we would like to echo President Ghani’s call on every member of the
General Assembly and the permanent members of the Security Council to help
Afghanistan achieve the end state of a sovereign, united and democratic Afghanistan,
at peace with itself and the region, capable of preserving and expanding the gains
achieved.

21-08609

35/60

S/2021/601

Annex XVII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the
United Nations, Tarek Ladeb
At the outset, I would like to thank Deborah Lyons, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Ghada Fathi Waly, the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and Mary Akrami, the Director of Afghan
Women’s Network for their briefings. I would also like to acknowledge the
participation of Mohammad Haneef Atmar, the Foreign Minister of Afghanistan, and
thank him for his intervention.
Tunisia reiterates its solidarity with the Afghan people and its support for the
peace process in Afghanistan. We hope that tangible progress will soon be made in
the negotiations between the Government and the Taliban and would like to renew in
this regard our appreciation to all the international partners and neighbours of
Afghanistan for their efforts to facilitate this process.
We remain, however, deeply concerned by the continued high level of violence
in Afghanistan, for which the Taliban is largely responsible, as most recently
illustrated by its deadly military offensive in northern Faryab Province last week. We
are also concerned by reports that the surge in the conflict is enabling the activities
of local and international terrorist organizations and facilitating the production and
trafficking of illegal drugs.
We reiterate our call for an immediate cessation of hostilities and stress again
the responsibility for all parties to take the necessary measures to prevent civilian
casualties and to abide by international humanitarian law and international human
rights law obligations. We underline in this connection the importance that all
allegations of violations be investigated and that perpetrators be held accountable.
We are indeed particularly troubled by the deliberate targeting of civil society
leaders, such as media representatives, judges and human rights defenders, especially
among women, as well as by the increase in attacks against health and humanitarian
workers and ethnic and religious minorities.
We believe it is crucial that all parties react quickly to address this environment
of fear and terror created by such attacks, in order to bring back hope in the peace
process.
We reiterate in particular our call to the Taliban to put an end to the attacks
perpetrated by its members, honour its counter-terrorism commitments and negotiate
in good faith with the Government.
In the current critical juncture, with the announced withdrawal of the international
forces, we believe that strong solidarity with and support for Afghanistan is today,
more than ever, needed in order to accompany the peace process and to sustain the
political settlement that, hopefully, will eventually be reached; and we welcome the
renewed commitments of Afghanistan international partners in this regard.
We would also like to underline again the importance that any future peace
agreement clearly include guaranties for the protection and promotion of fundamental
rights and freedoms for all in Afghanistan, with particular attention to women’s rights
and participation.
Lastly, I wish to acknowledge the important accomplishments of UNAMA; we
believe it will have an even bigger role to play in the coming period for the promotion
of peace, development and fundamental rights in Afghanistan.
36/60

21-08609

S/2021/601

Annex XVIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
Viet Nam thanks the Estonian Presidency for convening this important meeting
and Eva-Maria Liimets, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Estonia, for presiding
over it.
I also thank Deborah Lyons, Ghada Waly and Mary Akrami for their
comprehensive briefings.
Viet Nam is closely following the situation in Afghanistan. It is clear that the
country continues to face tremendous challenges in the pursuit of peace.
As the intra-Afghan peace negotiations have shown limited progress, Viet Nam
is deeply concerned about the alarming increase of violence and civilian casualties.
We strongly condemn the targeted attacks on civilians, including women, children,
students, humanitarian workers and civil servants during the past months. It is tragic
to hear about the deaths of mine clearance workers in Afghanistan on 8 June. We
would like to express our deepest condolences to the families of the victims and to
the Government and people of Afghanistan.
In light of the current situation, I wish to raise the following thr ee points:
First, on the political aspect, it is imperative to preserve the gains achieved so
far. Urgent efforts are needed to advance the intra-Afghan peace negotiations. We call
on the relevant parties to set aside their differences, build trust and r each a timely
peaceful agreement to end the conflict.
To this end, the support from the United Nations, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), regional countries and other international
partners remains critical to promoting practical progress of the peace talks. We look
forward to further collaboration between UNAMA and Jean Arnault, the Personal
Envoy of the Secretary-General on Afghanistan, in supporting the peace process in
the country.
We highly welcome the establishment of the High Council for Women and High
Council for Youth and encourage further efforts to enable the full and meaningful
participation of Afghan women and youth in all aspects of society.
Second, on the security and humanitarian aspect, it is crucial that a permanent
ceasefire be achieved as soon as possible, thereby putting an end to the ongoing
violence.
The high number of civilian casualties in the past months is unacceptable. In
this regard, we once again urge all relevant parties to fully respect inter national
humanitarian law, immediately stop targeting civilians and civilian objects,
particularly those that are indispensable to the survival of the civilian population, as
well as ensuring unhindered humanitarian access.
We are concerned about the increasing humanitarian challenges in the country,
of which the number of people facing high level of food insecurity had reached
16.9 million by March 2021. We call on the United Nations and regional and
international partners to continue to strengthen its hu manitarian assistance to
Afghanistan in this regard to ensure its projected needs.
We also commend the efforts of UNAMA, the Mine Action Service and partners
in facilitating mine clearance and risk education activities in this difficult time of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
21-08609

37/60

S/2021/601

Third, the international community should continue to support the Government
of Afghanistan in promoting socioeconomic development and reconstruction of the
country.
We commend the efforts of regional countries and in ternational partners in
promoting projects to improve economic development, livelihood assistance and the
health-care system in Afghanistan. We wish to see further support for the country in
its fight against the COVID-19 pandemic, including the vaccination process.
Strengthened efforts are also needed to combat the threat of terrorism, crime and
drug trafficking and to assist people with licit sustainable livelihoods.
In closing, Viet Nam would like to reiterate our support for the pursuit of peace,
stability and development in Afghanistan. The war in Afghanistan has gone on for far
too long. It is our sincere hope that peace will soon be achieved in this country for its
people at long last.

38/60

21-08609

S/2021/601

Annex XIX
Statement by the Minster for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan,
Mohammad Haneef Atmar
I would like to thank the President for hosting and presiding over this open
debate on the situation in Afghanistan and for Estonia’s effective and able stewardship
of the Security Council during the month of June.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his report and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Deborah Lyons, for her thorough briefing.
I also add my gratitude to the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
for their tireless work at a critical time in Afghanistan.
Finally, I thank Ghada Fathi Ismail Waly, the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and Mary Akrami for their expert interventions.
We meet at an inflection point in Afghanistan’s history. It is a time that has
created hope, but also fear and concern for the future – hope for achieving a
sustainable peace after four decades of imposed war and fear of falling back into a
continued protracted conflict.
We are at a time that underscores the linkage between Afghanistan’s peace and
security and regional and international security and stability.
A regression into a protracted conflict pursued by the Taliban in collaboration
with a number of United Nations-designated transnational terrorist networks that
maintain a symbiotic relationship with transnational narcotics and organized crime
will pose a serious threat, not only to Afghanistan, but also to our neighbours, the
region and the international community as a whole.
This is certainly not an outcome to be accepted after two decades of enormous
sacrifices in blood and treasure by Afghans and our regional and international
partners.
Profoundly appreciating your sacrifices and support over the past two decades,
we, the Government and people of Afghanistan, are committed to continuing to
partner with our international and regional partners, to not let our joint sacrifices go
in vain and to work to achieve our shared goal of peace, security and prosperity.
The utmost desire and aspiration of all Afghans weary of war and ongoing
bloodshed is the achievement of a lasting peace and a permanent end to the conflict.
We know that this desire is equally shared by all of you, our international and
regional partners, Members of the United Nations and members of its Security
Council.
All of us have welcomed the Doha peace agreement signed by the United States
and the Taliban in February 2020.
The Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 2513 (2020) to welcome
it and express its support for its implementation.
We are grateful to the Security Council for doing so and to all of our
international and regional partners for supporting the Afghanistan peace process.
In good faith, the United States and our North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) partners have met almost all of their obligations in the agreement, including
the withdrawal of their troops, to be completed in the coming weeks.

21-08609

39/60

S/2021/601

We, the Government of Afghanistan, were not a party to the Doha peace
agreement but, to respond positively to the shared desire of our people and the
international community, we released over 6,000 Taliban prisoners, constituted all
necessary institutions to support the peace process, including an inclusive peace
negotiation team, and engaged in good faith with the Taliban and our international
partners for peace.
However, it is a sad reality that the Taliban have not honoured any of their
obligations under the Doha peace agreement.
First, they have not cut their ties with international terrorism. They are hosting
and aiding, not only Al Qaeda, but also regional terrorist groups such as Lashkar -eTayyiba, Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan, Eastern Turkistan Islamic Movement and Islamic
Movement of Uzbekistan, in pursuit of their violent campaign against both
Afghanistan and other countries.
This is well documented by the recent reports of the Sanctions Monitoring Team,
as well as many other State and international agencies.
Second, the Taliban agreed to reduce violence and work with the Government
of Afghanistan to achieve a permanent and comprehensive ceasefire.
Under the watchful eyes of the international community, our people have
witnessed only the worst violence of the past two decades since the signing of the
Doha peace agreement, and especially since the announcement by the United States
and NATO of their troops’ withdrawal.
The massacre of schoolboys in Logar, schoolgirls in west Kabul, deminers in
the north and vaccinators in the east over the past weeks are just some examples of
the senseless violence inflicted by Taliban and their associates.
The Taliban said they were fighting the presence of foreign tro ops in
Afghanistan, but they need to explain to the world community as to why they are
killing their fellow Afghans, and especially civilians, while the foreign troops are
leaving the country.
Third, it was also the Taliban’s obligation, based on the agre ement, to enter into
negotiations with the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and reach a political settlement.
The President of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan has proposed, in good
faith, a peace plan for a ceasefire, power sharing, early elections and the
determination of the future of Afghanistan by the free will of the Afghan people.
For almost 10 months now, we have had no serious engagement from the Taliban
for serious peace negotiations, no response to our proposed peace plan and absolutely
no counterproposal.
The five host countries, Qatar, Norway, Germany, Indonesia and Uzbekistan, as
well as the United Nations and Turkey, have witnessed this lack of commitment and
progress and the rejection of the proposed peace conference in Istanbul.
While the Taliban have shown no positive response to any peace plan as yet, the
Government and people of Afghanistan are deeply grateful to all our regional and
international partners for their continued commitment and support.
In a couple of weeks, the foreign troops withdrawal will be completed and the
international community will, unfortunately, see for itself that the Taliban will not
have met any of their obligations in the Doha peace agreement.
This situation calls for a serious review and assessment as to where we, as the
international community, are with the peace process.

40/60

21-08609

S/2021/601

There must be respect for the Doha peace agreement and Security Council
resolution 2513 (2020) and there must be accountability and an appropriate response.
To achieve our shared goal of peace, the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
proposes the following two measures:
First, the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan remains fully committed to the peace
process and will continue to engage the Taliban negotiating team in Doha.
We fully support the role of the United Nations, including that of UNAMA, and
the Secretary-General’s Personal Envoy in the peace process and regional
cooperation.
We therefore call on the international community and our regional partners to
use their influence to persuade the Taliban to honour their obligations under the Doha
peace agreement.
The establishment of a nationwide ceasefire, to allow the Government of
Afghanistan and the international community to meet the immediate humanitarian
priorities as a result of the pandemic, the conflict and the unfolding drought, should
be a top priority for international diplomacy to achieve through the third round of the
peace talks in Doha, expected to begin soon.
Second, a monitoring mechanism should be established by the international
community to verify the implementation of the Doha peace agreement and Security
Council resolution 2513 (2020).
The Security Council will be expected to review the implementation of the
obligations under the Doha peace agreement and Council resolution 2513 (2020) and
to take appropriate measures to ensure compliance.
To conclude, it is no doubt that the senseless violence and the refusal of the
Taliban to honour their obligations have made the situation in Afghanistan and our
region precarious and dangerously unstable.
It is our strong belief, however, that if we work together as the international
community of the United Nations and commit all of our support for the
implementation of the Doha peace agreement and resolution 2513 (2020), we can
arrest this threatening situation and achieve lasting peace, security and prosperity for
all of us.

21-08609

41/60

S/2021/601

Annex XX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Australia to the
United Nations, Mitch Fifield
Australia appreciates the opportunity to comment on the situation in
Afghanistan and applauds the efforts by the Special Representative and Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Deborah Lyons, the
Secretary-General’s Personal Envoy on Afghanistan and Regional Issues, Jean
Arnault, and the whole United Nations family for trying to bring the p arties to the
conflict in Afghanistan together.
A peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan can only be achieved through adherence
to international norms and standards, especially in human rights, which includes the
rights of women, children and minorities. There is no military solution to the conflict
in Afghanistan. Australia remains committed to supporting an Afghan -led, Afghanowned peace process, which charts a course towards a safe, secure and prosperous
future, eventually allowing millions of displaced Afghans to return home.
When women are fully included in decision-making, societies are more likely
to prevent and resolve conflict. Women should have the opportunity to decide on
policies and programs that determine their safety and security, including thr ough
peace processes. We urge the parties to recognize the benefits of a more inclusive
society, where the gains made over the past 20 years are maintained and built upon,
in line with international norms and standards.
We encourage all parties to return to the negotiating table and continue progress
towards a political settlement. We urge the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan to remain
united in defending the constitution. We urge the Taliban to recognize that the only
path to legitimacy is through constructive engagement in the political process. This
is essential for continued international support for Afghanistan.
We condemn, in the strongest terms, the high levels of violence in Afghanistan,
particularly the ongoing targeting of human rights activists, women, children,
humanitarian workers and minorities. In the first quarter of 2021, UNAMA
documented 1,783 civilian casualties (573 killed, including 151 children). Targeted
assassinations rose by 40.1 per cent, to 297, with victims including civil servant s, two
university lecturers in Kabul, three female polio vaccinators in Jalalabad and the head
of the Takhar Ulema Council. The attack on the Sayed ul-Shuhada girls’ school on
8 May, which killed over 80 students, was a tragic example of such violence. We call
for an immediate ceasefire, an end to targeted killings and for the Taliban and the
Islamic Republic to work together in responding to the third wave of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) and the growing humanitarian crises.
Australia has provided $1.5 billion (to May 2021) in development assistance to
Afghanistan since 2001. Afghanistan will receive $50.0 million from the 2021/22
development budget allocations, aligned with our long -term commitment of
$200 million over 2021–2024 in development assistance, which was announced at the
2020 Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan. Afghanistan continues to be the
seventh-largest recipient of Australian bilateral aid.
The future of the country lies in the hands of the Afghan people. Australia urges
the parties to allow the Afghan people’s voices to be heard through democratic
processes. We call on the parties to seize this opportunity, to end the bloodshed and
to bring a just, durable and resilient peace to Afghanistan.

42/60

21-08609

S/2021/601

Annex XXI
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Germany to the
United Nations
At this critical juncture for Afghanistan, it is vital that the international
community send a strong message of continued support and of its unequivocal
expectations regarding the future and the peaceful development of the country. The
United Nations and the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
specifically will have to play their important role.
Germany will continue to stand by the Afghan people, as a reliable partner.
While our military engagement comes to an end, our civilian assistance continues.
We remain determined to support the Afghan Government in addressing the country’s
security, stabilization, development and humanitarian needs, and to help the people
of Afghanistan, particularly women, children and marginalized groups, as they seek
to preserve hard-won rights and freedoms. The safety of our own presence and of our
partners in Afghanistan is key for staying engaged and for our continued support of
Afghanistan on its way to peace and stability.
The high level of violence, with continued fighting and attacks with civilian
victims, and with assassinations, especially of women but also humanitarian workers,
is completely unacceptable. We concur with the press statements of t he Security
Council over recent weeks and speak out against these heinous acts. We strongly call
on all Afghan parties to reduce violence and to end targeted attacks. We reaffirm the
importance of ensuring that the territory of Afghanistan is not being use d by terrorist
organizations aiming at threatening or attacking any other country.
The Afghanistan peace negotiations in Doha have still not led to substantial
progress, despite the strong and legitimate expectations of the Afghan people and the
international community. To reinvigorate the process, negotiating sides must
reinforce their commitment to engage in meaningful negotiations and seize new
opportunities to give momentum to their talks. In addition, confidence -building
measures, such as an immediate reduction of violence, are urgently needed to give
the negotiations a new impetus. We also call upon the international community,
including the Security Council and countries from the region, to unequivocally and
strongly support the peace process and to offer assistance to the intra-Afghan
negotiations. Consensus among key regional and international stakeholders is crucial.
Germany remains prepared to assist on this path.
We welcome the United Nations’ commitment to playing a greater role in this
process. We continue our engagement with and support to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Deborah Lyons, and the Personal Envoy of the Secretary General on Afghanistan and Regional Issues, Jean Arnault. Looking ahead to
September, the evolution of the political and security environment in Afghanistan
might require an adaptation of the UNAMA mandate, with UNAMA being expected
to continue leading and coordinating the international civilian efforts in promoting
peace and stability in Afghanistan. Among others, the safeguarding of human rights,
in particular women’s and children’s rights, in Afghanistan should remain a core
element. We are ready to share our views and experiences as a former co -penholder
with all stakeholders, including the United Nations Secretariat and Security Council
members.

21-08609

43/60

S/2021/601

Annex XXII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Indonesia to the
United Nations
We thank all briefers for their insightful briefings.
With the withdrawal of foreign troops, Afghanistan enters a daunting chapter in
its journey towards peace and prosperity. Unfortunately, Afghanistan is entering this
chapter while also struggling with numerous challenges.
On this note, let me focus on three points:
First, advancing intra-Afghan negotiation.
Indonesia remains confident that intra-Afghan negotiation is the key towards a
peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan.
The active and constructive engagement from all international and regional
stakeholders remains critical for the success of the peace process, especially in
nurturing mutual trust and understanding between all parties.
To ensure that all Afghanistan stakeholders will meaningfully engage in the
peace process, the international community must be united to underscore that violence
and military option are not acceptable.
To this end, Indonesia welcomes the plan to hold the Istanbul Conference.
We call for the United Nations, as a neutral host, along with the co -conveners
to ensure the meaningful participation of all relevant parties in this Conference.
Second, ensuring safety, security and well-being of Afghans.
A general improvement in safety and security of the civilian population that is
preceded by a decreasing number of victims is one of the main indicators of a
successful peace process.
Unfortunately, we have yet to see this development in Afghanistan. Indonesia
remains concerned over the increasing security challenges towards the full
withdrawal of foreign troops, especially rising terrorist attacks aimed towards the
civilian population.
This is happening as humanitarian needs faced by the Afghan population are
escalating at unprecedented levels, especially for food security and the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic response.
Indonesia calls for an increased role of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and for all parties to ensure that there would be no setback
in sustaining peace following the withdrawal. All progress, including women’s rights,
should be well preserved.
Third, investing in Afghan society.
Indonesia firmly believes that all elements of Afghan society have a stake in
strengthening the peace process. The international community should work hand -inhand to enhance the capacity of all these elements.
Indonesia has taken this initiative through the Afghanistan-Indonesia Women’s
Solidarity Network, as well as the Ulema Conference.
The Solidarity Network is the fulfilment of Indonesia’s commitment to
supporting women’s full and meaningful participation in the peace process. T his year,

44/60

21-08609

S/2021/601

Indonesia plans to host the second meeting of the Solidarity Network and several
capacity-building programs.
Meanwhile, through the Ulema Conference, we shared with our Afghan
counterparts our experience in building a peaceful and diverse societ y in a country
with the biggest Muslim population on Earth.
To conclude, Indonesia remains committed to supporting the Afghan -led and
Afghan-owned peace process, through capacity-building programs and dialogue
facilitation.
We are ready to work together with UNAMA, as well as the Secretary-General’s
Personal Envoy, in this endeavour.

21-08609

45/60

S/2021/601

Annex XXIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran to the United Nations, Majid Takht Ravanchi
With the complete withdrawal of foreign forces from Afghanistan on the
horizon, this country is at a crossroads. It can go in the direction of reconciliation
when all sides agree to engage in dialogue and bring an end to decades of bloodshed,
or it can embrace more violence when one side u ses its military might to force the
other side to accept the terms of peace. The international community must not allow
the latter to happen, as it will not be a genuine peace and, as a result, will not sustain.
Indeed, a safer, more stable and prosperous Afghanistan, in peace with itself and
its neighbours, is in the interest of all Afghans, the region and the world. Conversely,
an insecure and unstable Afghanistan, which is a source of violent extremism,
terrorism and organized crime, including production of and trafficking in drugs, poses
a threat to Afghans themselves, as well as to regional and international peace and
security.
Therefore, confronting such threats and building a more secure and prosperous
Afghanistan is in the interest of all, and indeed, the current phase is a common
opportunity for everyone to work seriously to achieve these common goals.
This inevitably must start with an all-inclusive Afghan-led, Afghan-owned,
Afghan-controlled and United Nations-facilitated peace process, guided by this
fundamental principle that the path to a lasting peace, first and foremost, passes
through a genuine internal dialogue with the broad participation of all Afghans from
all political, ethnic and religious groups, including the Taliban, based on coope ration,
understanding, compromise and reconciliation.
In other words, in such a diverse society as Afghanistan, no group or groups,
however powerful militarily, can resort to force and violence to dominate others, and
the establishment of a legitimate government is possible only through a
comprehensive political process and democratic means.
With the withdrawal of foreign forces from Afghanistan, the Taliban’s
unwarranted justification to resort to force will be completely removed. Therefore, it
must stop the violence; demonstrate its willingness to use the force of logic instead
of logic of force to interact with its compatriots; and seize this unprecedented
opportunity to contribute sincerely to establishing a durable peace in the country
through political means, as peace and violence are mutually exclusive and cannot go
hand-in-hand.
While we have witnessed many lost opportunities for peace in the past years, it
is obvious that a possible new wave of violence and fratricide in Afghanistan will
only lead to a new cycle of insecurity and instability, something that this country, the
region and the world cannot afford.
At this critical juncture, the voice and demand of Afghans from all walks of life
for a durable peace must be heard and effectively support ed. They must not be left
alone.
Preserving the past achievements of the people and Government of Afghanistan,
including the Constitution, the rights of ethnic and religious minorities and women,
the right to self-determination of people through elections, governance system and
structures derived from the Constitution, as well as the commitment to combat
terrorism, must be one of the main elements of any peace process.

46/60

21-08609

S/2021/601

To succeed, any peace process and subsequent steps must enjoy the strong
support of all Afghans. It has now become clear that any peace process in Afghanistan
that is guided and directed by only one actor, however powerful, and in the absence
of active involvement of major players including from the region, and more
importantly, with the least engagement of the United Nations, would not yield results.
The significant position and high capacity of the United Nations in organizing
and facilitating the peace process in Afghanistan and also supporting and ensuring the
full and effective implementation of any future peace agreement is irreplaceable and
enjoys our full support. Iran continues to call for the central role, and further and
substantive engagement, of the United Nations in an intra-Afghan peace process.
Afghanistan’s security situation has remained a source of serious concern. The
growing number of deadly terrorist acts by Da’esh in Afghanistan, targeting certain
religious and ethnic minorities as well as women and girls, which we condemn in the
strongest possible terms, show the severity of its threat to Afghanistan and the region.
Such attacks indicate the vulnerability of ethnic and religious minorities and
women in Afghanistan and the dire need for effective preservation of their rights.
Such terrorist attacks also underline the need for continued efforts in combating
terrorism in that country.
Prior and simultaneous to the withdrawal of foreign forces, Afghanistan’s
military and security forces must be supported and strengthened and effective
assistance must be extended to Afghanistan in combating the illicit production of and
trafficking in narcotic drugs; a source of financing terrorism and other crimes.
While pursuing a durable peace must remain a top priority, the international
community must not lose sight of the dire need for economic development of
Afghanistan, which is also an important pillar of sustaining peace.
The Islamic Republic of Iran once again calls on all parties in Afghanistan,
including the Taliban, to place the interests of all people of Afghanistan above the
other interests.
By hosting millions of Afghan refugees and establishing the link of this land locked country to high seas through Iran’s Chabahar Port and to Europe through the
Khaf-Herat railway, Iran has stood with the people and Government of Afghanistan
in their quest for a safer and more stable, democratic and prosperous country. We
stand ready to further contribute to Afghanistan’s prosperity, peace and stability.

21-08609

47/60

S/2021/601

Annex XXIV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Italy to the United Nations
Afghanistan is now at a crucial juncture. The start of the withdrawal of troops
under the North Atlantic Treaty Organization Resolute Support Mission marks the
beginning of a new era, during which the country must not be left alone. The
international community will have to continue to be present in Afghanistan through
new forms of commitments, prioritizing at this time the dimensions of humanitarian
and financial assistance.
In this new course, it is all the more urgent that a true breakthrough occur in the
intra-Afghan peace dialogue. The continuation of warfare is incompatible with the
need and demands for peace of the Afghan people, who are paying the highest price
for the unacceptable violence to which they are subject. A cessation of hostili ties
cannot be delayed. The resumption in Doha, on 8 June, of contact between the Afghan
parties in the presence of mediators is certainly a positive step forward. It is essential,
however, to keep the focus of those talks on issues of substance and base t he future
potential agreement on the principles of national reconciliation. If and when
conditions allow, the organization of a high-level peace conference, under the aegis
of the United Nations, should be envisaged.
Concrete, immediate action is needed from both sides and would also serve to
show the goodwill to find a solution and instil confidence in the Afghan people, who
are living more and more in fear and uncertainty about their future. The Taliban must
cease their military pressure and end violence. Representatives of the republican
institutions must put the interest of their citizens first, departing from their
consolidated behavioural patterns, which are incompatible with the common good. It
is paramount that they find unity and agreement in purs uing credible conditions for
peace, reconciliation and reconstruction, in order to allow all Afghans to build their
futures, in the full enjoyment of security and of human, political and social rights.
This future will not be sustainable without recognizing the central role of
women in the country and in the peace process. Over the past two decades, Afghan
women have shown their resilience and their will to win back their place in society,
contributing to its change. This contribution must be encouraged a nd supported. The
action of the international community must focus on empowering citizens and
institutions, promoting well-structured and durable partnerships built on the political
and social gains of the past 20 years, consolidating and further advancing individual
rights, particularly those of women, youths and minors.
In the new era that is about to begin for Afghanistan, special attention will have
to be paid also to the safety of foreign diplomats and expatriates. This is a prerequisite
for ensuring the continuation of the political dialogue between Afghanistan and the
international community, as well as for monitoring and allowing initiatives that will
still be vital to the country.
Italy expresses, once again, its appreciation for the continued rol e of the United
Nations at this new and complex juncture, with a special appreciation for the Special
Representative and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
Deborah Lyons, and the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General, Jean Arnault. The
United Nations confirms itself as the essential, irreplaceable pillar of international
peace and security. This is all the more true within the Afghan context, where the
United Nations can facilitate constructive involvement of the regional stakeh olders,
thus making the difference in the search of a negotiated solution to this conflict.
Italy reaffirms its commitment to continue to do its part and to make its
contribution to peace in Afghanistan, alongside the Afghan people, the United Nations
and our international partners.
48/60

21-08609

S/2021/601

Annex XXV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations, Ishikane Kimihiro
Japan highly appreciates the convening of this high-level debate on Afghanistan
at a time when the country is in need of the solidarity of the international community
more than ever. I also thank the Special Representative of the Secretary -General,
Deborah Lyons, for her briefing and her dedicated efforts to bring peace and stability
to Afghanistan.
Japan strongly believes that a sustainable peace in Afghanistan can only be
achieved by a political settlement that reflects the voices of all segments of society,
including women, youth and minority groups. Japan continues to support the
Government of Afghanistan and other key stakeholders in their efforts to advance an
inclusive peace process.
It is our understanding that the decision to withdraw all international forces was
made to facilitate an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process. Nevertheless, it is
also understandable that the people of Afghanistan harbour anxiety over uncertainty
during and after the departure of international forces. At this critical transition period,
therefore, it is essential that the international community send a clear message to the
people of Afghanistan that it remains committed to supporting them in the years to
come as we have done over the past two decades.
It is also critical for the international community to stand firm against unabated
violence and terrorism, particularly those targeting and involving civilians. Japan
condemns in the strongest possible terms the recent terrorist attacks targeting innocent
civilians including schoolgirls, aid workers and journalists. We continue to urge all
concerned parties to stop the violence immediately and enact a comprehensive
ceasefire.
Japan reiterates that a sustainable political settlement to the conflict in
Afghanistan requires the strong commitment and cooperation of neighbouring and
regional countries, which must be well-coordinated and harmonized with broader
international efforts to support Afghan stakeholders. To this end, we encourage
Ms. Lyons and Mr. Arnault, the Secretary-General’s Personal Envoy on Afghanistan
and Regional Issues, to strengthen their efforts to effectively coord inate international
and regional support for the peace process.
As a longstanding partner of Afghanistan, Japan remains fully committed to
supporting Afghanistan throughout and beyond the peace process. Japan has already
provided $135 million this year to address the negative impact of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) and other humanitarian and development needs of the Afghan
people. We are ready to consider additional support, depending on the progress in the
peace process and the adherence of the Afghan Government to the Afghanistan
Partnership Framework.

21-08609

49/60

S/2021/601

Annex XXVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Kazakhstan to the
United Nations, Magzhan Ilyassov
Kazakhstan commends the Estonian Presidency for hosting this debate on the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We acknowledge with
great appreciation the efforts of UNAMA under the sterling leadership of the Special
Representative, Deborah Lyons, aimed at assisting the Afghan people and Government
to achieve sustainable peace and development, and also recognize the important role
of the Secretary-General’s Personal Envoy, Jean Arnault, in that regard.
Afghanistan is entering a critical phase in its history. We need to ensure that the
upcoming withdrawal of United States and North Atlantic Treaty Organization troops
will not lead to the escalation of the conflict.
The only means to de-escalate the conflict and lay the foundations of stability
in the country is dialogue, compromise and mutual understanding. We thu s, once
again, reiterate that the Afghan-owned, Afghan-led and Afghan-controlled settlement
of the Afghan conflict is the only way forward. Kazakhstan hopes that the opposing
parties will find compromise solutions in the interests of the people of Afghanis tan.
According to the Monitoring Team’s report, reducing violence and preventing
insurgent forces from amassing new territories are the critical tasks the Security
Council and the international community must address. The Team’s report also warns
that efforts should be made to ensure that the Government is not destabilized and
weakened by attacks on soft targets like schools, worship sites, education centres,
wedding halls or, now, even public buses.
Kazakhstan strongly condemns all targeted killings, attacks and violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law. We call on all actors to engage in
the peace process in good faith and to translate their commitments into tangible
actions for the benefit of all Afghans.
These call for implementing new national security policies and strategies to
enhance the effectiveness, inclusivity and accountability of security institutions. It is,
therefore, important to strengthen the military and police through comprehensive
security sector reforms, as well as to promote the United Nations women and peace
and security agenda by supporting national efforts to increase the representation of
women at all levels, including in the security and defence sectors.
Kazakhstan supports the aspirations of the people of Afghanistan for peace,
justice and prosperity. These could not be achieved without the preservation of the
republican democratic system in Afghanistan. We are committed to ensuring that the
gains in education, especially of women and girls, achieved in the past 20 years, are
not reversed. The women and youth of Afghanistan are at the forefront of society and
need to be given all opportunities for development and make their full contribution to
society. The independent and free media also play a critical role in a democratic
Afghanistan and should be protected.
We record the valiant efforts of UNAMA, which contributes to bilateral and
multilateral deliberations and action of the Central Asian States with Afghanistan.
A peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan has always been a priority for
Kazakhstan. Considering Afghanistan as our important regional partner, we are
working jointly with others to form an interregional model based on development,
security and cooperation between Central Asia and Afghanistan. This is critical, as
the future of Central Asia is directly related to the stability of Afghanistan.

50/60

21-08609

S/2021/601

Bearing in mind that the stability of Afghanistan is closely linked with its
economic development, Kazakhstan will continue to provide long-term financial,
technical and humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan, as we did in 2020, through
food, medicine and other humanitarian aid to pandemic-hit Afghanistan, and different
forms of technical and financial support, both bilaterally and jointly with the United
Nations and international partners. We will also continue to provide stipends for
Afghan youth to study in leading Kazakh universities.
To enhance the country’s infrastructure, and increase connectivity and access,
Kazakhstan participates in the Khaf-Herat railway project to accelerate its
completion. All these will transform Afghanistan into a viable self -sustaining
economy and will contribute to the development of both Afghanistan and the region
as a whole.
Another noteworthy step we have taken is to establish the United Nations
Regional Centre for Sustainable Development Goals for Central Asia and Afghanistan
in Almaty. The Centre will be based in the new United Nations building (which houses
18 United Nations agencies with regional and subregional mandates) in Almaty,
opened in May 2019 by President Kassym-Jomart Tokayev. It aims to ensure
efficiency and improved coordination between all stakeholders for delivering on the
2030 Agenda at the regional level. We believe that an expanded United Nations
presence in Central Asia, through establishing the United Nations Regional Centre in
Almaty, will contribute to sustainable development in the region, including in
Afghanistan.
To conclude, Kazakhstan will join the multilateral effort, in partnership with our
Central Asian neighbours, to lay the long-term foundations of enduring economic
recovery and, consequently, stability and progress in the country.

21-08609

51/60

S/2021/601

Annex XXVII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Kyrgyzstan to the
United Nations, Mirgul Moldoisaeva
I thank Deborah Lyons, the Special Representative of the Secretary -General for
Afghanistan for a detailed briefing on the current situation in Afghanistan.
We are emphasizing the central role of the United Nations in promoting peace
and stability in Afghanistan, expressing appreciation and strong support for all of the
efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special Representative for Afghanistan and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 2405 (2018).
On the other side, Kyrgyzstan is ready to contribute to the evolution of the peace
process in Afghanistan within the United Nations, the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, the Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Moscow format, the
Istanbul process, the Kabul process and other international platforms. We are proud
to be a member of the Group of Friends of Women in Afghanistan.
The Kyrgyz Republic is interested in a peaceful and stable Afghanistan and calls
for further cooperation with Afghanistan, the development of regional cooperation
and confidence-building measures to resolve the situation in Afghanistan. We support
the democratic reforms achieved by the Government of Afghanistan over the past
decades in the country to protect freedom of speech, the rights of women and national
minorities.
We strongly support the efforts made by the Afghan Government a nd the
international community as a whole in the fight against terrorism, extremism and drug
trafficking in Afghanistan, which pose a serious threat to regional security.
Kyrgyzstan stands for a ceasefire and an end to violence in Afghanistan and calls on
the conflicting parties to exercise restraint and to advance the peaceful dialogue
launched in 2020 in Doha.
Before the pandemic, important regional events were held in Kyrgyzstan, where
high-level representatives of the Government of Afghanistan, as well as
non-governmental organizations, took an active part. In 2019, Bishkek hosted the
Council of Heads of State of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the third
meeting of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization-Afghanistan Contact Group, as
well as conferences and seminars on regional issues of reducing violent extremism,
using social networks to recruit international terrorist organizations, countering drug
trafficking and the governance of natural disasters.
The Kyrgyz Republic provides possible assistance to Afghanistan. We
implement bilateral projects to improve the skills of Afghan civil servants, educate
Afghan students in educational institutions of the Kyrgyz Republic and carry out
humanitarian missions to ethnic Kyrgyz living in the Small and Large Afghan Pamir.
Also, the Kyrgyz side notes its full readiness to participate in the European Union and
United Nations Development Programme programme for training Afghan women in
the universities of the Kyrgyz Republic.
The Kyrgyz Republic expresses its readiness to actively contribute to the
economic recovery of Afghanistan. The Kyrgyz Republic is promoting initiatives to
establish a trilateral agro-industrial consortium, Kyrgyzstan-Tajikistan-Afghanistan.
In order to develop transregional energy trade and transit the work in the framework
of the Central Asia South Asia Electricity Transmission and Trade Project (CASA 1000) international project of energy export by Central Asian countries to countries
of Southern Asia through Afghanistan is being conducted. Within the frame work of
52/60

21-08609

S/2021/601

the CASA-1000 project, the Kyrgyz side should export electricity to Afghanistan and
Pakistan in the amount of up to 1.5 billion kWh annually in the summer.
In order to substantively discuss the current agenda of Kyrgyz-Afghan relations,
the Kyrgyz side proposed to hold the first meeting of the joint Kyrgyz-Afghan
intergovernmental commission in Bishkek, as well as the next meeting of political
consultations at the level of the deputy foreign ministers of the two States.
In conclusion, I would like to note the commitment of Kyrgyzstan to long-term
cooperation with Afghanistan and all Central Asian partners, along with our
international partners; we are ready for full cooperation to resolve the tasks before us.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is demonstrating to all of us that
multilateral cooperation is the key to overcoming global challenges.
I would also like to wish peace and prosperity to the brotherly Afghan people.

21-08609

53/60

S/2021/601

Annex XXVIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the
United Nations, Munir Akram
We thank the President for convening this high-level quarterly meeting on
Afghanistan.
We would also like to thank all the briefers, in particular the Special
Representative for Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan, Deborah Lyons, for her statement.
The peoples of Pakistan and Afghanistan are inextricably bound together by a
common historical, religious, cultural and lingu istic heritage, as well as shared
destinies.
Pakistan has a vital interest in a peaceful, stable, united and prosperous
Afghanistan. Apart from Afghanistan itself, no other country has suffered more than
Pakistan as a result of the ongoing conflict in Afghanistan.
The Prime Minister of Pakistan, Imran Khan, in a recent statement said, and I
quote: “Our country has suffered so much from the wars in Afghanistan. More than
70,000 Pakistanis have been killed.”
Pakistan has consistently maintained that the conflict in Afghanistan can be
ended, not by military force, but through a political settlement involving the full
spectrum of Afghanistan’s political landscape and through an Afghan -led and Afghanowned peace process.
As the result of our efforts to facilitate the Afghan peace and reconciliation
process, three major milestones were achieved in 2020: one, the United States -Taliban
peace agreement signed on 29 February 2020; two, the commencement of
intra-Afghan negotiations on 12 September 2020; and three, the agreement on rules
and procedures between the Afghan parties in Doha on 2 December 2020.
Today, Afghanistan stands at a critical juncture in its history. It is important that
the Afghan leaders seize the historic opportunity to reach an inclusive, broad-based
and comprehensive political settlement for durable peace and stability in Afghanistan.
We reiterate the need for a reduction in violence in Afghanistan, leading to a
ceasefire. At the same time, we urge the need for a responsible and orderly withdrawal
of foreign troops from Afghanistan, coinciding with the overall progress achieved in
the peace process.
Any security vacuum in the country will be exploited by the “spoilers” that aim
to subvert the peace negotiations and keep Afghanistan, as well as the region, in a
state of constant conflict and turmoil. We must guard against all such spoilers who do
not see peace and stability in Afghanistan serving their strategic interests.
In the current fluid political environment in Afghanistan, Pakistan has continued
its efforts to promote a peaceful resolution of the conflict in Afghanistan at the
bilateral, regional and international level.
Under the “troika plus” format, Pakistan, China, Russia and the United States
held meetings on 18 March and 30 April, in Moscow and Doha respectively, to help
galvanize the Afghan peace process by bringing together all the major stakeholders.
This format can continue to make a contribution to reaching a political settlement.
The Foreign Ministers of Pakistan, Afghanistan and Turkey held a trilateral
meeting in Istanbul, on 23 April 2021, during which they reiterated their support for

54/60

21-08609

S/2021/601

the Afghanistan peace process and for the achievement of a just and durable political
settlement of the Afghan conflict.
The fourth China-Afghanistan-Pakistan Trilateral Foreign Ministers’ Dialogue
was held on 3 June 2021. It underscored the importance of a peaceful resolution of
the Afghan conflict, through an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process, in
addition to expressing the resolve to deepen cooperation under the Belt and Road
Initiative and other regional mechanisms.
The Foreign Minister of Pakistan, Makhdoom Shah Mahmood Qureshi, held a
meeting with the Secretary-General, António Guterres, on 20 May 2021, on the
sidelines of the special session of the General Assembly on Palestine, during which
he highlighted Pakistan’s constructive efforts to facilitate the Afghan peace process.
Last week, the Pakistan Foreign Minister met with the Chairman of the Afghan
High Council for National Reconciliation, Abdullah Abdullah, the Foreign Minister
of Afghanistan, Haneef Atmar, and the Head of Jamiat-e-Islami Afghanistan,
Salahuddin Rabbani, on the sidelines of the Antalya Diplomacy Forum in Turkey and
discussed ways to advance the Afghan peace process.
Pakistan’s Chief of Army Staff also visited Kabul on 10 May 2021 and, in
meetings with the Afghan leadership, discussed the Afghan peace process, bilateral
security and defence cooperation, and the need for effective border managemen t
between Pakistan and Afghanistan.
All of these efforts – bilateral, regional and international – are testimony of
Pakistan’s strong desire to strengthen the prospects for peace and stability in
Afghanistan and the region.
Terrorism has had a devastating impact on Afghanistan and its neighbouring
countries. The international community must not allow Afghanistan’s territory to be
used by Al-Qaida, Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant or other international terrorist
groups, like Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan and the Eastern Turkistan Islamic Movement,
to carry out attacks against any country.
Pakistan is especially concerned about the support being provided to Tehrik -eTaliban Pakistan and Jamaat-ul-Ahrar by a third country, to operate and conduct the
hundreds of cross-border attacks that have been launched against Pakistan from
Afghanistan.
These Security Council-designated terrorist groups must not be allowed to
operate against Pakistan from Afghanistan with external support. We call on the
Council to take full cognizance of the terrorist activities of these groups and their
sponsors.
Peace and stability in Afghanistan will usher in an era of prosperity for
Afghanistan, as well as the broader region.
Promoting economic connectivity and regional trade is the key to lasting peace
and security in Afghanistan. Through regional connectivity projects, Pakistan and
Afghanistan can serve as a bridge connecting Central Asia and the Arabian Sea,
offering immense economic opportunities to both countries and the region, and help
Afghanistan reap the dividends of peace.
Pakistan is Afghanistan’s largest trading partner and c ontinues to provide
critical support in the areas of agriculture, health, education and infrastructure
development. We have committed over $1 billion to development support in
Afghanistan, including $500 million for infrastructure and capacity -building projects.
Over the past four decades, Pakistan has provided all possible support to
millions of Afghan refugees who sought safety and security on our soil. Pakistan
21-08609

55/60

S/2021/601

continues to host nearly 3 million Afghan refugees on its soil to this day. We are proud
that we opened our homes for our Afghan brothers and sisters in their hour of need.
Concurrently with the peace process, we expect the international community to
develop a time-bound and well-resourced plan for the return of Afghan refugees to
their homeland and their reintegration in Afghanistan. This can provide a key
component of endeavours to achieve lasting peace and security in Afghanistan.
Finally, I reiterate Pakistan’s desire to see a peaceful, stable, united, democratic,
prosperous and sovereign Afghanistan, at peace with itself and with its neighbours.
Peace is within the grasp of the Afghan people. They must not let it slip away.
I end by quoting the Prime Minister of Pakistan, Imran Khan: “We have no
favourites and will work with any Government that enjoys the confidence of the
Afghan people. History proves that Afghanistan can never be controlled from the
outside.”

56/60

21-08609

S/2021/601

Annex XXIX
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Poland to the United Nations
Poland would like to reaffirm its strong support for the leadership of the Special
Representative, Deborah Lyons, and for all the activities of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) aimed at bringing Afghan parties
together and paving the way towards peace and stability. We c ommend the Mission’s
efforts focused on strengthening the Afghan State’s capacity to protect civilians,
defend and promote human rights and ensure the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in all spheres of life. Poland fully endorses the Missi on’s
approach based on promoting national ownership, as well as inclusive and
accountable institutions that are built on the rule of law and good governance.
Poland would like to reiterate its support for the Afghanistan peace negotiations
and for the efforts of the Government of Afghanistan and of all other Afghan actors
to advance towards a sustainable political solution. We are aware that the path leading
to the final agreement will be long and difficult, but it is pertinent to continue the
process started in September of last year. Poland believes that an indefinite
postponement of the Istanbul Conference might mean losing another good
opportunity to build peace in Afghanistan. Having said that, we sincerely hope that
current impasse will be overcome shortly.
Poland is convinced that the situation in and around Afghanistan requires ample
regional cooperation in different dimensions. In this vein, we welcome the
appointment of Jean Arnault as the Secretary-General’s Personal Envoy on
Afghanistan and Regional Issues, and we wish the very best in his mission.
Unfortunately, the security situation in Afghanistan keeps deteriorating, and if
the violence is not stopped, in the long run, this may derail the whole peace process.
Daily attacks, often targeting civilians, continue in the country. We are deeply
concerned about the current human security situation in Afghanistan, as we observe
growing levels of violence and terrorism, conducted mainly by the Taliban, but also
by other terrorist organizations like Da’esh, Al-Qaida of Khorasan State and Tehrik-iTaliban. The security of people needs to be placed at the heart of conflict resolution
and peacebuilding if we want a peaceful, sustainable and prosperous future for
Afghanistan.
The protection of civilians, with special emphasis on the most vulnerable groups
such as women, children and persons with disabilities, remains a crucial area of
Poland’s multilateral commitments. As stated in the report of Secretary -General, the
armed conflict in Afghanistan lamentably continues to inflict serious casualties on
children. On 8 May, a car bomb attack on a high school in Kabul killed at least
90 people and injured more than 150, many of whom were teenage girls. Poland
condemns this outrageous attack in the strongest terms and is deeply concerned with
the growing violence against education facilities in Afghanistan in recent months.
We must take decisive action against this flagrant violation of international
humanitarian law. In this context, we reiterate our support for Security Council
resolution 2573 (2021), adopted unanimously by the Council in April, and we
sincerely hope it will contribute to ensuring better protection of civilian
infrastructure. At the same time, we underscore that the effect of the ongoing conflict
on Afghan children and youth and their right to education should remain a matter of
concern for the Council. We are also concerned about the fate of people with
disabilities. Yesterday we marked the second anniversary of the adoption of Council
resolution 2475 (2019) on persons with disabilities in armed conflicts, proposed by

21-08609

57/60

S/2021/601

Poland and the United Kingdom. We call upon all actors in Afghanistan f or its
implementation.
Looking ahead to the Mission’s mandate renewal before its September expiry,
strengthening the Mission’s child protection capacities should be treated as a matter
of priority. Poland also highlights the importance of incorporating c hild protection
considerations in the intra-Afghan talks. We urge the parties to the conflict to focus
on child protection measures as early confidence-building steps in the negotiations,
and we call for an immediate cessation of violence against children, and girls in
particular. Child recruits and detainees need to be released at once, and we must
monitor, report and respond to all abuses suffered by Afghan children in times of war.
Poland stands ready to support any initiative within the United Nations f ramework
aimed at ending and preventing these violations.
Poland is also committed to drawing the attention of the United Nations to the
importance and the need for enhanced women’s participation within the peace
processes, both in terms of numbers and roles they play. A practical manifestation of
this engagement is our work as a founding member within the United Nations Group
of Friends of Women in Afghanistan. We are convinced that the meaningful
participation of women in all phases of Afghan peace process, including official
negotiations, is a prerequisite of a real reconciliation. We also need to ensure that the
outcome of negotiations recognizes, protects and promotes the role of Afghan women
in all spheres of life.
Poland remains resolute to support the Government and people of Afghanistan
in building a self-reliant, sovereign and democratic State, with transparent, inclusive
and accountable governance. We have been present in Afghanistan for almost two
decades, contributing to international stabilization efforts, as well as to the
development of Afghanistan and the well-being of Afghan society. Today, we reiterate
our commitment to continue to support Afghanistan in its efforts to achieve lasting
peace and prosperity that leaves no one behind.

58/60

21-08609

S/2021/601

Annex XXX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the
United Nations, Feridun H. Sinirlioğlu
I thank Special Representative Lyons, the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Ms. Waly, and the Director of the Afghan
Women’s Network, Ms. Akrami, for their briefings.
I salute the presence of Haneef Atmar, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan, at this meeting.
The level of violence in Afghanistan has unfortunately reached very high levels.
The Secretary-General has reported that, in the six months following the start of the
peace talks in September 2020, the number of civilian casualties has increased
substantially compared with the same period in 2019. This is cause for deep concern.
The high number of civilian casualties and targeted killings of journalist s, civil
society activists and human right defenders are deplorable. The worsening security
situation, as well as the adverse effects of the coronavirus disease (COVID -19)
pandemic and drought have further exacerbated the challenges faced by the Afghan
people.
As a result, the risk of new waves of mass migration has been increasing. It is
estimated that migration flows will further grow in the months ahead, following the
withdrawal of foreign forces from Afghanistan. This may have security and
humanitarian implications in the wider region and beyond. Therefore, it is important
for the international community to start working on comprehensive contingency
planning to address this imminent challenge.
There can be no military solution in Afghanistan. The perspective of a
negotiated settlement should be kept alive. The parties should reach an immediate and
comprehensive ceasefire and continue in good faith the negotiations for a political
settlement.
Sustainable peace can only be achieved through an inclusive Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned political process. To support and reinvigorate the intra-Afghan
negotiations in Doha, Turkey remains ready to host a high -level conference in
Istanbul, together with Qatar and the United Nations. Such a conference will aim to
give momentum to the ongoing Afghanistan peace negotiations, to end violence and
to help achieve an inclusive negotiated settlement leading to lasting peace in
Afghanistan.
To this end, the parties and, in particular, the Taliban should clearly show their
genuine willingness to constructively take part in such an exercise.
We also continue to stress the need to strengthen political inclusion and national
consensus within the Republic team.
At the same time, it is crucial to have an inclusive peace process, which includes
women, youth groups and religious leaders. Broad-based ownership of the peace
process can be achieved with the participation of all segments of Afghan society. This
is indispensable for achieving lasting peace and the preservation of funda mental
rights and freedoms. The gains made at significant costs over the last two decades
cannot be sacrificed.
We also support an enhanced role for the United Nations in contributing to the
peace and reconciliation process in Afghanistan. A recent occasion in that regard has
been the talks we held with the Personal Envoy of the Secretary -General, Jean
Arnault, during his visit to the region.
21-08609

59/60

S/2021/601

It is certainly the region itself that has the greatest role, interest and
responsibility in establishing and sustaining a secure, prosperous and peaceful
Afghanistan.
Recognizing the importance of regional cooperation in support of peace, we
have taken several initiatives to build confidence between Afghanistan and its
neighbours and encouraged constructive and results-oriented dialogue. In that vein,
we recently held trilateral meetings, with Afghanistan’s key neighbours, namely
Pakistan and Iran.
We particularly support regional efforts focusing on enhancing economic and
infrastructure connectivity, to boost trade, transport, transit, energy and cultural
cooperation. Turkey will continue its contributions to Afghanistan, inter alia within
the multilateral platforms, including through the Heart of Asia -Istanbul Process.
Over the last months, we have witnessed dastardly terrorist attacks in the
country, claiming many innocent lives, including high school students and teenage
schoolgirls. We once again condemn these heinous acts in the strongest terms.
The access of Afghan children to education has a central role in Turkey’s
assistance efforts in Afghanistan. As we did in the past, we will continue our support
by building schools, providing assistance and changing the lives of hundreds of girls
and their families. At the same time, we will maintain our active role in supporting
the security of Afghanistan.
Despite significant challenges and threats that remain in the country, we will
continue to support the Afghan people in their path towards a peaceful, stable and
prosperous Afghanistan. At this critical juncture, the international community should
take stock of the contributions it has made and carefully assess the heavy cost of
failing the Afghan people.

60/60

21-08609
