5

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Recalling hopefully the letters exchanged recently
between Mr. Khrushchev, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
Mr. Kennedy, President of the United States of
America, and Mr. Macmillan, Prime Minister of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
in which they expressed their readiness to resume disarmament negotiations with renewed determination and
vigour,
Determined to avert the grave dangers to the human
race of nuclear confrontation, on which the recent crisis
focused attention,
1. Reaffirms the need for the conclusion, at the
earliest possible date, of an agreement on general and
complete disarmament based on the joint statement of
agreed principles for disarmament negotiations, submitted on 20 September 1961 by the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and the United States of America9
and endorsed by the General Assembly in resolution
1722 (XVI);
2. Calls upon the Conference of the Eighteen-Nati?n
Committee on Disarmament to resume at Geneva its
negotiations on general and complete disarmament, with
effective controls, expeditiously and in a spirit of constructive compromise, until ag:eement has been reached;
3. Recommends that urgent attention should be given
by the Eighteen-Nation Committee to various collateral
measures intended to decrease tension and to facilitate
general and complete disarmament;
4. Requests the Eighteen-Nation Committee to report periodically to the General Assembly on the progress of its work and, in any case, not later than the
second week of April 1963;
5. Transmits to the Disarmament Commission, and
reques.ts the Secretary-General to make available to the
Eighteen-Nation Committee, the documents and records
of plenary meetings of the General Assembly and meetings of the First Committee at which the question of
disarmament was discussod.
1173rd plenary meeting,
21 November 1962.
1801 (XVII). Question of convening a conference
for the purpose of signing a convention on
the prohihition of the use of nuclear and
thermo-nuclear weapons

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the question of convening a conference for the purpose of signing a convention on the prohibition of the
use of nuclear and thermo-nuclear weapons, 10
Having regard to the usefulness of further consultation with Governments of Member States on this
question,
Requests the Secretary-General to consult further
the Governments of Member States to ascertain their
views on the possibility of convening a special conference for signing a convention on the prohibition of the
use of nuclear and thermo-nuclear weapons for war
9 Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 19, document A/4879.
10 Ibid., Seventeenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 26,
document A/5174 and Add.l and 2.

purposes, and to report on the re~ults. of such consu_ltation to the General Assembly at its eighteenth sess10n.
1192nd pfenary meeting,
14 December 1962.
1802 (XVH). Jnternational co-operation in the
peaceful uses of outer space

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1721 (XVI) of 20 December 1961 on international co-operation in the peaceful
uses of outer space,
Believing that the activities of States in the exploration and use of outer space sho1..:d be carried out in
conformity with international law including !he Charter
of the United Nations, in the interest of friendly relations among nations,
Stressing the necessity of the progressive development of international law pertaining to the further
elaboration of basic legal principles governing the
activities of States in the exploration and use of outer
space and to liability for space vehicle accidents and
to assistance to and return of astronauts and space
vehicles and to other legal problems,
B earinq in mind that the application of scientific and
technological advances in outer space, particularly in the
fields of meteorology and communications, can bring
great advantages to mankind and contribute to the
economic and social progress of the developing countries as envisaged in the United Nations Development
Decade programme,
Having considered the report submitted by the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space in response
to resolution 1721 (XVI) ,11

I
1. Notes with regret that the Committee on the

Peaceful Uses of Outer Space has not yet made recommendations on legal questions connected with the peaceful uses of outer space;
2. Calls upon all Member States to co-operate in the
further development of law for outer space;
3. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to continue urgently its work on the further
elaboration of basic legal principles governing the activities of States in the exploration and use of outer space
and on liability for space vehicle accidents and on assistance to and return of astronauts and space vehicles and
on other legal problems;
4. Refers to the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space, as a basis for this work, all proposals
which have been made thus far, including the draft
declaration of the basic principles governing the activities of States pertaining to the exploration and use of
outer space submitted by the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, 12 the draft international agreement on the
rescue of astronauts and spaceships making emergency
landings submitted by the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, 13 the draft proposal on assistance to and
return of space vehicles and personnel suhmitte<l hy the
United States of America,14' the draft proposal on lia11 Ibid.,
12 Ibid.,

agenda item 27, document A/5181.
annex III, A.
13 Ibid., annex Ill, B.
14 Ibid., annex TU, C.

General Assembly-Seventeenth Session

6

bility for space vehicle accidents submitted by the United
States of America, 15 the draft code for international
co-operation in the peaceful uses of outer space submitted by the United Arab Republic, 16 the draft declaration of basic principles governing the activities of States
pertaining to the e~plorat~on and use of outer spa~e submitted by the Umted Kingdom of Great Bntam and
Northern Ireland, 17 the draft declaration of principles
relating to the exploration and use of outer space submitted by the United States of America, 18 and all other
proposals and documents presented to the General
Assembly during its debates on this item and the records
of those debates;

II
1. Endorses the recommendations set forth in the
report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space concerning the exchange of information ;19
2. N ates with appreciation that a number of Member
States have already, on a voluntary basis, provided information on their national space programmes, and
urges other States and regional and international organizations to do so;
3. Urges all Member States and appropriate specialized agencies to give whole-hearted and effective support to the international programmes mentioned in the
report and already under way, including the International Year of the Quiet Sun and the World Magnetic
Survey;
4. N ates that the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space considers that the creation and use of
sounding rocket launching facilities under United
Nations sponsorship would contribute to the achievement of the objectives of resolution 1721 (XVI) by
furthering international collaboration in space research
and the advancement of human knowledge, and by providing opportunity for valuable practical training for
interested users ;
5. N ates the recommendation that Member States
should consider the establishment under United Nations
sponsorship of a sounding rocket facility, or facilities,
on the geomagnetic equator, in time for the International Year of the Quiet Sun ;
6. Endorses the basic principles suggested by the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space for the
operation of such facilities under United Nations sponsorship;
7. Affirms that such facilities, when established and
operated in accordance with these principles, shall, at
the request of the host Member State, be eligible for
United Nations sponsorship;

III
1. N ates with appreciation the prompt initial response of the World Meteorological Organization to the
request of the General Assembly, as embodied in resolution 1721 C (XVI), that it report on a programme to
advance atmospheric science research and to develop
improved weather forecasting capabilities in the light
of developments in outer space ;20
annex III, D.
annex III, E.
17 Ibid., document A/C.1/879.
18 Jbid., dociment A/C.1/881.
rn Ibid., document A/5181, para. 14.
20 A/5229.
15 Ibid.,
16 Jbid.,

2. Calls itpon Member States to strengthen weather
forecasting services and to encourage their scientific
communities to co-operate in the expansion of atmospheric science research;
3. Recommends that the World Meteorological Organization, in consultation with other United Nations
agencies and governmental and non-governmental organizations, should develop in greater detail its plan for
an expanded programme to strengthen meteorological
services and research, placing particular emphasis on
the use of meteorological satellites and on the expansion
of training and educational opportunities in these fields;
4. Invites the International Council of Scientific
Unions through its member unions and national academies to develop an expanded programme of atmospheric
science research which will complement the programmes
fostered by the World Meteorological Organization;
5. Invites United Nations agencies concerned with
the granting of technical and financial assistance, in consultation with the World Meteorological Organization,
to give sympathetic consideration to requests from
Member States for technical and financial assistance to
supplement their own resources for these activities, including the improvement of meteorological networks ;
6. Requests the World Meteorological Organization,
following its Congress in April 1963, to report to the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, and to
the Economic and Social Council at its thirty-sixth session, on steps taken relating to these activities;
IV
1. N ates with appreciation the prompt initial response of the International Telecommunication Union to
the request of the General Assembly, as embodied in
resolution 1721 D (XVI), that it report on those
aspects of space communications in which international
co-operation will be required ;21
2. Believes that communication by satellite offers
great benefits to mankind, as it will permit the expansion of radio, telephone and television transmissions, including the broadcast of United Nations activities, thus
facilitating contact among the peoples of the world ;
3. Emphasizes the importance of international cooperation to achieve effective satellite communications
which will be available on a world-wide basis ;
4. Observes that the Secretary-General of the International Telecommunication Union has invited member
States to submit information on:
(a) Technical progress and developments in space
telecommunications ;
( b) Subjects which they regard as appropriate for
international co-operation in order to achieve the objectives set forth in resolution 1721 D (XVI) ;
(c) Which of those subjects, if any, should be included in the agenda of the Extraordinary Administrative Radio Conference to be held in October 1%3;
5. N ates that the Secretary-General of the International Telecommunication Union, in the light of the
replies, will report on these questions to the next meeting
of its Administrative Council in March 1%3 in order
that the Council may complete the agenda for this
Conference ;
6. Considers it of the utmost importance that this
Conference make allocations of radio frequency bands
sufficient to meet expected outer space needs;
21 A/5237.

Resolutions adopted on the rep01·ts of the First Committee

Noting that the United Nations forces which were
sent to Korea in accordance with United Nations resolutions have in greater part already been withdrawn, and
that the Governments concerned are prepared to withdraw their remaining forces from Korea when the conditions for a lasting settlement laid down by the General
Assembly have been fulfilled,
Recalling that the United Nations, under its Charter,
is fully and rightfully empowered to take collective
action to repel aggression, to restore peace and security
and to extend its good offices to seeking a peaceful settlement in Korea,
1. Reaffirms that the objectives of the United Nations
in Korea are to bring about, by peaceful means, the
establishment of a unified, independent and democratic
Korea under a representative form of government, and
the full restoration of international peace and security
in the area;
2. Calls upon the North Korean authorities to accept
those established United Nations objectives which haYe
been repeatedly affirmed by the General Assembly;
3. Urges that continuing efforts be made to achieve
those objectives;
4. Requests the United Nations Commission for the
Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea to continue its
work in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly.
1199th plenary meeting,
19 December 1962.

7. Requests the International Telecommunication
Union to report to the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space, and to the Economic and Social Council
at its thirty-sixth session, on progress made relating to
its outer space activities.
1192nd plenary meeting,
14 December 1962.
1855 (XVII). The Korean question

The General Assembly,
Having noted the report of the United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea
signed at Seoul, Korea, on 1 September 1962,22 and the
addendum to the report signed at Seoul on 19 November 1962,23
Reaffirming its resolutions 112 (II) of 14 November
1947, 195 (III) of 12 December 1948, 293 (IV) of
21 October 1949, 376 (V) of 7 October 1950, 811 (IX)
of 11 December 1954, 910 A (X) of 29 November
1955, 1010 (XI) of 11 January 1957, 1180 (XII) of
29 November 1957, 1264 (XIII) of 14 November 1958,
1455 (XIV) of 9 December 1959 and 1740 (XVI) of
20 December 1961,
22 Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventeenth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 28, document A/5213.
23 Ibid., document A/5213/ Add.I.

*

*

*

Notes
Condemnation of propaganda favouring preventive nuclear war (item 93)

At its 1177th plenary meeting on 27 November 1962, the General Assembly
approved the decision of the First Committee, as set forth in the letter dated
22 November 1962 from the Chairman of the First Committee to the President of
the General Assembly. 24
Question of general and complete disarmament (item 90)

At its 1199th plenary meeting, on 19 December 1962, the General Assembly
approved the recommendation of the First Committee, as set forth in its report/ 5
that the consider<ltion of the draft resolution submitted by Bolivia, Brazil, Chile and
Ecuaclor 26 should be postponed to the eighteenth session.

The urgent need for suspension of nuclear and thermo-nudear tests
(item 77)

At its 1200th plenary meeting, on 20 December 1,962, the General Assembly
took note of the report of the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on
Disarmament. 27
2 4 Ibid., agenda item 93, document A/5311.
2 5 Ibid., agenda item 90, document A/5303/ Add.I, para. 3.
26 Ibid.,
2 7 Ibid.,

7

document A/C.l/L.312/Rev.2.
agenda item 77, documents A/5338 and Add.I and 2.
