S/PV.8206

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8206th meeting

Friday, 16 March 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Van Oosterom. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Netherlands)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Tenya
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Allen
Mr. Miller

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-07334 (E)
*1807334*

S/PV.8206

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. De Mistura is joining the meeting via videoteleconference from Brussels.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Recalling the Security Council’s latest note 507 on
its working methods (S/2017/507), I wish to encourage
all participants, both members and non-members of the
Council, to deliver their statements in five minutes or
less. Note 507 also encourages briefers to be succinct and
to focus on key issues. Briefers are further encouraged
to limit initial remarks to 15 minutes or less.
I now give the floor to Mr. De Mistura.
Mr. De Mistura: We have been constantly, around
the clock, in touch with the Secretary-General, my
colleagues in the field and all those with influence
because, as the Security Council knows, many events,
some of which are very worrisome, have taken place in
the past few days.
On 7 March, I briefed the Council in consultations
on the status of the implementation of resolution 2401
(2018). At that time, I said that there had not been any
sustained ceasefire or adequate humanitarian access at
that stage. On 12 March, the Secretary-General himself
orally reported to the Council on the implementation
of resolution 2401 (2018) and United Nations efforts to
create such conditions by using his own good offices
or those of his own team, including ourselves (see
S/PV.8201). The Secretary-General also underscored
that it was incumbent on all the parties and on all those
with influence in the Council, in the Astana process
and in the broader International Syria Support Group
to act on the resolution throughout Syria without delay.
Allow me to update the Council on where we stand
on the matter since then — that is, since the SecretaryGeneral gave a very comprehensive report — on the
very day after the sad anniversary of the beginning
2/10

16/03/2018

of the conflict. We are entering the eighth year. In
everything that we are doing in the horrific conflict,
our compass — and I know the Council feels the
same — has been, is and should be the Syrian people,
wherever they are, who are telling us that they are fed
up with the conflict and the way in which civilians
are being affected in the cross-fighting. That is our
compass. So whatever we do these days and whatever
we suggest, including our current facilitation role, is
constantly framed by the urgent needs of ordinary
civilians — women, children and men.
Since the briefing by the Secretary-General, in
the past few days further meetings have taken place
between the Russian Federation and Jaysh Al-Islam
on the outskirts of Douma, which is the northernmost
of the three opposition-controlled enclaves in eastern
Ghouta. The result of that engagement is a tenuous and
fragile ceasefire between the Government, the Russian
military and the Jaysh Al-Islam forces, which has now
largely continued to hold for the sixth day. We hope that it
will continue to do so, notwithstanding the engagement
between Government forces and Jaysh Al-Islam in
other areas outside Douma, such as the village of
Reihan. In other words, the talks, the discussions and
the ceasefire have been effected and implemented with
Jaysh Al-Islam in Douma but not beyond.
However, that is only one part of eastern Ghouta.
For example, the ceasefire is not being replicated in the
rest of eastern Ghouta or elsewhere, and it is extremely
fragile. While I speak, I understand that at this very
moment there are some delicate meetings taking place
regarding the follow-up to the arrangement regarding
Douma. Let us therefore hope that the ceasefire holds
because that would be at least one good piece of news
among very bad news.
The United Nations has been practicably offering
its good offices but efforts to facilitate meaningful
contacts between the Russian Federation and Faylaq
Al-Rahman or Ahrar Al-Sham have not yet produced
results. They are dominant forces in the two other
enclaves in eastern Ghouta — in Harasta and around
Kafr Batna, Ayn Tarma, Arbin, Zamalka and Jobar,
respectively. In those two other areas, we have not
seen any ceasefire to speak of. Rather we have seen
Government forces and their allies pursue a concerted
escalation against those two enclaves with rapid ground
offensives, accompanied by shelling and airstrikes.
Reports of a public market in Kafr Batna having been
18-07334

16/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East

hit are just coming in. Of course, we need to verify
them, since they are new reports.
Again, regrettably, there are numerous civilian
casualties. We have also seen continuous shelling
coming from those areas of eastern Ghouta inside
civilian areas of Damascus again. We are also hearing
from people inside eastern Ghouta, asking the United
Nations, the Council and Member States with influence
to pressure the armed opposition groups to let civilians
leave and to pressure all parties for a ceasefire and
protection for those who do not want to leave but want
to stay. The bottom line of all this is that too many
civilians are suffering and too many have died in
that area.
Let me first say that it need not be that way.
Negotiations in Douma in the past few days show that
there is a way to create the conditions to advance the
implementation of resolution 2401 (2018). As we have
done so far, the United Nations therefore stands ready
to offer its good offices to all parties to facilitate further
engagement of that kind so as to make a concrete
contribution to the implementation of resolution 2401
(2018) in all areas of eastern Ghouta. The United Nations
is not ready to facilitate ultimatums from either side.
It stands ready to facilitate discussion, a ceasefire and
evacuations. Meanwhile, violence has escalated across
many other parts of Syria, where there is no ceasefire
to speak of. In Afrin, the Turkish Government forces
and their armed allies continue to gain ground rapidly.
We have also received reports of shelling in besieged
Fo’ah and Kafraya — two villages which, for a long
time, have been held by the opposition. There have also
been air strikes in Idlib and a new armed-opposition
offensive in Hama. Clashes and air strikes have also
occurred in Dar’a, southern Syria.
If now is the time for de-escalation, the Security
Council had better convince me that de-escalation is
indeed taking place. What we see on the map looks like
the opposite — escalation. Let me re-emphasize that
resolution 2401 (2018) cannot be applied piecemeal. It
is not an à la carte menu. It applies to all non-SecurityCouncil-listed terrorist groups across Syria. Let me
also reiterate the words of the Secretary-General who
stated that even efforts to combat terrorist groups
identified by the Council do not supersede obligations
under international law.
I am sure that members of the Council will have the
opportunity to hear a briefing from Mr. Mark Lowcock.

S/PV. 8206

Meanwhile, since I have the opportunity to brief the
Council today, let me provide some information about
the humanitarian situation. On 13 March, the United
Nations observed the evacuation of 147 civilians,
including 10 critical medical cases — the majority of
them women and children from Douma who sought
shelter in rural Damascus. Based on the outcome of
discussions and meetings between the Russian military
and Jaysh al-Islam, facilitated by the United Nations,
on 15 March, United Nations colleagues also delivered
a convoy of food assistance to Douma for 26,100 people
in need. Additional medical cases were also evacuated.
Let us be honest and admit that positive efforts
are generally welcome and long overdue, but remain
limited. Civilians require much more, including
medical and health-care supplies, the restoration of
water, commercial access and freedom of movement.
Members of the Council must have seen the report in
which Mr. Peter Maurer, who had been meeting with
some of the people in eastern Ghouta, stated they
were simply asking for water. They just needed water.
Humanitarian colleagues who entered those areas spoke
of having seen hunger, dire want, poverty, haggard
faces and despair all around. Even for experienced
people, such as my own humanitarian colleagues, it
is an unsustainable situation in which people are on
the brink of collapse a few kilometres — 20 minutes’
drive — from Damascus. Let me be clear, that is only in
Douma — an area which has seen a few days of ceasefire
and positive movement on humanitarian access. Can we
imagine the situation elsewhere? In other words, in the
other two enclaves of eastern Ghouta further south, we
have seen no ceasefire to speak of and to borrow the
words of the Secretary-General, people are still living
in hell on Earth.
Scores of people have been killed and the injured
left unattended because health workers could not reach
them due to the relentless air strikes. We have heard
fresh allegations about the use of incendiary weapons
in various urban areas and the targeting of medical
facilities since 12 March, as well as new and disturbing
allegations of chlorine use in those areas. As the
Secretary-General has stated, we cannot independently
verify those allegations but we also cannot and should
not ignore them. We have also received reports of
thousands of people displaced, some moving further
into eastern Ghouta and many others exiting en masse
in large groups, as a result of the advances of the Syrian
Government in Hama, Noria and in Saqba.

18-073343/10

S/PV.8206

The situation in the Middle East

Evacuations not observed by the United Nations
are also reported to have taken place, including from
Misraba and other areas. The United Nations was not
present to observe those evacuations and is unable to
know the precise number of them. We urge parties that
all evacuations must take place in accordance with
the highest protection standards under international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
Whether civilians choose to stay or leave, they must
be protected against attacks and have access to the
essentials to survive. They must be safe and voluntarily
enter a place of their of choosing. The United Nations
stands ready to provide assistance to people in
need — those who choose to stay and those who want
to leave.
We are also extremely concerned about the plight of
civilians throughout Syria. They include the displaced,
as well as almost 3 million in besieged and hard-toreach areas and those caught up in escalations in Idlib,
Hama, Aleppo and Dar’a. Resolution 2401 (2018)
demands that all parties immediately lift the sieges
of populated areas. To date, that has not occurred.
According to my colleagues, the situation in Afrin is
particularly worrying. We have received reports of tens
of thousands of people displaced within Afrin and to
nearby Tell Rifaat and surrounding villages, Nubul and
Zahra, and other areas of Aleppo governorate.
The United Nations has also received reports of
civilian casualties and restrictions on movement for
many of the large numbers of civilians seeking to
leave the city. I urge all parties to ensure that civilians
seeking to leave Afrin be given safe passage. Since
6 March, it has been reported that people in Afrin city
have suffered from severe water shortages as its source
of water has been damaged by the fighting.
Allow me to add a point of particular importance
that was revealed in a recent report. The safety of
Syrian women in particular is threatened when they are
evacuated following the lifting of a siege or end of a
battle. Threats include widespread sexual and genderbased violence, which has been widely documented
and mentioned by women’s groups. The protection and
needs of women must be at the forefront of our response.
With regard to a separate humanitarian issue,
on 14 March my technical team participated in the
first meeting of the Working Group on detainees
and missing persons that took place in Astana. We
pressed the Astana guarantors at that meeting and
4/10

16/03/2018

before to make progress on the crucial issue, which
to us, is one of the main reasons we attend meetings
in Astana. It is an issue that has been at the forefront
of our concerns. We have offered to host a standing
secretariat so that information on detainees can be
distributed in all meetings of the Working Group. Thus
far, the guarantors have simply agreed to consider our
proposal about a standing secretariat in Geneva to
monitor the issue of detainees, but no final decision
has been taken. We will intensify our contact with
them and the parties in order to accelerate work on that
important — frankly, crucial — humanitarian issue. We
should remind ourselves that the issue of detainees and
missing persons was first raised in Astana a year ago
and, sadly, no concrete progress has been made so far.
We owe it to the Syrian families on all sides who have
long been awaiting word on the fate of their relatives.
Although the logic of war clearly still prevails
and resolution 2401 (2018) is not being implemented
as it should be, as the Secretary-General stated, we
absolutely refuse to give up hope of seeing Syria rising
from the ashes. The Syrian people deserve to be helped.
The Syrian people are proud. They love their country.
We need to help them to go back to having a normal
country. There too, it is with the people of Syria in
mind and their legitimate aspirations for the long-term
shape of their country that we continue our political
efforts — in spite of what we see on the ground — for
a sustainable settlement of the conflict. And there too,
the voices of women across Syria conveying their wish
to play a meaningful role — just as with our own civil
society — in the next stage of the political process must
be heard.
Therefore, my team and I have continued to consult,
in the context of the political side, widely and intensively
on the formation of the constitutional committee in
Geneva in an effort to advance the full and complete
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) within the
framework of the United Nations-facilitated political
process in Geneva. To this end, we seek to leverage the
momentum produced by the Sochi final declaration,
which emphasizes the fact that we should have a
constitutional committee in Geneva with the assistance
of the United Nations. We take note, therefore, of the
statement issued — today, I believe — by the Astana
guarantors in their own ministerial meeting, in which
they reaffirmed that
“the results of the Sochi Congress, especially to form
the constitutional committee and to facilitate the
18-07334

16/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East

beginning of its work in Geneva with the assistance
of the United Nations Secretary-General’s Special
Envoy for Syria as soon as possible.”
However, I have to be frank. I must report that at
this stage — more than two weeks beyond one month
since the National Dialogue Congress in Sochi — we
have not yet received the complete inputs on the pool of
candidates for a constitutional committee developed in
Sochi, from the three guarantors. It is my intention, in
close consultations with all concerned, to look carefully
at this pool when we receive it, and at others as required
and consistent with resolution 2254 (2015), to facilitate
the establishment of the constitutional committee. I
must also report, once again, that there is still some
serious homework to be done regarding the Syrian
Government’s readiness to engage on implementing
the Sochi final declaration and moving forward with a
constitutional committee in Geneva. I have impressed
that on the relevant guarantors repeatedly in recent
weeks, just as I continue to make clear the readiness
of the United Nations to engage the Government of
Syria on this matter. We need them to be part of it. We
need to have the comprehensive participation of all
Syrian parties.
In the meantime, we have been proactive in
offering creative suggestions as to how to expedite
the formation of that constitutional committee. We
continue to assess various options on how to advance
discussions on all four baskets of the political process in
Geneva. In particular, it is clear that there must be more
and serious talks with the Government, the opposition
and all Syrian and international stakeholders on what
is required in order to establish a secure, calm, neutral
environment, as per resolution 2254 (2015), in which a
constitutional process and United Nations-supervised
presidential and parliamentary elections, pursuant to a
new constitution, could viably take place. We remained
determined to engage all parties.
As I said in my most recent briefing, a month
ago (see S/PV.8181), conflict is increasingly spilling
over Syria’s borders, or at least risks doing so. This
month we have further incidents of potential and real
international confrontation within Syria that we cannot
independently verify, but which concern us. That is
precisely we need urgent action on the political front.
Syrians need to see some positive movement on the
political process.

S/PV. 8206

On Monday I will be attending a meeting of European
Union (EU) Foreign Ministers here in Brussels. On
Tuesday, I should be back in Geneva. I will attend
the meeting at the invitation of High Representative
Mogherini, in the context of the preparatory efforts of
the EU and the United Nations for their joint ministerial
conference in Brussels at the end of April. I hope that
the Conference will provide a significant opportunity
to bolster international support for the Syrian people
though humanitarian commitments. I also hope that the
gathering of a significant number of Foreign Ministers
will also provide an opportunity to reinvigorate the
collective efforts of the international community
towards a sustainable peace through the United Nationsled peace process in Geneva, within the framework of
resolution 2254 (2015) and other relevant resolutions.
In conclusion, I urge caution. We must recognize
that we are witnessing developments of the utmost
gravity on the ground. These events demand action, and
the world is worried and watching. I remain concerned
that concrete matters that we have been trying to
advance — resolution 2401 (2018), detainees and a
constitutional committee — need to move faster and
with more meaningful impact than has so far proven
possible. And de-escalation must replace what we are
watching at the moment — a clear tendency towards
escalation. I will continue, creatively and determinedly,
to seek to facilitate the overall political process. As the
Secretary-General said on Monday, the ultimate goal is
to help the Syrians and to
“see a united, democratic Syria able to avoid
fragmentation and sectarianism and with its
sovereignty and territorial integrity respected,
and to see a Syrian people able to freely decide
their future and choose their political leadership.”
(S/PV.8201, p. 5)
The President: I thank Mr. De Mistura for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
you, Sir, for convening this meeting and Mr. De
Mistura for his briefing. We are grateful for his tireless
and important efforts.
We agree that the continuation of the conflict
and the regrettable humanitarian situation in Syria
undermines the prospects of making political

18-073345/10

S/PV.8206

The situation in the Middle East

progress. The unpunished lack of compliance with
international law, international humanitarian law and
Security Council resolutions erode the needed trust for
sustainable peacebuilding. While we express our deep
sympathy and solidarity with the victims, we would
like at the same time to indicate our concern over the
impact of the Syrian conflict on regional stability, the
Council’s credibility and the functioning of an rulesbased international system.
More specifically, the international community
is awaiting an immediate ceasefire throughout Syria,
full access to the needed humanitarian assistance, the
attainment of a political agreement that could bring
about sustainable peace in Syria, and accountability
for the heinous crimes committed, including the use of
chemical weapons. There can be no more excuses and no
more delays. The humanitarian ceasefire, as stipulated
in resolution 2401 (2018), must be implemented
immediately in eastern Ghouta, Idlib, Afrin, Raqqa,
Rukban and throughout Syria.
All parties should commit to resolving the conflict
peacefully, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). That
will require the constructive participation of the Syrian
Government and the opposition groups in establishing
a constitutional committee, as agreed in Sochi. We
believe that a new constitution must be drafted to lay the
political and institutional groundwork for sustainable
peace in Syria.
The Syrian Government and all parties to the
conflict must rise to the occasion in confronting the
gravity of the situation, prevent its further deterioration
and escalation, and fulfil their obligations and
responsibilities. The Astana guarantors must also meet
expectations in terms of the special responsibility
entailed by their influence and involvement on the
ground. Yesterday’s meeting in Astana and the meeting
to be held in Istanbul in early April must yield concrete
outcomes, including in the matter of those detained
and missing.
As a member of the Council, Peru believes that its
own responsibility vis-à-vis the tragic humanitarian
situation in Syria entails requiring all parties involved
in the conflict, especially those with greater ability
to influence events on the ground, to comply with
international law and international humanitarian law.
Peru places priority on the protection of civilians,
in particular women and children, and stresses the
6/10

16/03/2018

importance of maintaining the unity of the Council
concerning this and all other conflicts and humanitarian
crises, wherever they might arise.
In conclusion, we convey our support for Mr. De
Mistura’s work to encourage dialogue among the Syrian
opposition groups that have expressed their willingness
to comply with the ceasefire and expel terrorists from
eastern Ghouta and other parties to the Syrian conflict.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): We appreciate the initiative of convening
this meeting owing to the gravity of the situation on
the ground. We also thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. De Mistura, for his
informative briefing.
As we continue to seek a solution to the tragic
humanitarian situation throughout the country, it is also
important to continue pursuing political efforts. We all
believe that there is no military solution to the Syrian
issue. The international community must continue to
support and encourage the intra-Syrian negotiations
and impress upon all parties that it is only by sitting
around the negotiating table and engaging in frank,
direct and inclusive dialogue that a solution can be
reached that addresses everyone’s concerns. In such a
process, we must ensure that the sovereignty and unity
of Syria are respected.
We support the United Nations in its mission as a
mediator in finding a political solution to the Syrian
issue, pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015). It is imperative
to relaunch negotiations in Geneva and all other peace
initiatives, including those in Astana and Sochi, which
must lead to the resumption of negotiations in Geneva.
The final outcome must ensure the well-being of the
Syrian people. Consolidating a political process in
Syria will be difficult without eradicating terrorism.
The international community must also demonstrate
its unfaltering unity by joining forces and following
the same criteria to combat the various terrorist
organizations operating in Syria.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Envoy De Mistura for his update.
The humanitarian situation in Syria remains dire.
We echo the United Nations call on all parties to
facilitate a ceasefire and unconditional, unimpeded and
sustained access to all people in need throughout the
country, pursuant to resolution 2401 (2018). It is also
vital to take the measures necessary to protect civilians
18-07334

16/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East

and civilian infrastructure, including schools and
medical facilities, as required under international law
and human rights standards.
As members of the Security Council are aware, the
guarantor States of the agreement on the cessation of
hostilities adopted a joint statement on the settlement
of the conflict and its future direction at the meeting of
Foreign Ministers on 16 March in Astana. Kazakhstan
remains committed to bringing peace to Syria. The
situation is not simple, but nevertheless we cannot give
up. Kazakhstan has taken the following positions.
First, we do not believe in a military solution,
for that would only aggravate an already difficult
situation. We need serious compromises from every
side. Any conflict — even the most serious — ends
with negotiations, and we must strive to achieve the
goal of bringing peace to Syria. We know of many
fine examples in which conflicting parties in many
other countries have come together despite difficult
negotiations so as to find common prosperity for
their peoples.
Secondly, Kazakhstan calls on the Syrian
Government and opposition parties to immediately
begin substantive talks on the entire spectrum of issues.
Astana does not anticipate any political or international
miracles, yet sees great promise in a collective and
pragmatic approach. Kazakhstan, for its part, is deeply
committed to ending the intense suffering, which has
lasted for eight long years.
We all know that today Syria is undergoing a
significant challenge that must not lead to a deadlock,
but offer new opportunities to pave the way to a peaceful
and lasting political settlement to the crisis. We hope
that the forthcoming ninth round of talks, to be held in
Astana in May, will offer an opportunity to end the war.
In that regard, we will urge the guarantors and Syrian
parties to overcome their differences through dialogue
and reach a final agreement covering every aspect of
the issue.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte D’Ivoire) (spoke
in French): Côte d’Ivoire thanks Mr. De Mistura,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, for
his briefing on the latest developments in the political
process and the situation in the country, and for his
work to find a solution to the ongoing crisis.
The Ivorian delegation remains concerned about
the upsurge in fighting, which with every passing

S/PV. 8206

day further distances us from finding a peaceful
settlement through political negotiations. Despite the
efforts of the international community to establish
a ceasefire, we continue to witness indiscriminate
attacks and bombardments in eastern Ghouta and other
areas in Syria, thereby resulting in a large number
of casualties among civilians and the destruction of
important infrastructure.
My country therefore calls once again for an
immediate cessation of hostilities and urges the
international community to work together towards the
effective implementation of resolution 2401 (2018).
That resolution, which was unanimously adopted by the
Security Council, calls for establishing a humanitarian
cessation of hostilities of at least 30 days so as to
allow for the safe, lasting and unhindered access of
humanitarian convoys to deliver essential supplies to
the people of eastern Ghouta and other areas in Syria.
Should it be implemented, such a temporary cessation
of hostilities could not only alleviate the suffering of
millions of people living in distress and hopelessness,
but also allow for the resumption of political talks
among Syrian parties in a peaceful environment. In that
regard, Côte d’Ivoire hopes that the Astana meeting will
lead to a lasting ceasefire, improve the humanitarian
situation and establish the conditions for advancing the
political process.
My country welcomes all initiatives aimed at
reviving the inter-Syrian dialogue and encourages
Mr. De Mistura to continue undertaking, within the
framework of the Geneva process, the steps needed to
set up the committee responsible for drafting Syria’s
new constitution, as agreed at the meeting in Sochi in
the Russian Federation.
In conclusion, my delegation urges the Syrian
parties to give priority to dialogue, which is the only
way to advance the political process with a view to a
definitive end to the crisis, in accordance with the road
map laid out by resolution 2254 (2015). That is Côte
d’Ivoire’s profound conviction and it is in the interests
of the Syrian people.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational States of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate the briefing
given by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, to whom we reiterate
our support in the discharge of his duties.
As on previous occasions, my delegation wishes
to express its support for the various meetings held in

18-073347/10

S/PV.8206

The situation in the Middle East

different contexts and at different levels, which have
allowed for the creation of de-escalation zones, the
cessation of hostilities and humanitarian access. At
the same time, we remain converned over the urgent
need to advance in a political process that will help
to resolve the conflict in Syria so that the people can
return to peace.
That is why we again highlight the commitments
made at the Syrian National Dialogue Congress, held
in Sochi on 30 January. It focused on strengthening
the political process led by the United Nations within
the framework of resolution 2254 (2015), particularly
through the drafting of a new constitution by a
constitutional committee, which we believe should be
representative and neutral. We underscore in particular
that the mandate, terms of reference, powers, rules of
procedure and selection criteria for the composition of
the committee must be agreed in the United Nationssupported talks held in Geneva.
In that regard, we firmly believe that the principles
agreed at the Sochi Congress will lead to a strong
commitment on the part of the parties to respecting
the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria,
in the context of its right to choose its own political,
economic and social systems, without pressure or
foreign interference. We are certain that the political
process will resume as a result of those dialogues.
However, and despite the advances in the political
arena, we remain concerned over the critical situation
of the Syrian people. In that regard, we welcome the
holding of the Astana meeting and its outcome, and we
hope that those political agreements will be reflected
on the ground. We also express our greatest hopes for
the success of the summit to be held shortly among
high-level representatives of Turkey, Iran and Russia.
We hope that it will serve to reaffirm the Astana
agreements and de-escalation zones with a view to
reducing violence and addressing the needs of families
of detained, kidnapped and disappeared persons.
Once again, the Council has the challenge of
remaining united and calling on the parties involved to
join forces and maintain the impetus of the Astana talks
and the political process in Sochi, among others, the
outcomes of which, we reiterate, must strengthen the
political process in Geneva. We hope that those forums
for dialogue will promote points of convergence and
consensus in order to reduce violence and allow the
humanitarian access that is so necessary, not only for
8/10

16/03/2018

the safe and dignified return of refugees and internally
displaced persons, but also to achieve sustainable peace
in Syria. To that end, it is crucial for the parties to
demonstrate their willingness to seek a settlement to
the conflict, which has persisted for more than 8 years.
We again call on all parties involved to effectively
implement resolution 2401 (2018) throughout the
entire Syrian territory in order to achieve unrestricted
humanitarian access and permit the necessary
urgent medical evacuations. We reject any attempt at
fragmentation or sectarianism in Syria, and believe that
the Syrian people must be able to freely decide their
future and political leadership within the framework of
their sovereignty and territorial integrity. In that regard,
we reiterate that the only way to resolve the conflict is
through an inclusive, negotiated and concerted political
process, led by the Syrian people for the Syrian
people, which will enable a peaceful solution for all
parties involved.
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
I wish to again remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable to Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): On 12 March
(see S/PV.8201), I informed the members of the
Security Council of a number of measures undertaken
by the Syrian Government to alleviate the suffering
of Syrians throughout my country caused by armed
terrorist groups. Today, I assure those present once
again that the Government of Syria is indeed most keen
to save the lives of its citizens and continues to take all
necessary measures to ensure their safety and security.
In line with those efforts, the Government of
Syria opened the new secure corridor in Hamouriyah
village, which was liberated from terrorists yesterday
in eastern Ghouta. Its aim is to assist the evacuation
of civilians who are being used as human shields by
terrorist groups. Just yesterday, Thursday, 15 March,
more than 40,000 civilians exited eastern Ghouta
through the new additional corridor. They went to the
Syrian Government, which coordinated with the Syrian
Red Crescent, to facilitate their safe transportation
to temporary shelters that are equipped with all the
necessary resources. They were not transferred to
camps, or tents. The Syrian Army, in coordination with
18-07334

16/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East

the Russian Reconciliation Centre for Syria, has opened
a total of three corridors in Hamouriyah, Jisreen and
Wafideen. Yesterday, the Government of Syria also
allowed the entry of a joint assistance convoy of the Red
Crescent, the Red Cross and the United Nations, made
up of 25 trucks carrying 340 tons of various medical
and nutritional supplies. The Syrian Government will
continue to allow the passage of such convoys, security
conditions permitting.
In return for all those efforts undertaken by the
Government of Syria to protect its citizens, the armed
terrorist groups — upon direct instructions from the
Governments of the States supporting them — continue
to use civilians as human shields in eastern Ghouta and
prevent them from using the corridors as they target
them with bullets and missiles. It is quite strange
that the Government of Syria is shouldering the huge
responsibility of implementing resolution 2401 (2018)
and responding to the needs of civilians exiting the
inferno of terror in the eastern Ghouta, while the United
Nations agencies working in Damascus, including the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
and Governments of other countries that are lamenting
the destiny of our civilian population have done nothing
materially or morally to alleviate the suffering of tens of
thousands of people who have escaped from terrorism.
One hundred thousand civilians were displaced in Afrin
and around 100,000 fled eastern Ghouta —— a total of
almost 200,000 civilians — yet no one has provided
them with help.
Some States members of the Security Council
are abusing the work of the Council in launching
campaigns to defame and spread misinformation about
the Government of Syria, especially with respect to the
unofficial Arria Formula meeting that the Council held
on 12 March. However, I recall that the United Nations
is an Organization of Governments and not a theatre for
the display of power, and that giving the opportunity to
terrorist groups, including the so called White Helmets
affiliated with the Al-Nusra Front, to use the platform
of the Security Council represents a gross violation
of Security Council resolutions, especially those on
combating terrorism.
The biggest scandal is that one of the United
Nations agencies working in Damascus has asked for
the transfer of 76 White Helmets out of eastern Ghouta.
It does not care about the tens of thousands of civilians
but it cares about 76 White Helmet terrorists. If the
Security Council really wants to know about what is

S/PV. 8206

happening in Syria, it should ask some of our people
who are still living in the city of Raqqa to talk before
the Council about the scandals perpetrated against
civilians by the outlaw coalition, and its extreme respect
for international law after it completely destroyed their
city. The coalition has committed the most terrible
massacres against civilians, provided protection to
4,000 terrorists affiliated with Da’esh, and facilitated
their exit from the city of Raqqa in order to use them
somewhere else in Syria. The city of Raqqa is to us
what Dresden is to Germany.
The Security Council should also ask to hear from
some of our people in Afrin, who could tell its members
about the ideal implementation of the provisions
of international humanitarian law and resolution
2401 (2018) by the invading Turkish forces that have
perpetrated terrible massacres against civilians and
displaced tens of thousands of them. The Council
should also ask some foreign terrorist fighters who have
returned to their countries to explain in an open meeting
of the Security Council how the Governments of their
countries were actually involved in their recruitment,
training and financing and how they provided them
with arms and sent them to Syria to commit massacres
against the Syrian people. The problem is, however,
that these fighters have been recycled, renamed and
rebranded as the moderate opposition in Syria.
The Security Council should also ask some of
our people who have left eastern Ghouta over the past
few days to talk about the terrorist practices of Jaysh
Al-Islam, Faylaq Al-Rahman and Ahrar Al-Sham, the
three groups that have been called the moderate Syrian
opposition by the United States, France, Britain and
their agents in the Gulf Sheikhdoms, and to talk in
particular about how those groups kill anyone who tries
to get out. They have seized all forms of humanitarian
and medical assistance and sold it at very high prices.
The Council should also ask some of our people from
Fo’ah and Kafraya to talk about their years of suffering
in the ongoing oppressive siege there, which has been
conducted by Al-Nusra Front with direct assistance
from Turkey and Qatar. However, it seems that those
defenders of humanity have no ears and tongues to
listen about the suffering of those civilians and talk
about it.
If Western countries in the Security Council
were one part in a thousand as sincere as the Russian
Federation in their assertions that they really care
about the Syrian people and respect the provisions

18-073349/10

S/PV.8206

The situation in the Middle East

of the international law, the purposes and principles
of the Charter and the Security Council resolutions,
particularly those pertaining to combating terrorism,
then terrorism would not have emerged in Syria and
in other countries. No civilian would have suffered in
eastern Ghouta or in eastern Aleppo or in the old city of
Homs, Raqqa or any other Syrian city. Those Western
countries have invested in terrorism to bring down
Iraq, Libya and Yemen. Now, they have also invested
in terrorism in Syria and that investment has failed. It
is as if these countries were saying that, given a choice
between supporting the demons of terrorism, on one
the hand, and the Syrian State, on the other, they, the
sponsors of terrorism, would choose the demons.
In conclusion, the Government of my country
reiterates its principled position that the solution to the

10/10

16/03/2018

Syrian crisis is a political one, based on an intra-Syrian
dialogue led by Syria without any foreign interference
or preconditions. I have spent hours and hours in
negotiations with Mr. De Mistura on those very words
in resolution 2254 (2015). I remind Council members
that the success of the political track and the tangible
enhancement of the humanitarian situation will depend
primarily on creating an environment conducive to
international and regional commitment to seriously
fighting terrorism in Syria and freeing the process
from politicization.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

18-07334
