18

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

consultations and a systematic exchange of the relevant
information with that organization;
(c) To enlist, from the non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and
Social Council and from those non-governmental organizations having a special interest in the field of decolonization, support in the dissemination of the relevant
information;
(d) To continue to publish, in consultation with
the Special Committee, selected issues of the periodical
Objective: Justice and the bulletin "United Nations
and Southern Africa" in other languages besides English
and French;
4. Requests Member States, in particular the administering Powers, to co-operate fully with the Secretary-General in the discharge of the tasks entrusted to
him under paragraph 3 above;
5. Invites all States, the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
and non-governmental organizations in consultative
status with the Economic and Social Council, as well
as other non-governmental organizations having a
special interest in the field of decolonization, to undertake, in co-operation with the Secretary-General and
within their respective spheres of competence, the
large-scale dissemination of the information referred
to in paragraph 2 above;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Special Committee, to collect and prepare on
a continuous basis for redissemination by the Office
of Public Information, basic material, studies and
articles relating to various aspects of the problems of
decolonization;
1. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Special Committee on the implementation of the present
resolution;
8. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine the question at its next session and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its twenty-seventh
session.
2028th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.

by the colonial peoples and the activities of their
national liberation movements,

Taking into account the suggestions of the Special
Committee as well as the views of the Office of Public
Information on the implementation of these suggestions,
as reflected in the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee,
Taking into account the recommendations of the Fifth
Committee112 relating to the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the review and reappraisal of United Nations
information policies and activities,113 and noting the
report of the Secretary-General on the joint meeting of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, the Special Committee on Apartheid and the
United Nations Council for Namibia, 114
Recognizing the importance of publicity as an instrument for furthering the aims and purposes of the Declaration and the need for the Office of Public Information to intensify its efforts to acquaint world public
opinion with all aspects of the problems of decolonization,
1. Approves the chapters of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the question of publicity for the work of the United
Nations in the field of decolonization;
2. Affirms the vital importance of urgently effecting
the widest possible dissemination of information on
the evils and dangers of colonialism, the continuing
struggle for liberation being waged by the colonial peoples, particularly in southern Africa, and the efforts
being made by the international community to eliminate
the remaining vestiges of colonialism in all its forms and
manifestations;

3. Requests the Secretary-General, having regard
to the suggestions of the Special Committee, to continue to take concrete measures through all the media
at his disposal, including publications, radio and
television, to give widespread and continuous publicity
to the work of the United Nations in the field of
decolonization, to the situation in the colonial Territories and to the continuing struggle for liberation
being waged by the colonial peoples and, inter alia:

2903 ,(XXVI). Appointment of the Secretary•
General of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Acting in accordance with the recommendation contained in Security Council resolution 306 (1971) of
21 December 1971, 55
Appoints Mr. Kurt Waldheim Secretary-General of
the United Nations for a term of office beginning on
1 January 1972 and ending on 31 December 1976.
2031st plenary meeting,
22 December 1971.

(a) To intensify the activities of the information
centres located in southern Africa, including the establishment of an additional information centre where
appropriate;
( b) To maintain a close working relationship with
the Organization of African Unity by holding periodic
112 A/C.5/L.1068/Rev.2. For the text of this document, see
Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth Session, Annexes, agenda item 76, document A/8531/ Add.I,
para. 137.
ll3 A/C.5/1320/Rev.1 and Add.I.
114 A/8388.

*

55 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentysixth Session, Annexes, agenda item 18, document A/8496.

*

*
