THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

nd
MEETING:

22 DECEMBER

1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS

1982) . . . . I . . . . . . . , . . . . . , . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . +

1

. . . , , , . . . , . .. , . . . . . . . .. , . .. . ,. . . ,. . . . . . . , . . , . . . .

1

Complaint by Lesotho against South Africa:
Letter dated 16 December
1976 from the Permanent
Representative
of
Lesotho to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/12257), . . , . . , . , . . . . . , . . , , . . , . . . , . . , , . . . . , . . . . . , . . , . . , . . .

1

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/
of the agenda

SIPV. 1982

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly S1r~~plr1~o7t.s of the Qfjc,icr/ Rccwrds of the Sccr/ritg Cor/nci/. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of R~sol~/tic~/~.s 1r11d
Dcc~isiotrs r?f the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1982nd MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 22 December 1976, at 10.30 a.m.
Prc~sidcnt:

Mr. Ion DATCU

(Romania),

Prese~zt: The representatives of the following States:
IBenin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
‘Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
Iof Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional

3. I invite the representatives of Botswana and
Mauritius to take the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber, on the usual understanding that they will be invited to take a place at the
Council table when they wish to address the Council,

agenda (S/Agenda/l982)

1.

Adoption of the agenda

2.

Complaint by Lesotho against South Africa:
Letter dated 16 December 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Lesotho to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/12257)

Adoption

of the agenda

Complaint by Lesotho ,against South Africa:
Letter dated 16 December 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Lesotho to the United Ngtions
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12257)

1 . The PRESIDENT
(intp,p,‘ptrrtio/t .fkom Fr~wh):
In accordance with decisions taken by the Security
Council at its 1981st meeting, I shall now, with the
consent of the Council, invite the representatives of
Lesotho and Madagascar to participate in the Council’s discussion without the right to vote.

2. The PRESIDENT
(into.p/‘rtrrtiotf
jiwr
Fww/I):
In addition, 1 have received letters from the representatives of Botswana and Mauritius in which they ask to
be invited to participate in the debate. 1 therefore
propose that the Council agree, in accordance with
the provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote.

4. The PRESIDENT
fiz?rp,pI.CtzztiOlz,fkom FIYVW/~~:
The speaker is the representative of Mauritius. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make a statement.
5. Mr. RAMPKUL
(Mauritius): First of all. I should
like to place in the record of the Security Council
my sincere appreciation for the co-operation I have
received from my distinguished and beloved African
brother, Mr. Blaise Rabetafika of Madagascar. who in
my brief absence from New York addressed the
Council yesterday [19Rlsr /llcvti,y] as the current
Chairman of the Group of African States on the
complaint by Lesotho against South Africa.
6, Now that I have returned, I shall speak first as
representative of Mauritius as well as representative
of the Chairman of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU).
7. On 26 October, Transkei, one of the 10 so-called
African homelands in South Africa, was declared
independent. But on that same day. the General
Assembly, in its resolution 31/6 A, rejected the declaration of thk so-called independence and declared it
invalid. It condemned the establishment of bantustans
as designed to consolidate the inhuman policies of
trptrr*thcirl. to destroy the territorial integrity of the
country, to perpetuate white-minority domination and
to dispossess the African people of South Africa Of
their inalienable rights. In calling upon all Governments
to deny any form of recognition to the so-called
independent Transkei and to refrain from having any
dealings with the South African bantustans. the
Assembly called for the isolation of the Transkei and
other bantustnns. The adoption of resolution 31/6 A
constituted a firm commitment of the international
community to reject any attempt by the Pretoria
regime at balkanizing South Africa and to stand for oneunited and democratic South Africa.

8. Lesotho is now suffering hardship for abiding by
this commitment
and for complying with a United
Nations resolution. It has decided to withold recognition of the so-called independent Transkei, and
South Africa is determined to coerce the Government
of Lesotho into reviewing that decision. In this connexion, may I be permitted to read out a message
dispatched by my Prime Minister, Sir Seewoosagur
Ramgoolam,
who is also the current Chairman of
OAU, to the Prime Minister of Lesotho. This message
was dispatched
on 19 November. It says:

helped the Organization to uphold the purposes and
principles of the Charter. For this Lesotho deserves
the active support and assistance of the international
community.
As we all know, being a land-locked
country surrounded by South African territory,
Lesotho is confronted with problems of a unique
nature. We have therefore always followed with
understanding its efforts to solve those problems,
in particular its efforts to attain economic selfsufficiency. We should encourage the Lesotho
Government
in its endeavours by assisting it to
overcome the emergency situation confronting it
and to meet the special economic needs arising from
the closure of the border.

“1 have the honour to refer to recent information
of the deliberate inhuman decision by South Africa
regarding the closure of frontier posts with the
Kingdom of Lesotho and inform Your Excellency
of my support in denouncing the blatant violation
by t’he South African racist Government
of the
customs treaty to keep borders open under international law regardless of the non-recognition of the
Transkei. The African Group at the United Nations
has already alerted the President of the Security
Council and the Secretary-General
of the South
African blockade. You can be assured of the firm
and unrelenting support of our African brothers to
denounce in the strongest terms this racist and
inhuman move of the Vorster rtgime. As Chairman
of OAU, 1 admire and endorse your decision not to
recognize Transkei in compliance with resolution
D/133”,-this
is a reference to a resolution adopted
at Port Louis by the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of QAU“the resolutions taken
by OAU and the non-aligned countries, despite the
blockade by South Africa coercing you to do so.
Fraternal considerations. I should be grateful if you
would communicate developments.”

11. South Africa should be condemned for the closure
of the border, and the Council should demand that it
take the necessary steps to reopen the border forthwith. As the African Group stated in its communication
of 12 November [S/12227], South Africa’s action is a
flagrant breach of international law, which stipulates
safe passage of transit goods to and from land-locked
countries. The African Group also expressed the view
that the situation arising from South Africa’s unilateral
action not only poses a serious economic problem for
the people of Lesotho but constitutes a threat to
peace and security in the region. It is in this context
that we call on the Security Council to take urgent
appropriate action.
12. By refusing to recognize the independence of
the so-called independent Transkei, Lesotho has concretely demonstrated its abhorrence of the policy of
separate development. It should be commended for its
decision and accorded the means tb maintain its
position. The rrpa~heid rigime believed that it could
coerce Lesotho into accepting the bantustanization
of South Africa. Lesotho’s will to resist the South
African pressures in spite of its vulnerability
is
symbolic of Africa’s determination to combat the evils
of qxtt*thd
and racism. By assisting Lesotho, it is
Africa’s struggle for freedom that the Council would
be supporting. It is the basic rights of the people of
South Africa that the Council would be upholding.

9. It is in this light that the Council should view the
unilateral closure of about one third of Lesotho’s
common border with the Republic of South Africa.
The entire population of the country’s south-eastern
region is affected by the closure of the border. The
historic dependence of these Sothos on neighbouring
areas in the Republic of South Africa, particularly
in the Transkei region, for trade and services is only
of goodnatural
under
normal
circumstances
neighbourly relations. To deny them free access to the
areas concerned is to deprive them of their livelihood.
We should understand their plight, considering that the
part of the’country
where they live is a highlands
region which is hardly accessible from other parts of
Lesotho. A smooth flow of goods and human traffic
between their mountains and adjoining South African
territory is essential for their survival.

13. On behalf of OAU, I urge all members of the
Council to support the programme of assistance
presented yesterday [1981st meetitlg] by the Foreign
Minister of Lesotho.
14. Mr. ILLUECA
(Panama) (inf~~rpretcrtiot7 Jiwttl
At its meeting yesterday [i/d.], the Security
Council heard the statement made by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Lesotho, Mr. Charles Molapo. We
recognize that Mr. Molapo gave us an account which
was moderate, in good faith and prudent. At the same
time, however, it was extremely dramatic, because the
fact that the representative of the victim country took
a dignified position by using moderate language in no
way detracts from the tragedy of the situation which,
as he described it, is causing suffering to a quarter
million of his fellow citizens. They are virtually in a

Spatlish):

IO. The Government
of Lesotho is in duty bound
to take emergency action to redress the situation,
and the international
community
is duty-bound
to
assist Lesotho in that endeavour. In deciding not to
recognize the so-called independent Transkei, Lesotho
has made an important contribution to the realization
of United Nations objectives in South Africa. It has
2

state of’siege because of an arbitrary act that is also
illegal, unjust and contrary to international law, an
act for which South Africa is responsible.

ment. In this respect, I believe that United Nations
bodies such as the Economic and Social Councif, the
food programmes and others, might consider direct
assistance to the people of Lesotho. Likewise, ways
could be found so that the Secretary-General,
.in
co-operation with the competent organizations, might
prepare and provide a programme of technical and
financial assistance for Lesotho so as to assist that
country to overcome the difficulties it is encountering
because of the closure of the border posts between that
country and South Africa.

15. My country would advocate solving this problem
in such a manner as to conclude with a decision taken
by the Council with the approval of all its members.
What is happening requires effective Security Council
action-specific
action-in order to give satisfaction to
a country which is at this very moment suffering
great anxiety because of the closure of some border
posts between Lesotho and South Africa as a result of
the actions of the South African Government.

21. In our opinion, the Council should also keep the
matter under review so that the situation will not
deteriorate but rather be resolved.

16. After having listened to the preceding speakers in
the debate and having had an opportunity to participate
in the consultations so wisely guided by the President
of the Council, we are in favour of the Council’s
adopting a decision which would not only give satisfaction to the Government and people of Lesotho in
respect of the offences they have suffered in the
political field but also pave the way to a resolution
of the economic situation, which is so precarious and
difficult for Lesotho, ‘through international co-operation and the use of United Nations mechanisms.

22. Lastly, my country, a Latin American COLIntry,
has a sense of brotherhood and of identification with
the peoples of Africa, and we therefore wish to declare
our total identification with the statement made by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lesotho yesterday. He
said:
“To us, South Africa belongs to all South Africans
regardless of their race, colour or creed, and my
Government will not acquiesce in any scheme which
violates the territorial integrity of South Africa by
balkanizing
it into so-called independent tribal
homelands, without the consent of the majority ofthe
people of South Africa.” [Ibid., parrr. 14.1

17. No doubt the Council, in taking a decision, will
bear in mind that the General Assembly of the United
Nations, in its resolution 31/6 A, has already’
pronounced itself against any form of recognition of
the sham Transkei, an artificial creation of the Government of South Africa designed to thwart the resolutions adopted by various bodies of the Organization.
In this regard, we believe that Lesotho is acting
in accordance with United Nations resolutions in not
recognizing the Transkei.

In that statement, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Lesotho demonstrates that herein lies *the crux of the
problem. This is not an isolated problem of Lesotho;
it is an integral problem of southern Africa and of the
independent States in the southern part of Africa.
This is a problem linked to the solution of the question
of Zimbabwe, the question of Namibia and even the
hunian tragedy of rrpartheid in South Africa. We therefore endorse the words of the Foreign Minister of
Lesotho inviting the Council to reach a unanimous
conclusion. In this case, the Council has had the
benefit of this rational, prudent and intelligent presentation by the Foreign Minister of Lesotho.

18. We think that South Africa has taken a very
dangerous course and one that is full of risks, in trying
to sow discord among African States, in particular the
independent African States in southern Africa.. Its
attempt to have Africans fight one another will
certainly not lead to constructive results but will only
aggravate the internal crisis which South Africa ivill
have to suffer in the future, unless we find a solution
to these problems which are, in our opinion, burning
issues of our time.

23., I have just been informed that there is an excellent possibility of members of the Council reaching a
solution eiher through consensus or by unanimity on
this question, and I am really very pleased because
the decision will no doubt have great political, spiritual
and, particularly, economic impact.

19. My delegation believes that the Government of
Lesotho deserves praise for abiding by the General
Assembly resolutions in not recognizing the so-caIled
Transkei and that South Africa’s closure of the three
border posts mentioned by the Foreign Minister of
Lesotho can only be considered undue pressure on an
independent State to coerce it into recognition of the
artificial creation’ of the sham State of the Transkei.

24.

Mr. LEPRETTE

(France) (infeyefufiotz
fionr
to the question before the
Security Council, I should like to address to Mr. Kikhia
my sincere gratitude for the cordial words addressed
to me in the course of his statement yesterday. He may
rest assured of my complete co-operation.

French): Before referring

20. The Council would also be justified in making
an appeal to all Member States of the Organization
to co-operate in resolving the financial and economic
crisis from which Lesotho is suffering and to
co-operate in its programme for economic develop-

25. I have listened most attentively to the preceding
speakers. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lesotho
[198/sf meeting],
whom I wish to greet here, most
3

31. Mr. MOGAMI (Botswana): I should like, first
of all, to thank you, Mr. President, and through
you the other members of the Council for allowing my
delegation to take part in this debate.

clearly stated the needs of his country in the difficult
situation which it is undergoing at present. The statements which we have heard since yesterday have
brought to light the keen feelings and the censure
aroused by the attempt of the Pretoria authorities
to coerce Lesotho into recognizing the existence of an
entity whose establishment was condemned by the
entire international
community.
The delegation of
France joins in this censure. As was indicated in the
course of the debate in the General Assembly by the
representative of the Netherlands,’ the countries of the
European Economic Community (EEC) have no intention of recognizing the sham independence of Tanskei.

32. The Security ,Council is dealing today with a
question which has very grave implications not only
for Lesotho but ultimately for other Slates in the
region, and certainly also for the international community as a whole. The gravity of the situation is
reflected in the fact that the Council has seen fit
to discuss the issue.
33. The United Nations has always responded, if not
always speedily and forcefully, to various crises in
southern Africa that threatened, or indeed violated,
the tenets of its Charter and its decisions. I have in
mind here the positive way in which the United
Nations responded to the call of the People’s Republic
of Mozambique for assistance when it closed its
border with the rebel Rhodesia in order to enforce
United Nations resolutions on sanctions against that
regime; the United Nations condemnation of attacks
against Zambia and the People’s Republic of Angola by
South Africa; the declaration by the United Nations
that South Africa must withdraw from Namibia since
its presence there was illegal; and the imposition of
sanctions against Ian Smith’s rebel Rhodesia so as to
force that rCgime to yield to the principle of majority
rule for the people of Zimbabwe.

26. Thus my delegation understands the attitude of
Lesotho. As several delegations have done before us,
we should like to pay tribute to the courage displayed
by the Government and people of Lesotho in refusing
to accept the situation imposed upon them. By taking
up the challenge which has been thrown down, they
have proved that they are determined to respect
principles rather than protect material interests. My
delegation is aware, indeed, of the considerable difficulties created in Lesotho by that decision. We know
that the rerouting of traffic will impose a heavy
burden on the economy of that country. We have
learned from the Minister for Foreign Affairs himself
what major efforts will be required to improve roads
and airports and to create new traffic routes.
27. The international
community
cannot remain
indifferent:
it is up to the Security Council to
pronounce itself. No doubt it would be desirable for
the Secretary-General to send a team of experts to
proceed to evaluate the aid which Lesotho will need
in order to set up a communications system that will
enable it to maintain its economy. The countries of
the European Communities have already decided to
grant emergency assistance to Lesotho. I should like
to assure the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lesotho
that my Government.will,
for its part, consider the
problems of his country with the utmost understanding.

34. Once again the United Nations is called upon
to act in yet another southern African crisis, and
will certainly be called upon to act in other crises,
for these are bound to occur so long as minority rule,
racism and qx~r.theicl remain. So long as oppression
persists in that region, many more complaints will be
brought before this august body. In order to live up to
its mission, and to the spirit of the Charter, the
Security Council should act with resolve and speedily
solve this and other crises emanating from the volatile
southern African situation. Only in this way can the
stature and credibility of the United Nations be
enhanced. Failure to act with resolve and speed in
this instance can only regrettably give comfort to
those who perpetuate these crises, and will indeed
encourage them to precipitate similar crises elsewhere
in the region.

28. By expressing censure and recommending the
granting to the Kingdom of Lesotho the aid required
as a result of a situation imposed on it, the Security
Council will be carrying out an act of solidarity and
justice.
29. I do not believe that it would serve any useful
purpose to extend my comments beyond the item on
our agenda. I am certain, furthermore, that I am
thereby reflecting the general wish and, in particular,
the wish of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lesotho.
In the same spirit, the draft resolution which will be
submitted to us should be limited to the subject of the
debate. This would make it even more meaningful.

35. Lesotho is being blackmailed because it has
steadfastly stood by the internationalist
obligation
to implement the decision of the United Nations not
to recognize the “independence”
of the bantustan
Transkei.
36. In abiding by the decision of the United Nations,
Lesotho has in fact also implemented the resolutions
of OAU and the non-aligned countries calling for
non-recognition
of the “independence”
of the
bantustan Transkei, which is, for us, still an integral
part of South Africa.

30. The PRESIDENT
(ink/-p,-efntion from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Botswana. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
4

37. Botswana’s position is that the bantustan
Transkei is an integral part of South Africa, and for
this reason we fully support Lesotho’s position in this
regard. Any dealings between Lesotho and that part
of South Africa called the Transkei must be as agreed
between Pretoria and Lesotho, and this must hold for
any dealings in whatever sphere between any independent State in the region and any part of South
Africa which that regime calls a bantustan.

43. It should be borne in mind that assistance to
Lesotho can only be a temporary and partial solution
to the problem. The ultimate and only effective cure
is the elimination
of apcrrtheid, which creates bantustans. The present crisis serves as a reminder that
concerted effective action against rrpartheid
is urgent
and imperative.
44. Finally, I should like on behalf of my delegation
to say how grateful we are to the Foreign Minister of
Lesotho for the address he made here yesterday. I
should also like to assure him of our solidarity with
the nation of Lesotho and its Government, and also of
our support for all the efforts that Lesotho is seeking
today before the Council.

38. The international community must not allow any
State, now or in the furutre,, to be blackmailed into
recognizing bantustans as independent entities because
of the hardships they may encounter as a result of
implementing
decisions of the United Nations. The
decisions relating to the Transkei are those of the
international community, and so the solutions to the
problem should be the collective responsibility of the
international community.

45. Mr. AKHUND
(Pakistan): First of all, I should
like to join my Libyan colleague in extending a
personal welcome to Mr. Jacques Leprette of France
and in expressing regret that a number of colleagues
with whom we had the privilege and pleasure of
working last year have left the Council, and that
others will be soon leaving it, and to wish them well
in their new and, in some cases, higher duties.

39. The present crisis is replete with lessons and
warnings. Probably the most important lesson is that
bantustans can be used to create havoc in the
neighbouring African States. They are cat’s-paws for
aprprrrthrid policies beyond the borders of South Africa.
The warning is simply that the dangerous pattern of
things now evolving in Lesotho is likely to be
extended to other States with bantustans on their
borders. A glance at a map of South Africa shows that
all States in the area-Botswana, Mozambique, Swaziland and Zimbabwe, when it finally becomes independent soon-have
bantustans on their borders.
It should be recalled that attempts by South Africa
to do likewise in Namibia have not been abandoned.

46. I wish also on behalf of my delegation to express
our welcome to Mr. Molapo, the Foreign Minister of
Lesotho, from whom the Council heard yesterday
[ikill.] a most lucid and, in the circumstances, dispassionate account of the predicament which his country
is facing as a result of South Africa’s unilateral
decision of 26 October last to close three outposts on
the border between South Africa and south-eastern
Lesotho.

40. What will prevent the use of these bantustans
for purposes that they .are now being used for in
Lesotho? So long as trpartheid persists, bantustans
will exist and are likely to create problems in the
regiion. This is what I meant when I stated in my
opening remarks that the ramifications of this crisis
extend beyond Lesotho, but it is in Lesotho that the
surgery must be performed so that this cancer can be
arrested-not
only in Lesotho but in the body politic
of the region.

47. The action has resulted not only in the severing
of the economic links of Lesotho with the rest of the
world but, because of the mountainous topography
of the country, with the rest of Lesotho itself. South
Africa’s action has created-and created deliberatelya grave economic crisis for Lesotho. The primarily
agrarian economy of Lesotho, we were told, relies
heavily on border trade with South Africa, and the
closure of the horder posts is creating mounting
difficulties for it.

41. Failure to heed the lessons and the warnings
in the Lesotho crisis can only be regretted later.
History instructs us that those who ignore the warnings
of an impending crisis do so at their own peril.
Throughout history many have suffered because of this
serious error:

48. Why has South Africa created this situation’? The
answer is plain from South Africa’s refusal even to
discuss it with the Kingdom of Lesotho: it has informed
Lesotho that the matter is one between Transkei, the
supposedly independent bantustan, and the Kingdom
of Lesotho: and, further, that if Lesotho were to
comply with the border formalities
imposed by
Transkei, the problem could be resolved. Such is the
/prison c/‘Gtrc of South Africa’s closure of the border.

42. Lesotho has called for international assistance,
and it is our hope that the international community
will respond generously in. terms of the short-and
long-term objectives directly related to this crisis.
The people of eastern Lesotho must continue to
have access to the bare necessities of life-food,
clothing and the like. They must also continue to
export their produce in order that their well-being
and that of Lesotho will be assured.

49. The General Assembly in various resolutions
-and, in particular, in its resolution 341 1 D (XXX)-has condemned the establishment of bantustans and
called on all Governments not to recognize them.
Moreover, the General Assembly, in its resolution
31/6 A of the current session, enjoins all States
5

and objectives remain unchanged. It is heightening
tension in southern Africa and creating a situation
which will bring suffering and violence to the peoples
of southern Africa.

specifically to deny any form of recognition to the
Transkei and to refrain from having any dealings with
this so-called independent country. Lesotho’s compliance with the resolutions of the United Nations on
this matter-its
refusal to recognize Transkei-is
all
the more commendable, given the geopolitical situation and the economic situation of the country.
Lesotho finds itself today in virtually a state of
economic siege. Who can deny that South Africa’s
action is a transparent attempt to apply economic
pressure on Lesotho in order to force it to recognize
the ficfitious entity of the bantustan Transkei?

53. It is the view of my delegation that South
Africa must not be allowed to succeed in its attempt
to compel Lesotho to recognize Transkei. My Government fully supports Lesotho in its courageous
decision to uphold principle and in its refusal to
succumb to pressure. It is our hope that the Security
Council, by unanimously adopting a decision on the
matter, will give Lesotho unequivocal support and
serve warning on South Africa that its pressures and
manceuvres will not be allowed to succeed.

50. The concept of dividing South Africa into
bantustans is but a means towards the end which
(ryrrrtlwid, in more crude fashion, seeks to attain,
namely, the exploitation of the wealth and resources
of the territory for the benefit of the white minority,
reducing its black majority to political subjugation and
economic
servitude.
An article which appeared
recently in The N~II~ Yorli Ti177cs on the self-styled
“white tribe” of South Africa, sets out the pseudointellectual trappings and spurious arguments which
the white ruler employs to justify his actions towards
his black fellow citizens. Reduced to its essence, the
policy would herd the 18 million indigenous Africans
into tribal bantustans which would in fact be no better
than rural slums. While 10 per cent of the white
population would reserve for themselves 87 per cent of
the territory of South Africa, its industry and its
resources, the rest of the indigenous population would
be penned up in 13 percent of their own homeland,
formally deprived of all rights and claims therein, and
free only to continue to live and slave for the benefit
of the white ruling minority. The bantustan concept
cuts across the very root of the idea of independent
nationhood by seeking to divide the black Africans
through territorial separation. The policy is a thinly
disguised attempt to perpetuate the colonial domination
of the white minority over the indigenous population+

54. Mr. SUNDBERG (Sweden): First of all, I should
like to welcome most warmly Mr. Jacques Leprette
of France, and to congratulate him on his important
assignment as Permanent Representative of his country
to the United Nations. He is indeed no newcomer
here. He has a long and distinguished career in
United Nations affairs and his diplomatic skill will
undoubtedly be a great asset in the work of our
Organization.
55. The adoption of General Assembly resolution
31/6 A of 26 October this year on the so-called
independent Transkei and other bantustans, signified
the broad international condemnation of South Africa’s
efforts to establish bantustans as designed to consolidate the inhuman policies of ~pnr.theic/, to destroy
the territorial integrity of the country, to perpetuate
white minority domination and to dispossess the
African people of South Africa of their inalienable
rights. On that occasion the General Assembly further
called upon all Governments to deny any form of
recognition to the so-called independent Transkei and
to refrain from having any dealings with the so-called
independent Transkei or other bantustans.

51. In this perspective, South Africa’s action in
closing the border with Lesotho cannot be viewed
in isolation. Lesotho is being told in unmistakable
terms that it should recognize Transkei, and if it were
not to comply, it would be made to suffer unbearable economic privation, not excluding a shortage
of food and medical supplies. As. more bantustans
bordering Swaziland and Botswana are brought into
being, the same tactics would no doubt be applied
to coerce those countries, whose economic lifelines
run through South Africa, to bring them to recognize
the situation.

56. As was made clear in the important statement
yesterday by the Foreign Minister of Lesotho [ihid.],
the South African Government has now resorted
to the application of counter measures in order to force
a break-up of the total international isolation of their
artificial creation, the so-called independent Transkei.
By suddenly applying administrative
measures
against the traditional transit movements of people
and goods between various parts of Lesotho through
border areas of South Africa, the South African
Government tries to put pressure on the Government
of Lesotho to give up its loyal support of the General
Assembly resolution. It is obviously an effort to
force Lesotho to become the first country to have
dealings with the so-called independent Transkei.

52. Contemptuous of world public opinion, oblivious
of the universal condemnation of its rrprrrihiti policies, disregarding the warnings provided by the disturbances in Soweto and Cape Town, South Africa
presses on with its repugnant policies, policies which
cannot but engender more unrest, more violence and
bloodshed. In using coercion against Lesotho, South
Africa is telling the world that its essential policies

57. Lesotho is placed in an especially difficult
position vis-8-vis South Africa. Lesotho’s geographical
situation exposes the econo,mic and social life of the
country to South African pressures. In spite of this,
Lesotho has calmly and systematically worked to
6

decrease and diminish the effets of this South African
pressure. Such a policy cannot but have short-term
econolmic repercussions on the situation of Lesotho.
Nevertheless, the people of Lesotho has supported
that policy. The new hardship now inflicted upon the
people of Lesotho as a consequence of its refusal
to have any dealings with the so-called independent
Transkei, adds considerably to the heavy burden
alreadly placed on it. Against this background
yesterday’s statement by the Foreign Minister of
Lesotho was particularly encouraging and inspiring
in its clearly demonstrated will to resist South Africa’s
schemes.

63. The letter of the representative of Lesotho,
which is the reason for convening the Security Council,
provides fresh proof of a turn of events in South
Africa which is dangerous for peace in the world. A
serious situation has arisen as a result of South Africa’s
closure of the border between the south-eastern part
of Lesotho and that part of South Africa called
Transkei. That is virtually tantamount to a blockade
-a minor one, not a particularly powerful one-on
the part of the South African State against Lesotho.
64. In the letter of 12 November 1976 from the Chairman of the African Group in the United Nations to
the President of the Security Council [S//2227], it is
pointed out that the closure of the border is intended
to force Lesotho to recognize the bantustan Transkei,
which is a sorry puppet contrivance invented by the
Government of South Africa in pursuance of its policy
of crprrtheid.

58. The Swedish delegation considers it a natural
and logical step by the international community to
come to the support of the people of Lesotho in this
difficult situation. For several years it has been the
policy of the Swedish Government to assist the small
independent countries in southern Africa with the
purpose of supporting their efforts to preserve their
indeplendence against pressures from South Africa
and to help those countries to build an economy
less dependent on South Africa.

65. Thus, as has been stated here by representatives
who have spoken before me and as was very cogently
demonstrated by’ Mr. Molapo, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Kingdom of Lesotho [lYBl.rt meetbg],
the situation in that area has become serious. Not only
have South Africa’s actions caused economic problems, they are also a test of how the United Nations
will react to subsequent acts of this nature against
other neighbouring States.

59. It should be a common task, in particular for
the industrialized countries, to encourage the economic: strengthening of African States standing up
against South Africa’s ambition for domination.
Otherwise, the danger of neo-colonialism based in
Pretoria will remain. Only when all African States have
also gained their full economic independence can
there be hope for an end to the new forms of imperial
ambitions represented by the South African regime.

66. It is quite obvious that there can be no question
about whether the measures of grqss coercion connected with the closure of the border are admissible
to force any particular State to recognize another
State-even
less, to recognize a fraudulent Statelike
entity which has arisen as a result of the manoeuvres
of the South African racists who are attempting at all
costs to maintain their domination in the south of
Africa. There can be no two opinions about this. It is
perfectly .clear that such actions are inadmissible;
they are a gross violation of the elementary principles
of contemporary international law.

60. ,4gainst this background, Sweden will support
decisions by the Council recommending increased
international economic aid to Lesotho.
61. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): This year
the Security Council has already discussed’ various
items relating to the actions, policies and heinous
practices of the South African racist regime,, which
continues to throw down the gauntlet to the peoples
of the. entire world and to the United Nations.

67. The actions of Lesotho, which has refused to
recognize the bogus “independence”
of the bantustan
Transkei, are in full accord with the genuine situation
in that region and coincide with the desires of the vast
majority of the membership of the United Nations.
Progressive and peace-loving forces throughout the
world have quite properly considered that the international recognition of the Transkei would be tantamount to justifying the system of apartheid and the
racist policies of bantustanization.

62. The representatives of the African countries
which have freed themselves from colonial domination,
the representatives of the socialist countries and
others have frequently demanded that the Security
Council take effective steps against the racist regime
which is grossly flouting the dignity and rights of the
indigenous population of South Africa, inflicting brutal
repression on its population and perpetrating aggressive acts agai,nst neighbouring African States. We have
constantly warned that, if forthright steps are not
taken against South Africa and its Fascist regime
as laid down in the Charter of the United Nations,
the racists who prevail in South Africa might expand
the scope of their crimes and extend them on a wide
scale to neighbouring countries and regions.

68. The United Nations has frequently come out
against the creation of bantustans in the Republic of
South Africa. The General Assembly has described the
bantustanization
of that country as a consolidation of
the inhuman policy of crpcrr+theid and a step intended
primarily to destroy the territorial integrity of the
country. It has called upon all Governments and
organizations not to enter into relations with any
7

institutions or authorities in the bantustans and not to
give them any form of recognition.

73. South Africa’s policies, including the actions it
took recently against Lesotho, show that it is essential
for effective steps to be taken. We must ensure in the
final analysis that South Africa is completely isolated
in the international arena. We must also ensure that
there is a complete cessation of military, economic
and any other form of support to that regime.

69. Public opinion throughout the world has long ago
realized the real purposes of the racist regime and
its policies of bantustanization.
Under the guise of
bantustanization,
South Africa is virtually attempting
to maintain the social and racial sfortrrs ylro. The
racist regime is trying to create reserves of free or
cheap labour and maintain the present heinous system
of crpcwtheid.
Even after the proclamation
of the
bantustans as “States”,
they would be doomed to
backwardness and complete dependence on South
Africa. In that the racists see a guarantee that they
would be able to continue their politiCal and economic
domination in the southern part of the continent.

74. The explosive situation that has arisen as a result
of South Africa’s unilateral actions vis-a-vis Lesotho
has deep-rooted causes that are connected not only
with the actual existence of those racist regimes.
Our delegation has already commented on this on many
occasions. If we do not now take steps that are
appropriate to the serious situation that has arisen, the
Council’s
actions might be interpreted to mean that
it has acquiesced in the fact that there exist racist
regimes in the southern part of Africa and in their
endless provocations against neighbouring African
countries.

70. The genuine liberation of southern Africa cannot
be supplanted by a fictitious one. The peoples of Africa,
like peoples throughout the world, are calling for the
dismantling of the inhuman system of c~purthcid and
racial oppression which has become roote,d in the
southern part of the African continent, and that
demand is winning ever more understanding and
support.

75. The events that are now being considered by
the Security Council are, the alarming consequences of
more deep-rooted causes that have frequently been
spoken of by members of the Council, including my
own delegation.

71. That position, as has frequently been stated,
has been reflected in resolution 3116 A adopted at the
thirty-first session of the General Assembly concerning
the so-called Transkei and other bantustans, for which
134 delegations voted. It is’important to recall that not
a single delegation voted against it. The General
Assembly rejected the declaration of the so-called
independence of the Transkei and declared it invalid;
it called upon all Governments to refrain from any
form of recognition of that bogus “independent”
entity and to refrain from any dealings with the
so-called Transkei or other bantustans. That is precisely how the Government of Lesotho has reacted,
namely, in strict accord with that Assembly resolution
to which I have referred. We should like to express
our profound conviction that, in its decision, the
Security Council will stand fully behind that Assembly
resolution.

76. The position of the Soviet Union on questions of
decolonization, on all matters relating to the struggle of
peoples for genuine freedom and independence, is
abundantly clear. Any unbiased observer must know
that the Soviet Union vehemently eschews the pursuit
of any rivalry or hegemony. The following is stated
clearly in the report of the General Secretary of the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of the
Soviet Union, Mr. Brezhnev, to the Twenty-fifth
Congress of the Party:
“Our Party is giving and will continue to give
support to those peoples that are fighting for their
freedom. In so doing, the Soviet Union is not
seeking any advantages for itself. It is not in quest
of concessions. It is not seeking any political
domination. It is not seeking military bases. We are
acting in accordance ‘with the behests of our
revolutionary conscience and our communist convictions.”

72. The totally illegal and heinous actions of South
Africa in response to that decision show that the
South African racist regime is. striving to conduct
relations with the liberated countries on that continent
from a position of brute force and overt coercion.
And responsibility
for that lies not only with the
racist regime of South Africa but also with those circles
in Western countries who are in collusion with the
racists and are helping them step up their military
potential, thus increasing the threat to international
peace and security in that area. It is also further
fostered by the broad economic co-operation
of
certain transnational monopolies which facilitate the
development of South Africa’s economy and military
potential, and by the moral support which is sometimes
rendered by certain Western States to South Africa.

The report goes on:
“We are doing and we shall continue to do everything to develop and strengthen friendship with
those who genuinely seek it. We are linked with the
vast majority of States which have arisen as a
result of the breakdown of the colonialist system.
We have those links because of our deep dedication
to peace and freedom and our repugnance for any
forms of aggression, domination or exploitation of
one country by another. This fundamental community of ideas is a rich and fertile soil in which our
friendship will continue to thrive and flourish.”
8

the South African regime. We are prepared to support
the sort of resolution which, in addition to expressing
condemnation,
sets forth steps that will force the
#Government of South Africa to put an end to its
blockade of Lesotho. Finally, we consider that the
Council must recall and demand the implementation
of the decisions of the General Assembly and Security
Council that have demanded that an end be put to
military assistance, economic co-operation and any
other form of help to the South African r&gime. We
believe that other steps, too, should be envisaged to
respond to the very burdensome economic situation
that has just arisen in Lesotho.

77. That is the way relations are developing between
the Soviet Union and many independent African
States. The community of our positions on many key
issues of the present day has been clearly endorsed
in a number of international documents recently. I
shall give only one example. The Soviet-Libyan
communiqut
published on 10 December this year
states on behalf of both parties that they will give
constant support to the struggle of the African peoples
fighting for their political,
economic and social
freedom. The two parties reiterate their persistent
support for the African liberation movements strubgling for freedom and independence. They express their
solidarity with the struggle of the peoples of Zimbabwe
and Namibia,
as well as the African peoples in
southern Africa. The Soviet Union and the Libyan
Arab Repub1i.c condemned the racist rbgimes in Africa
and the plans and inroads of imperialism designed to
restore and protect the positions of those rkgimes and
to eliminate the African national liberation movements.

82. The PRESIDENT
lirzte,p,.~tf?ti~/l ,fi*o/lz FrorcVr):
A draft resolution, co-sponsoi-ed by seven States
members of the Security Council, has just been
distributed [S/ 122603.
83. I now call on the representative of the United
Republic of Tanzania, who wishes to introduce that
draft resolution.

78. That is the position held as a matter of principle
by the. Soviet Union with regard to the eventual
implementation
of the historic Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, and with regard to all matters connected with
the struggle against racist rkgimes, which continue to
foster tension in the southern part of the African
continent. Whatever is said and wherever it is said,
the Soviet Union will always be guided by this position
in the future, until the time when the racist rigimes
are totally eradicated. We are deeply convinced
that tlhe downfall of those rCgimes is historically
inevitable.

84. Mr. CHALE
(United Republic of Tanzania):
I should like at the outset to express my delegation’s
great pleasure in welcoming amongst us here today
the Foreign Minister of the Kingdom of Lesotho,
Mr. Molapo. The presence of the Foreign Minister
during this debate is as important as it is necessary.
On the part of the Kingdom of Lesotho, it is a reflection
and demonstration of the seriousness of the problem
besetting the Government of Lesotho
85. It was on 26 October 1976 that the so-called
independence of the Transkei was proclaimed in
rrl~rrthcill South Africa: and it was on the same date
that the General Assembly adopted resolution 31/h A
on the so-called independent Transkei and other
bantustans. As we are all aware, that resolution,
i/r/cr rrlirr, totally rejects the declaration of independence of the Transkei and declares it invalid. I repeat:
invalid; and it calls upon all Governments to deny any
form of recognition to the so-called independent
Transkei and to refrain from having any dealings with
the so-called independent Transkei or other bantustans.

79. In the light of those views, which we hold as a
matter of principle, the Soviet delegation is prepared
to support any decisive, forthright and effective
measures that are responsive to the seriousness of
the situation that has arisen in connexion with Lesotho.
80. I should like at this point to express my sincere
gratitude to the representative of the Bibyan Arab
Republic, Mr, Kikhia, for the kind words and good
wishe!; he addressed to Mr. Malik. My delegalion
will not fail to communicate his remarks to Comrade
Malik, who has already started to perform his new
and very responsible duties as head of the African
Department of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of
the Soviet Union. We should like to say also that
we entirely support Mr. Kikhia’s assessment of the
development of Soviet-Libyan
relations. We agree
entirely that the recent visit to the Soviet Union by
Colonel Al-Qadhafi, Chairman of the Revolutionary
Command Cquncil, was a distinguished con!ribution
to the strengthening of friendship and comprehensive
co-operation between the Soviet Union and the Libyan
Arab Republic.

86. Before that date, the Thirteenth Assembly of
Heads of State and Government
of OAU and the
Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government
of Non-Aligned
Countries,
in July and August
respectively, had adopted similar resolutions on the
question of the so-called independence of the Transkei
and other bantustans. They categorically rejected and
condemned the bantustan policy and the fake independence of the so-called Bantu homelands.
87. The decisions of OAU, the non-aligned countries
and the United Nations General Assembly were made
on the conviction that the so-called independence of
the Transkei and the bantustan policy are no more than
the extension and consolidation of the inhuman and

81. What sort of resolulion can the Security Council
adopt on the present item? We can adopt a resolution
which condemns outright the actions and practices of
9

abominable policies of c/prpartheid practised by the
racist minority rbgime of South Africa.
88. My delegation has spoken at length several times
before, both in the Security Council and in the Genera1
Assembly, on the doctrine, policy and practice of
trptrrtheid,
the root cause and root reason of the
problem. On each occasion my delegation has insisted
on the elimination
of this ignominious
scourge by
whatever means, and we have never failed to express
our disappointment
at the ineffectiveness of the
Council in dealing with this perplexing evil which
creates such tragedy. Bantustanization is the extension
of cqxrrthrid in the sense that bantustans are intended
to nourish upurtheid into maturity, which is complete
geographical trpclrtheid. So recognition of the independence of any bantustan, for that matter, is tantamount
to accepting uprrtheiti in the logical culmination of the
ideal.

know that its policies of apartheid, and in particular
the closure of the border posts with the southeastern part of Lesotho, will only continue to damage
its image. We therefore call upon South Africa to
undertake to reopen the border posts as an urgent
measure to ease the difficult situation in Lesotho.
92. Having made those remarks, my delegation has
the honour to introduce the draft resolution in document S/12260 on behalf of Benin, Guyana, the Libyan
Arab Republic, Panama, Romania and the United
Republic of Tanzania.
93. The first preambular paragraph is a statement of
fact. In the second preambular paragraph we express
our deep concern at the serious situation created by
the closure of certain border posts between South
Africa and Lesotho, an action aimed at coercing
Lesotho into according recognition to the bantustan
Transkei.

89. We listened very carefully to the elaborate
statement presented by the Foreign Minister of
Lesotho [/98/sr nrecti77g].
He has given us a vivid
picture of the difficulties being faced by a large
portion of the population of Lesotho due to the
closure of the border posts by the racist regime
between the eastern part of Lesotho and that part of
South Africa which the South African authorities call
independent Transkei. The closure imposed on the
people of Lesotho by racist South Africa clearly
shows the intention of the uptrrthc>id racist authorities
to force Lesotho into submission and recognition of the
Transkei. The desperate racist regime of South Africa,
having failed to gain support for the sham independence of the bantustans, is resorting to arm-twisting
and blackmailing tactics. This we must reject.

94. In the third and fourth preambular paragraphs
we recall General Assembly resolutions that have
condemned the establishment of bantustans and the
call to all Governments to deny any form of recognition
to the so-called independent Transkei.
95. In the next three preambular paragraphs the
Council takes note of the actions of the Government
of the Kingdom of Lesotho and the urgent needs of that
Government arising from the situation created.
96. In operative paragraph 1, the Council endorses
Genera1 Assembly resolution 31/6 A. In operative
paragraph 2, it commends the action of the Government of the Kingdom of Lesotho. In operative paragraph 3, it condemns any actions calculated to coerce
Lesotho into negating the thrust of General Assembly
resolution 31/6 A, mentioned in operative paragraph 1.
In operative paragraph 4, it calls for South Africa to
take immediate action to reopen the border posts.

90. The situation in Lesotho, as presented to us by the
Foreign Minister of Lesotho, warrants the Council’s
immediate attention and action. The United Nations
ought to give immediate
technical and economic
assistance to Lesotho to alleviate the acute problem
being faced by the Government of Lesotho and the
part of the population who find themselves without
their daily needs due to the malicious acts of the
racist rCgime. The unwarranted closure South Africa
has imposed upon the people of Lesotho, which has
resulted in extreme harship for the people of eastern
Lesotho, is cause for concern to us all. It calls for
concerted action by the Council to assist the Government of Lesotho. As has been explained very well to us
by the Foreign Minister of Lesotho, the action taken
by the racist South African regime to close the border
posts is contrary not only to the principles of international law but also to the Customs Union Agreement
between Lesotho and South Africa.

97. In operative paragraph 5, an appeal is made to
all States to provide immediate financial, technical
and material assistance to Lesotho so that its development programmes are not jeopardized and so that its
capacity to implement United Nations resolutions on
trparthcitl and bantustans can be enhanced. In operative paragraph 6 the Council requests the United
Nations system to assist Lesotho as appropriate.
98. In operative paragraphs 7 and 8 it requests
the Secretary-General, in collaboration with the appropriate organizations, immediately to organize all forms
of assistance to enable the Kingdom of Lesotho to
overcome the economic difficulties arising from
the situation created and to keep the situation under
constant review, to maintain close liaison with Member
States and to report to the Security Council on the
question. Operative paragraph 9 speaks for itself.

9 1. My Government commends the decision taken by
the Government of the Kingdom of Lesotho not to
recognize the so-called independence of the Transkei
and not to have any dealings with the installed puppet
chiefs. It is high time that South Africa was made to

99. The PRESIDENT (i/ltL~,pretcltion J%MI Fwd~):
I thank the representative of the United Republic of
IO

Tanzania for his well-known activities as a negotiator
on the text of the draft resolution. I wish to announce
that Pakistan has joined the sponsors of the draft
resolution listed by the representative of the United
Republic of Tanzania.

104. The qw~heid
policy of South Africa has for
some considerable time demonstrated fully how
repugnant it is to those, both within southern Africa
and in the international commun’ity at large, who value
freedom. The blatant attempt to apply pressure to an
independent African State, which stands by its
commitment to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, places in clear perspective the ends to which the Pretoria regime will go to
seek to maintain those policies which have been
consistently condemned and denounced by the Drganization.

100. Mr. JACKSON (Guyana): Let me at the outset
pay tributes to our colleagues who have recently left
us. First-and
1 use strict chronological order-I
should like to ask the Soviet delegation to convey
to Mr. Malik our full appreciation of him. Mr. Malik,
who has returned to his Foreign Ministry, has left
with us an indelible memory of him as an accomplished
diplomat and as a fine person. Secondly, I would ask
the Chinese delegation to convey to Mr. Huang Hua,
who has left us to become Minister for Foreign Affairs,
our sincere greetings and congratulations. During his
five years with us at the United Nations, Mr. Huang
Hun has won our appreciation for his skills as a
diplomat and for his distinctive charm as a person.
The contributions of Mr. Malik and Mr. Huang Hua
to our debates and to the Organization will always be
remembered.

105. The contrived independence of the Transkei
thus takes on dangerous dimensions for the States of
southern Africa. Immediately it becomes a further
pretext for creating critical human and economic
problems for Lesotho, a land-locked State with the
additional disadvantage of being physically encircled
by uprwth~irl. In this speiial regard, the consideration
by the Security Council of the complaint brought by
Lesotho against South Africa will have profound
importance in connexion with both South Africa’s
exercise of pressures on Lesotho and its contemptuous
response to the will of the international community.

101. Mr. Rydbeck of Sweden has also left us to
becom’e his country’s representative at the Court of
St. Jarnes, and I should like to pay my respects to
his eminent qualities as a diplomat and as a repreststative whose empathy for the problems of the
cleveloping world will not be forgotten, I should
like, through the delegation of Sweden, to extend
our sincere wishes to Mr. Rydbeck for the future and
to say how refreshing it was to work with him during
the past two years.

106. The Council is fully aware of the fact that
Pretoria has never implemented the Council’s resolutions enforcing sanctions against Rhodesia. Indeed,
that regime has been the main conduit enabling the
Ian Smith clique in Zimbabwe to defy Security Council
resolutions in that regard. Today, however, the action
of the Fascists in Pretoria is directed against a Member
State of the Organization which seeks to abide by the
decisions of the General Assembly.

102. (Once again the Security Council has been
convened as a result of the application of the policies
of the I?retoria regime based on concepts of domination
and racial superiority. In this instance the policies
concern the extension of inhuman and illegal practices
to a Member State of the Organization with a view
to coercing that State-the Kingdom of Lesotho4nto
disregarding resolutions of the General Assembly.

107. My delegation wishes to congratulate the
Government of Lesotho on its courageous and
exemplary demonstration of respect for the principles
and decisions of the Organization. This position of
Lesotho stands in appreciable contrast with that of
South Africa, which contumaciously flouts United
Nations resolutions.
108. When the Council considered the request by
Mozambique under Article 50 of the Charter in relation
to the situation which had arisen as a result of its
decision to impose sanctions against Southern Rhodesia in full implementation of the relevant decisions of
the Council, my delegation [1891st wefing] called
attention to the heavy price exacted from certain
States in their defence of principle and justice. In
accordance with the gallant example of Mozambique
in March with regard to its obligations as a Member
State, Lesotho is likewise today determinedly abiding
by its obligations. The international community-and
the Council in particular-has
a responsibility to
respond positively. Let us support Lesotho effectively
in its defence of the obligations prescribed in Assembly
resolution 31/6 A and in the Charter.

103. It was on 26 October 1976 that the General
Assembly,
in considering the item regarding the
policies of upurtheid perpetrated by the minority
regime: in South Africa, adopted, with the overwhelming support of I34 States, resolution 31/6 A
rejecting the so-called independence of the Transkei.
That resolution further called upon all Governments
to deny any form of recognition to the so-called
independent
Transkei and to refrain from having
any dealings with that creation or any other of its ilk.
It was on the same day, 26 October, that the Pretoria
regime: effected a closure of certain border posts
between Lesotho and the bantustan called Transkei.
The closure of those posts was crudely designed to
pressure Lesotho into disregarding the aforementioned
resolultion and to coerce it into according recognition
to a bantustan created by the warped racists in South
Africa.

109. In his statement to the Security Council, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lesotho, Mr. Molapo
11

[ 1981sr meeti/7g],
declared yesterday that Lesotho
would stand firmly by the decision of the General
Assembly and would not be cowed by South Africa’s
closure of the border posts. He noted correctly that
Lesotho had been pushed into a confrontational situation. However, the Foreign Minister importantly reaffirmed that his country would not shirk its responsibilities. Neither should the Council. We cannot be
selective. We should not lose sight of the real implications of this attempt to compel recognition of
bantustans. Today it is Lesotho that South Africa is
attempting to cow into submission; but, with other
bantustans being goaded into a kind of pseudo-independence, other African States, sharing geographical
situations similar to that of Lesotho, may eventually
be faced with similar pressures to recognize bantustans.

114. Since 16 November until today we have not been
informed whether travel permits have been denied or,
if granted, have been very much restricted for residents
of the area of Lesotho and if, as a result, traffic and
communications
have been disrupted or virtually
stopped. We have no details. However, if it is so, we
cannot but conclude that this arbitrary and inhuman
measure, which constitutes a serious menace to the life
of the people of Lesotho in that area, has been taken
without any decent reason.
115. One may easily understand the very difficult
position in which the Government of Lesotho has
been placed. The only alternative ‘for it is either to
negotiate with the so-called Government of Transkei
on the border problem or to refuse to do so and to
accept the obvious consequences of the continued
closing of the border.

110. The challenge to the Security Council is clear.
There is nothing ambiguous about it. It is, therefore,
incumbent upon us to be alive to the real implications
of the closure of the border posts, to take note of
and to endorse resolution 31/6 A, to condemn the
coercive action of South Africa against Lesotho and
to agree to give Lesotho support to overcome its
present difficulties.

116. The Government of Lesotho, as the Foreign
Minister of Lesotho assured the Council yesterday, is
firmly determined not to negotiate with the so-called
Governme,nt of Transkei. Therefore, Lesotho is
compelled to accept sacrifices in its economy in order
to comply with the overwhelmingly expressed will
of the international community with regard to the
so-called independence of Transkei, and to stand firm
against the evil design of bantustanization, which is
merely a variation of the abhorrent apartheid policy.

1 f 1. Mr. ABE (Japan): My delegation listened carefully to the statement the Foreign Minister of the
Kingdom of Lesotho, Mr. Molapo [ikid,],, delivered
yesterday in the Council. According to him three
border posts between south-eastern Lesotho and a
region belonging to the so-called Transkei have been
closed since 26 October. As a result, about a quarter of
a million people of Lesotho living in the borderland
have lost access to the area where they used to buy their
daily necessities and sell goods and services to earn
their living. They virtually have no substitute for
what they have lost, because of the peculiar geographical situation of their land.

117’. Here I should like to assure the Foreign Minister
of Lesotho that the Government of Japan cannot fail
to appreciate how painful was the decision that
his Government has had to make. Lesotho commands
our deepest sympathy and appreciation.
118. We believe that it is necessary and timely
for the Security Council to express its obvious position
on the so-called independence of Transkei; to condemn those actions that give rise to the complaint
of the Government of Lesotho; to demand their
redress and appeal to the international community to
extend effective assistance to Lesotho in its unprecedented predicament.

112. We have also learnt from the Foreign Minister
that the South African Government stated, in response
Lo what I presume were the Lesotho Government’s
desperate efforts to save its people from their plight,
that representations of that kind must be made to the
Transkei Government.

119. Addressing myself now to the draft resolution
[S/222@] that has just been submitted to the Council
for consideration, I should like to say that my delegation is happy to be able to support it.

113. More precisely, in response to the letter dated
12 November [S//2227] from the representative of the
Libyan Arab Republic-the
then Chairman of the
African Group-addressed
to the President of the
Security Council, the repfesentative of South Africa
wrote on 16 November to the Secretary-General:

120. Before concluding, I should like to join with
previous speakers in expressing deep regrets at the
departure of several eminent colleagues on the Council, namely, Mr. Huang Hua, Mr. Malik and Mr. Rydbeck, and at the same time extending best wishes
for their further success in their new assignments.

“The Republic of Transkei has already denied
that it has closed the borders between Lesotho and
Transkei, but merely insists, as is its right, on valid
travel documents for people crossing the border into
Transkei.” [S//2231, c1nnex.1

121. Presuming that this will be the Council’s last
meeting this month, I should like to take this opportunily as a retiring member to express to all my colleagues around this table the deep appreciation of my
delegation for the great help and constant and kind

The letter gave no reason for the new requirement
of travel documents.
12

co-operation that they have so generously accorded
my delegation during a term of two years. My delegation ‘extends best wishes to the Council for its further
success.

African Government given itself a most effective instrument in its effort to break the solidarity of Lesotho
with other African countries on this vital issue and
to force it to recognize an entity whose very existence
serves only to perpetuate a brutal system of oppression over millions of its fellow Africans.

122. Mr. VINCI (Italy): The General Assembly,
during its thirty-first session, which is concluding
today, has had its attention focused to a great extent
on the domestic and international consequences of
the npartheid policy of the Government of South
Africa. Numerous
aspects and effects of that
anachronistic policy have been throughly scrutinized
and condemned by both the General Assembly and
the Council.

126. Indeed, we feel that it is the duty of the Council
and of the United Nations to move speedily and
,effectively in a positive response to the moving
appeal made yesterday by Minister Charles Molapo
and help the Government of Lesotho to resist those
pressures. The EEC has already taken urgent measures
in that direction, as was mentioned by the French
representative, and further action is being considered
by the Nine. However, we think that the United
Nations, which has always played a lkading role in
the struggle against crpurfhcid,
bears the primary
responsibility to assist Lesotho to overcome its present
difficulties.

123. The complaint of the Government of Lesotho
that we are considering at present draws our attention
to yet one more negative consequence of that system
of crpartkeid, and a particularly serious one. What we
are this time confronted with is, in fact, the adoption
by the South African Government of measures
threatening the economic stability of Lesotho and the
working system on which the very life of its population
depends. No one can be so nai’ve as not to see behind
that move an attempt to interfere with that country’s
sovereign right to make its own decisions on the
question of the so-called independence of Transkei.
The well-balanced and straightforward statement by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of
Lesotho [1981st meeting] threw further light on that as
well as on other points.

127. That is why my delegation fully supports and
will vote in favour of the seven-Power draft resolution
[S/12260], which was so effectiveIy elaborated on and
introduced by the representative of the United Republic of Tanzania, Mr. Chale. The measures proposed
in it will probably not suffice to resolve all the
problems which Lesotho is now facing and will
continue to face in its adherance to United Nations
resolutions. Further efforts by that country will continue to be necessary. It is most important, however,
that the international community should give immediately a tangible sign of its solidarity with an African
Member State that is courageously struggling. al the
cost of considerable economic sacrifice, to uphold
some of the very principles on which the Organization
was founded.

124. ‘The Italian Government has repeatedly stated its
firm opposition to the policy of separate development
and the programme of bantustanization in the territory
of South Africa. We have refused, and will continue to
refuse., to associate ourselves in any way with the
design whose purpose is certainly not that of granting
freedom and independence to the black populations
of that region but merely an attempt to confer a new
sort of legitimacy upon the system of oppression
embodied in the practice of rrprrr~heitl. It was in the
light of these considerations that we joined with the
overwhelming
majority of the General Assembly,
when, in its resolution 31/6 A, it invited Member
States to withhold recognition of the Transkei on
26 October, the same day that lhe independence of
that Territory was proclaimed; and we full concut
with the stand of the Government of the Kingdom
of Lesotho on this matter, a stand that is taken in
accord’ance with resolutions of the United Nations.

128. The PRESlDENT(i/rrop,‘cfatit,Ir
ji.o/rr F/Y/~&):
With the permission of the members of the Council,
I now wish to make a statement as representative of
ROMANIA.
129. At the request of the Kingdom of Lesotho. the
Security Council is now considering a situation which
is both the result and one of the aggressive mnnifestations of the upnrthcid
policy of the Pretoria racist
rigime. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lesotho.
Mr. Charles Molapo, in the important statement he
made here yesterday [IYBlst nrcrtiug]
and the other
participants in this debate have informed us of the
facts and developed convincing arguments regarding
the grave situation created in Lesotho as a result of
the arbitrary measures taken by South Africa. It is
quite obvious that the Pretoria racist authorities’
closure of the border between the south-eastern region
of Lesotho and the region of South Africa called
the Transkei is an illegal, wilful act aimed at coercing
Lesotho into recognizing the so-called independence
of the Transkei.

125. It is, therefore, a matter of grave concern to
my delegation that the particular geographical position
of Lesotho is being used by the South African Government to exert on that country intensive and unacceptable pressure. Our concern is all the greater in the
knowledge that the only existing communication links
between certain districts inside Lesotho and the rest
of South Africa have been included within the territory
of the so-called Transkei, and we can hardly considet
this ta be a mere coincidence. Thus has the South

130. It is an act of economic and political coercion
against a sovereign Stale, (he purpose of which is to
13

The draft resolution

impose by force the policy of aptrrtheitl and of bantustanization on the indigenous people of South Africa.
There is no need to prove that these aggressive actions
of the Pretoria regime are totally contrary to the
decisions of the Organization regarding the elimination
of the policy of racial discrimination and rrpartheid
and of the direct consequences thereof.

was adopted (resolution

402

(1976)).
137. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfiorn
French):
I shall now call on those representatives who have
expressed the desire to explain the position of their
delegations after the adoption of the draft resolution by
consensus.

13 I, What is happening in southern Africa in general,
and on the Lesotho border in particular, is proof that
the vestiges of colonialism and the persistence of
the policy of ~lpdl’fhei~/ and racial discrimination are
permanent sources of tension which engender acts of
aggression and jeopardize international peace and
security. It is high time that certain anachronistic
phenomena were totally eradicated. Accordingly, the
Security Council cannot ignore the actions of the
racist southern African regimes, which are reflected in
the violations of fundamental principles enshrining the
right to self-determination and independence for countries and peoples subjected to colonial, racist and
foreign domination.
The Council must take a firm
stand against the persistent violation of the Charter
and the resolutions of the United Nations and in
particular against the policy ofaprr,tkeitl of the Pretoria
regime. It is the sacred duty of the Organization to
support by every means available to it the legitimate
aspirations to freedom and independence of the peoples of southern Africa, and of all peoples that are
subjected to racial discrimination
and colonial and
foreign oppression.

138. Mr. SHERER (United States of America):
The United States has joined in the consensus adoption
of this resolution because we wish to make very clear
our support for its main point. Restricting movement
between Lesotho and that territory known as Transkei
has imposed serious burdens on the economy of
Lesotho, and we believe the world community should
assist Lesotho in this difficult period.
139. At the same time, I must comment on paragraph 1 of the resolution. It endorses and quotes
General Assembly resolution 31/6 A, on which the
United States abstained.
140. My delegation abstained in the General
Assembly but not because we intend to recognize that
territory known as Transkei. On the contrary, we have
made it eminently clear that we have no intention of
recognizing the so-called Transkei. We do, however,
reserve the right to attend to the welfare and protection of United States citizens. Realistically,
the
occasion may arise in the future when it would be
necessary to have some contact with the authorities of
the entity in question. Despite the foregoing, we feel
that the main purpose of the present resolution clearly
is to encourage assistance to Lesotho,
and,
accordingly, we have joined in the adoption of the
consensus.

132. In this spirit, we consider that the Security
Council should condemn South Africa for having
resorted to coercive measures against Lesotho in order
to impose its rrprrrrheid policy on it.
133. At the same time, the Romanian delegation
considers it perfectly natural that the Council should
respond speedily, effectively and, above all, unanimously to Lesotho’s request for assistance in confronting the economic difficulties caused by the
arbitrary measures taken by South Africa, especially
since, by resisting the pressures exerted against it,
Lesotho is only acting in implementation
of the
decisions of the United Nations.

141. In that connexion, I should like to point out that
the United States already is extending substantial
assistance to the Government of Lesotho. We have
co-operated in a regional health project involving
maternal and child health care and family planning
services in rural areas, and in the development of
a more comprehensive programme intended to upgrade
the knowledge and skills of health personnel in planning
and managing a national health system. We also
are co-operating with projects in land and water conservation and livestock, farm management, irrigation
and agriculture. We currently are examining other ways
to assist the Government of Lesotho.

134. That is why, in the opinion of the delegation of
Romania, the measures to be agreed on to assist
Lesotho are important in principle for the Organization
and must be conceived and placed within the broader
range of the concerns of the Security Council in
respect of the situation in southern Africa. We believe,
therefore, that there are sufficient reasons to adopt
emergency assistance measures for Lesotho.

142. What I have just said demonstrates our commitment to helping the Government and the people of
Lesotho to overcome the obstacles which have been
placed in the way of their national development. ‘We
hope that the concern of the Council will be heard
and that the border posts in question will be opened
promptly to the free movement of the people of
Lesotho.

135. Speaking now as PRESIDENT,
I should like to
point out that several delegations have expressed the
wish that the seven-Power draft resolution should be
adopted by consensus.
136. If I hear no objections, I shall take it that the
draft resolution in document S/12260 is adopted by
consensus.

143. Before concluding, I should like to express 0111
appreciation for and satisfaction with the spirit of
14

co-operation and close co-ordination which went into
the preparation of the draft resolution. Such co-ordination clearly assisted the Council in reaching a consensus agreement. It is an example of the type of
co-ordination and co-operation which can only assist us
all in resolving problems before us. We hope that this
example may be followed in the future.
144. Mr. MURRAY (United Kingdom): Mr. President, wit.h your permission I should first like to ask the
representative of China to convey to Mr. Huang Hua
our congratulations on his elevation to the rank of
Foreign Minister. It should be a matter of satisfaction
to us allI at the United Nations that the Foreign
Ministry of China is now guided by someone so familiar
with and skilled in the problems of the United Nations.

the fact that, my delegation has certain reservations
about the resolution. We doubt that it is appropriate
for a Security Council resoJutibn to endorse a resolution of the General Assembly such as resolution
31/6 A. The functions of the General Assembl,y and
the Security Council are separate, and it is neither
appropriate nor necessary for one to have the endorsement of the other for its actions.
150. At this stage it is opportune that I should
inform the Council that the United Kingdom, for its
part, has long been aware of the communications
problems facing Lesotho, and has not been indifferent
to the requests received from Maseru. As Mr. Molapo
knows, Her Majesty’s Government
has alre’ady
increased projected aid to Lesotho by X5 million to
help repair rain-damaged roads, and this as a result
of a direct appeal made to the British Prime Minister
by the Prime Minister of Lesotho a few months ago.
I should also mention that EEC, of which my country
is a member, decided recently to approve the amount
of 1 million European Units of Account by the European Development Fund under the Lom6 Convention
of 28 February I 9752 by way of exceptional assistance
to Lesotho for upgrading the road from Sekakes to
Mount Morosi. It should be clear that, at least for
the British Government and some of its close friends,
the plight of Lesotho and the needs for an expanded
road-building programme are well known and have
already attracted not only our sympathy but also,
and this is much more important, our positive financial
help.

145. Might I also ask my Soviet colleague to convey
to Mr. Malik our best wishes on his new appointment,
and in particular to express the hope that he is now
fully recovered from the consequences of his accident.
I am divulging no secrets if I say that Mr. Malik and
my delegation did not always see eye to eye on the
topics that came before us here. But our differences
of policy were never allowed to spill over into personal
relationships,
which remained extremely cordial,
except possibly when the smoke from one of Mr.
Ivor Richard’s fiercer cigars drifted across the front of
the Soviet delegation.
146. We have already had an opportunity elsewhere
to express our regrets to Mr. Rydbeck on his
departure. I need only say here that we are delighted
that he has been transferred to London.
147. I turn now to matters of substance. We heard
yesterda.y a very clear statement from the Foreign
Minister of the Kingdom of Lesotho, Mr. Molapo
[ihid.]. No one who listened could fail to have been
convinced ‘of the problems which confront a State
which is both small and economically vulnerable.
I hope the Foreign Minister will ‘forgive that
description, but the relationships between his country
and mine are sufficiently close, friendly and longstanding for us to be honest and straightforward
with each other. It can be no easy matter for a State
which has set its face against npnrtheid to find itself
by historical accident totally surrounded by the Republic of South Africa, without any other access to the
outside world. We understand that such a situation
poses every day for the Government of Lesotho a host
of difficult and uncomfortable problems.
148. As seen by my delegation, the main thrust of
the resolution whidh we have just adopted is the
clearly expressed call for all border posts to remain
open without let ‘or hindrance, and the appeal for
the wor:ld community to assist Lesotho in its present
economic diffictilties. My delegation associates itself
with both these sentiments, and we have therefore
been ab:le to join in a consensus of the Council on the
resolution.

151. Since we are talking about practical assistance
to Lesotho, it seems to me right that I should remind
the Council that my Government has already a substantial aid programme for Lesotho. We have been the
major donor of aid to Lesotho over the years since
independence. While much of our aid has been
budgetary support, our capital aid disbursements
have amounted to a total of over 222 million, and
we have committed. ourselves to a further programme
of fll million for the period I976 to 1979. In addition,
Her Majesty’s Government
has supplemented the
salaries of technical assistance staff and university
teachers, as well as providing funds for training
Lesotho nationals in the United Kingdom.
152. Finally, since much has been made in many
statements that the Council has heard on the question
of the Transkei, I should like to make the attitude of
my Government on this matter quite clear. I can
do no better than refer to the statement made by.
the representative of the Netherlands to the General
Assembly on 26 October during the debate on c!pcrrtheid when he explained the vote of the nine member
States of EEC. He said:
‘$our nine Governments do not intend to recognize
the so-called independence of the Transkei. False
solutions to the problem of opcm’keicl such as the
establishment of bantustans... promote rather than
diminish racial discrimination
in South Africa.“>

149.’ But in endorsing this appeal for economic
assistance on behalf of my delegation, I do not disguise
15

He added that the consensus did not prejudge the
manner in which the European members would deal
with specific problems of a practical and legal
nature with regard to that territory and its inhabitants.

countries to the Council’s activities and how happy we
have been with our close co-operation with theil
representatives in the work we did together. I want
also to wish them every success in their future activities
at the United Nations and elsewhere.

153. In closing, I should like to take the opportunity
to thank the Foreign Minister of Lesotho for his
helpful statement earlier and to express the hope that
the appeal launched here today will result in real
assistance to the Kingdom of Lesotho.

159. A week ago we bade farewell to Mr. Rydbeck
of Sweden. During this month two other eminent
colleagues departed to assume important functions
in their countries: Mr. Huang Hua 6f China and
Mr. Yakov Malik of the Soviet Union. May I on this
occasion pay a well-deserved tribute to them and
express our gratitude and admiration for the work they
accomplished while on the Council. May I request the
representatives of China and the Soviet Union to
transmit to Mr. Huang Hua and Mr. Malik, respectively, our feelings of friendship and our best wishes
for success in their future activities.

154. The PRESIDENT
(intPrp,efationj~o/n
Fw~hj:
I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lesotho.
1.55. Mr. MOLAPO
(Lesotho): On behalf of my
delegation, my Government and the people of Lesotho,
I wish only to express our most sincere and heartfelt
gratitude to you, Mr. President, and through you to the
inembers of the Security Council, for the overwhelming
support that they have given to my country by adopting
the resolution
by consensus. The Council has
demonstrated its opposition and that of the world
to the oppression and racial policies of the Government
of South Africa. This resolution convinces us in
Lesotho more than before that we are not alone in
this struggle. The most important countries in the world
are behind us. Let us not forget, however, that the
adoption of this resolution is but a step--a major
one indeed-towards
enabling Lesotho faithfully to
carry out the resolutions of the United Nations and
to live up to its obligations under the Charter.
We shall expect all peace-loving and freedom-loving
Member Sates to rally behind the implementation of
this resolution.

160. I could not end without paying a special
tribute-or without associating therein all the members
of the Council--to the Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt
Waldheim, whose work has been assiduous throughout
the year and whose mandate was recently unanimously
renewed. That unanimous confidence authorizes me to
state once again our common conviction that the
Secretary-General will be able to continue his mission
with the same selflessness and dynamism and, as in
the past, place his eminent qualities at the service of the
noble ideals and principles of the United Nations.
161. With this feeling of confidence in the future the
United Nations, I wish to express to all members of
the Council and all members of the Secretariat my
best wishes for the holidays and the New Year.

156. I am happy to note that friendly countries
have already promised concrete assistance. We
are well aware of the fact that this resolution will not
solve the hard-core problem of our region, namely,
that of uptrrthcitl. The elimination of racial discrimination and upardwid in southern Africa will eliminate
and eradicate problems like the one which we brought
here, and indeed will 8ave our region from an impending
blood-bath and destruction.

162. Mr. VINCI (Italy): Assuming that this would be
the last meeting of the Council for this year, I had
prepared a statement. But, since the hour is late and I
do not want to delay further the luncheon period-I
think all our colleagues will appreciate that-1 shall
subscribe to everything that you, Mr. President, have
said and reserve my right to circulate my statement
by personal letter. I am sure that all our colleagues
will also appreciate the fact that that letter will not
require any action, I associate myself also with your
kind words about our former colleagues who have left
the United Nations family-in
particular, I have in
mind Mr. Rydbeck, Mr. Huang Hua and Mr. Malik.

157. We once again pledge our commitment to the
struggle against apcrrrheicl and racial discrimination.
158. The PRESIDENT
(intPl’prutetiot2fi’Oln French):
Before I adjourn the meeting, and since it seems to me
that this meeting will be the last this year-at least
that is my wish-1 should like to avail myself of this
opportunity to express my warm gratitude, on behalf
of the Security Council and on my own behalf, to the
representatives of the delegations of the five nonpermanent members who are leaving us at the end of
the year: Guyana, Italy, Sweden, Japan and the United
Republic of Tanzania. We thank them for the major
contribution that they have made to the Council’s
work during their term of office. I believe I am
expressing the feelings of all members of the Council
by saying how very much we have appreciated the
constructive, substantial contribution of those five

163. The PRESIDENT (intrrpretntiou jkm French):
I am willing to be the interpreter of the unanimity
of our colleagues by expressing our gratitude to the
representative of Italy.

SLJ.S&JIJ,
P/e,loly Mre/i,~g.s,‘42nd meeting.

2 See A/AC.176/7, of 16 September 1975.
3 OJXd Reco,uls qf lhr C~twrulAssembly, Tlzbty-fht Session,
Yle/7ctr:\~
Mertiug.7, 42nd meeting, para. 20.5.

16

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

publications
may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore
or write to: United Nations,
Sales Section.
New York or Geneva.

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Units
monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres
des ventcs,
New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations,

New

York

DES NATIONS

UNIES

sent en vente dans les Iibrairies
et les agences
de votre libraire
ou adrcssez-vous
a : Nations

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas pa&s
del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

DE LAS

NACIONES

depositaires
du
Unies. Section

UNIDAS

Unidas
estan en venta en librerias
y casas distribuidoras
cn
a su librero
o dirljase
a: Naciones
Unidas.
Section
de Ventas.

00400

83-60801-April

I985-2,200
