United Nations

S/PV.3987

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fourth Year

3987th Meeting
Friday, 19 March 1999, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Qin Huasun . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bahrain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gambia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovenia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Petrella
Mr. Al-Dosari
Mr. Valle
Mr. Duval
Mr. Dejammet
Mr. Dangue Réwaka
Mr. Jagne
Mr. Hasmy
Mr. Andjaba
Mr. van Walsum
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Türk
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Burleigh

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Letter dated 4 March 1999 from the Permanent Representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/1999/278)

99-85185 (E)

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Expression of sympathy in connection with the recent
helicopter crash in Haiti
The President (interpretation from Chinese): At the
outset of this meeting, I should like, on behalf of the
Security Council, to extend deep sympathy to the
Governments and the people of Argentina, the Russian
Federation and the United States for the great loss of life
suffered in the crash of a helicopter flying for the United
Nations in Haiti on 14 March 1999. I would request the
representatives of Argentina, the Russian Federation and the
United States to convey to their respective Governments
and to the bereaved families our deep condolences.

3987th meeting
19 March 1999
Mr. Erwa (Sudan), Mr. Mbabazi (Uganda),
Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr.
Kasanda (Zambia) and Mr. Muchetwa (Zimbabwe)
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President (interpretation from Chinese): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations on the
letter dated 4 March 1999 from the Permanent
Representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council, contained in document S/1999/278.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo
Letter dated 4 March 1999 from the Permanent
Representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/1999/278)
The President (interpretation from Chinese): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Burkina Faso, Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt, Germany, Japan,
Kenya, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Rwanda, South Africa,
the Sudan, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Zambia and Zimbabwe, in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. She Okitundu
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat at the
Council table; Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso), Mr.
Ndaruzaniye (Burundi), Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt), Mr.
Kastrup (Germany), Mr. Takasu (Japan), Mr. Mahugu
(Kenya), Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr.
Mazimhaka (Rwanda), Mr. Vermeulen (South Africa),

2

The first speaker inscribed on my list is the Minister
for Human Rights of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, His Excellency Léonard She Okitundu, whom I
welcome and on whom I now call.
Mr. She Okitundu (Democratic Republic of the
Congo) (interpretation from French): I wish to take this
opportunity to express my pleasure at seeing you, Sir,
presiding today over the Security Council. Your
presidency is for me a source of pride, because China has
excellent relations with my country, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I feel duty-bound to thank you for
allowing my delegation to speak here in order to help find
ways and means to put an end to the armed aggression
suffered by my country.
Nor can I fail to thank your predecessor, Mr. Robert
Fowler, the Ambassador of Canada, for his skill in
guiding the Security Council’s work last month and
particularly for his productive contacts with my country’s
delegation with respect to today’s meeting. I should like
also sincerely to thank the members of the Security
Council for having responded favourably to this request,
which is, after all, a legitimate one.
Article 52 of the Charter encourages the Security
Council to encourage the development of peaceful
settlement of local disputes through regional agreements.
My delegation is aware of the Security Council’s efforts
to ensure the proper implementation of that provision, in
particular in two statements it made on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. For this we are most
grateful. But we must not, however, lose sight of the fact
that the last paragraph of that same Article allows the

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year

3987th meeting
19 March 1999

Security Council simultaneously to apply the provisions of
Articles 34 and 35 of the Charter.

opposition forces under the auspices of the Organization
of African Unity and the United Nations.

It is for that reason that my delegation decided to
initiate the process that has led to this debate, with the
legitimate goal of drawing the Council’s attention to the
danger posed by the continuation of the conflict that is
currently under way in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

One need only look back at the negotiating process
for peace, begun in Lusaka, to see that my country has
considerably changed its position in favour of negotiations
leading to a cease-fire. Let us recall in this context that
my Government had decided to bring together, within or
outside of the country, the population of the country as a
whole with a view jointly to examining the causes of
these disputes and to take account of them in the
management of public affairs.

Far be it from us to tax the patience of this gathering
by reiterating facts and events it is already quite familiar
with. My delegation wishes to impress upon international
opinion the finer points that have meant that despite all the
concessions made by my Government, the negotiating
process has not yet led to the signing of a cease-fire. The
efforts deployed by certain countries that are Members of
our Organization, at both the regional and international
levels, to find a peaceful settlement to the conflict would
have already succeeded had all the parties involved acted in
good faith and with honesty throughout the negotiating
process.
However, the stubbornness and intransigence of
Rwanda and their determination to remain on Congolese
territory have been the sole obstacles to a peaceful solution
to the Congolese crisis.
To be sure, negotiations are continuing at the regional
level in the Organization of African Unity, whose efforts I
should like to hail, but it should be known that the effective
involvement of the international community would in no
way thwart those regional efforts. Accordingly, my
Government, as a result of the impasse in the negotiating
process, felt it timely to appeal to the international
community to become more involved in the quest for a
lasting and peaceful solution to the conflict.
My Government wishes to draw the attention of the
United Nations to the determination of the Congolese nation
as a whole and of its tremendous need for peace and for
internal and external security. It expects the international
community to become genuinely and positively involved,
with a view to inducing the aggressors to engage in sincere
negotiations to ensure regional peace and stability. Such an
atmosphere would be conducive to the realization of the
programme of national reconstruction and development,
which all Congolese yearn for. My Government believes
that resolving the current crisis requires the convening of a
regional conference of the countries of the Great Lakes
region that would bring together leaders and their respective

As members are aware, My Government has just
proposed a national debate involving all of the active
forces of the Congolese nation. The level of these
concessions is proof of our flexibility in responding to the
need for a peaceful solution to the crisis in the Great
Lakes region.
None of our concessions have elicited a similar
response on the part of the aggressors, and the Security
Council is aware of this. The international community
will recall that it had to bring great pressure to bear on
Uganda and Rwanda in order for those two countries to
acknowledge their military involvement on Congolese
territory and their participation in this war. Is the pressure
to stop there, despite the refusal by those countries to
withdraw from the territory of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo? Must we still hear of the atrocities
committed daily by those countries against the most
vulnerable sectors of our population, atrocities that have
repeatedly been condemned by non-governmental
organizations?
The Democratic Republic of the Congo shares with
nine other countries more than 9,600 kilometres of land
borders, none of which are free from threat or from the
danger of direct or indirect stabilization. Upon his
accession to office, President Laurent Désiré Kabila had
focused on pacifying and stabilizing the Great Lakes
region, which was in the grip of great instability, and
made it his goal to export peace, security and
development. Let us recall the initiative of President
Kabila, who, in close cooperation with the United Nations
Development Programme, organized a regional conference
on peace and development in the subregion.
But this did not take into account the bad faith, and
especially the grand ambitions, of the current aggressors,
who endeavoured to ensure the failure of the initiative.

3

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
This question of insecurity as a reason for such
aggression is nothing new. The statement made by the
Ugandan Minister for Foreign Affairs in Lusaka on 27
October 1998 is most telling. He said that Uganda’s
security concerns had existed before President Kabila took
power in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Unfortunately, it can be seen that, in the case of
Uganda and of its ally, Rwanda, just a few years after the
coups carried out by the current authorities of those
countries, no effort has been made to reach out to the
exiled opponents to integrate them into the structures of
their respective societies.
Since, as the saying goes, there's no place like home,
these political exiles will seek every available means to
rejoin their societies. That is an entirely legitimate right.
Since, like their Governments, they find the language of
arms more expressive than dialogue, insecurity will grow
for natives and foreigners alike. The odious murder of the
Western tourists in Bwindi Park, Uganda, is an unfortunate
illustration of this and remains fresh in our memories.
What objective attitude should responsible leaders
have adopted in such circumstances? I suppose that they
could have approached their opponents and negotiated with
them, as they insist we do towards the reconstruction of
their respective countries.
Unfortunately, that was not the case. They found it
easier to carry their war onto Congolese territory. Today,
the consequences for the native populations of that war, and
especially of the occupation of the eastern territories, is
terrible and absolutely deplorable. By way of example, I
would point to the massacre of 858 people in Kasika; of
more than 600 at Makobola; and, more recently yet, the
horrible massacre at Kamituga, all committed by the
Rwandan Patriotic Army. I wish to spare the Council a
litany of the massacres perpetrated in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I would simply refer to Security
Council document S/1999/205 of 25 February 1999, by
which my Government transmitted the “White paper on
massive violations of human rights and of the basic rules of
international humanitarian law by the aggressor countries
(Uganda, Rwanda and Burundi) in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.”
In view of the complexity of the question and of the
horrors being committed in the occupied Congolese territory
by the regular armed forces of neighbouring countries, the
international community, through the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) and the United Nations, has merely

4

3987th meeting
19 March 1999
issued a few timid declarations on the violations of the
territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. A strong condemnation of the violation of the
basic principles of the OAU and United Nations Charters
would prevent the negotiations from being bogged down
and war atrocities from being committed on the ground.
The number of these atrocities is now countless and they
continue to exact an extremely heavy tribute from the
innocent population.
In seven months of war, thousands of innocent
people have been murdered in the most horrendous
manner; some have even been decapitated. This is beyond
all imagination.
It is in this context that I come to the Council today
to ask it to deal objectively with this situation so as to
end the hostilities in my country by peaceful means. By
way of example, my Government might be amenable to
peacekeeping forces' being deployed to guarantee peace
and security along the borders. How long could
peacekeeping forces remain effective in the Great Lakes
region, however, if reconciliation among the warring
parties in those countries that have attacked my own did
not include all the grassroots forces of their nations in the
structures of their respective countries?
As I emphasized earlier, the borders of my country
with its neighbours to the east are more than 2,000
kilometres long. Thus, one must wonder how peace and
security, and above all the time necessary to deploy such
a force, can be truly guaranteed. Our concern is to end as
soon as possible the martyrdom of the population in the
eastern and Kivu provinces, which remain under the
occupation of the regular armed forces of Uganda and
Rwanda.
My Government is fed up with mere statements of
good intentions. It wants a definitive solution to this
question with the help of the entire international
community. That is why, after the troops of aggression
are withdrawn, it would wholeheartedly call for the
convening of a regional conference of the Great Lakes
countries, to which leaders and their respective opponents
would be invited. We have set the stage for our
participation and my Government is ready to join,
whenever possible, the entire opposition in a national
debate. Such an approach is essential for Uganda and
Rwanda, which are suffering from a lack of national
cohesiveness, the real cause of insecurity in their
countries and in the Great Lakes region.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
The body that you, Sir, have the privilege of leading
today has received from the international community the
heavy responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. The Great Lakes region suffers from chronic
instability and a complete breakdown of peace, causing the
focal point of tension constantly to shift in the absence of
a definitive solution. Yesterday, Rwanda; today the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; what about tomorrow?
No one knows.
Paragraph 2 of Article 24 of the United Nations
Charter calls on the Council to act in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations in such
circumstances. That is why my Government wishes the
Security Council to become more involved in the search for
a peaceful and lasting solution to the current conflict. My
Government seeks peace and wishes to live in harmony and
good understanding with all its neighbours. My Government
agrees to sign a ceasefire agreement, followed by the
deployment along the border of a buffer force, with a
precise timetable for the withdrawal of the aggressor troops.
Such a force would be tasked with monitoring and securing
the borders shared by the Democratic Republic of the
Congo with Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda.
My Government is also resolutely determined to reestablish a state of law and fundamental freedoms
throughout its national territory and has formalized the
opening of the political landscape, notably by the
promulgation of Law 194 of 29 January 1999 on
liberalizing the activities of political parties. My
Government recently demonstrated its good faith towards
this opening by proposing the convening of a national
debate to include every region, every political tendency and
every socio-political sector of the country, including the socalled rebels, so as to enable them to consider and work for
the future of the Congolese nation at the dawn of the third
millennium. My Government fully supports the idea
proposed by France for an international conference on
peace and security in the Great Lakes region.
My Government is convinced that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will succeed in restoring peace and
domestic harmony. However, in order to ensure peace
throughout the Great Lakes region, it is of the highest
important that peace reign within the national boundaries of
Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda. The international community
has the duty and the obligation to help these three countries
to resolve their internal problems, which are the source of
regional destabilization. I can assure the Council that my
Government is already prepared to participate actively in
these future meetings.

3987th meeting
19 March 1999
Until these steps can be taken, a mere Security
Council presidential statement cannot hope to end with
any dispatch the holocaust in which Rwanda and Uganda
are engaged. It is true that the ostensible motive, as
announced by the aggressors, is the issue of insecurity
along the borders. I have already proposed an effective
solution for this. If there are hidden motives, however,
they are hidden to the Congolese delegation but may not
be to the members of the Security Council. Can these
hidden motives override consideration for the lives of the
thousands of Congolese natives who continue to be
slaughtered unjustly by the weapons of the aggressors?
In view of the Security Council's powers in the area
of international peace and security, and until the
international community takes additional steps to bring
peace to the entire Great Lakes region, the least my
Government expects from this meeting is, first, the
realization that my country is the victim of armed
aggression, as defined in resolution 3314 (XXIX), adopted
by the General Assembly with a view to defining
aggression.
Secondly, we expect condemnation of that
aggression; thirdly, we seek full respect by the aggressors
for international humanitarian law; fourthly, we expect
withdrawal of the troops of aggression from our territory.
In that regard, the Council can make use of the provisions
of Articles 39 to 42 of the Charter of the United Nations.
Fifthly, we seek from the Security Council the
deployment of an interposing force along common
borders. As the pretext used by the aggressors to justify
their aggression is precisely insecurity along borders, this
interposing force could control security along the common
borders. Finally, my Government calls for the convening
of an international conference on the restoration of lasting
peace in the Great Lakes region.
I would like to reserve the right to take the floor
later in the discussion.
The President (interpretation from Chinese): I thank
the Minister for Human Rights of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for the kind words he addressed to
me.
Mr. Duval (Canada)(interpretation from French):
Mr. President, first we would like to thank you and to
congratulate you for having made today's debate possible.
We welcome the presence of the Secretary-General at this
debate.

5

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
Canada hopes that the debate on the peaceful
settlement of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and the ideas that will be discussed, can serve to
define a solution to this conflict, which, unfortunately, has
extended throughout the region and which now affects
several countries.
At the outset, Canada reaffirms that a military solution
cannot resolve a dispute that is essentially political, and that
only negotiations can lead to a lasting solution and restore
peace and stability to a region that has already undergone
too much suffering. Like the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) and the Security Council, Canada attaches the
highest importance to respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States, whether those of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo or those of its
neighbours.
Agreement to an immediate ceasefire, coupled with
serious and sincere discussions involving all parties, offers
the only solution to the military stand-off which has
resulted from eight months of conflict involving the armed
forces of eight countries and a dozen militias.
The people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the peoples of the entire region want peace. They want
respect for their sovereignty and their borders, and security
guarantees. They desire not war, but a return to the
productive work of development and to the establishment
of democracy.
Canada supports without reservation the efforts of
regional leaders to achieve a negotiated solution. We join
with our colleagues on the Security Council in inviting
President Chiluba of Zambia and the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) to continue their tireless
efforts. A great deal has already been achieved. A ceasefire,
however, has yet to materialize.

3987th meeting
19 March 1999
of an agreed process for the political settlement of the
conflict. We would support adoption by the Security
Council of concrete, sustainable and effective measures to
this end.
As in any conflict, it is the civilian population that
suffers the harshest consequences. The humanitarian
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
seriously deteriorating and contributes to an increased
number of displaced persons. Moreover, we are
unfortunately witnessing serious human rights violations
by all parties to the conflict. The Congolese population
has suffered enough. We commend the courageous efforts
of the United Nations Children's Fund to implement a
major vaccination programme throughout the country. We
trust that the goodwill shown on all sides in support of
this campaign, regardless of their various allegiances, will
be renewed when humanitarian organizations undertake to
relieve the suffering of the Congolese people.
The ceasefire, monitoring arrangements and
humanitarian assistance will, however, remain tenuous if
they are not followed by dialogue among the various
elements of Congolese civil and political society. This
dialogue must lead to a national consensus, and to purely
Congolese institutions chosen and approved by all
Congolese. This transition will allow for the reestablishment of the rule of law, the restoration of a fair
and independent judicial system and respect for the rights
of all with no discrimination based on ethnic origin. It
must also combat the culture of impunity which is still
rampant in the region.
In our view, implementation of these elements is
essential to national reconciliation among Congolese, and
to the reconstruction and stability of the country and the
region as a whole.
(spoke in English)

All the forces involved must participate in a ceasefire
while respecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The ceasefire must
be accompanied by a timetable for the withdrawal of all
foreign forces involved in this conflict and by monitoring
arrangements in accordance with the Lusaka agreements. In
our view, this is an essential condition for the restoration of
peace and stability in central Africa.

To ensure a lasting peace, we must find solutions to
the various problems that have burdened the Central
African region for too long. The worsening situation has
led to plans to convene, under the auspices of the United
Nations and the OAU, an international conference on
peace, stability and socio-economic development in the
Great Lakes region of Africa.

Canada, as it announced in autumn 1998, is prepared
to examine the active involvement of the United Nations,
in coordination with the Organization of African Unity, in
the implementation of an effective ceasefire agreement and

Canada supports this idea. We believe that not only
the countries of the region, but also African civil society
as a whole, must participate in such a conference. The
problems of the region, including those of nationality and

6

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
the application of customary as opposed to judicial law,
cannot be resolved without the vital contribution of the
region's civil societies. Canada invites the international
community to continue its consideration of this important
issue so as to allow the holding of such a conference when
the opportunity arises.
Our support for the regional mediation process and a
peaceful and lasting solution to the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo remains steadfast. We
strongly encourage the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
to continue to work actively with the Secretary-General of
the OAU and with all the parties concerned to reach a
peaceful solution, and we hope soon to consider his
concrete recommendations on a possible role for the United
Nations to that end.
The President (interpretation from Chinese): I thank
the representative of Canada for the kind words he
addressed to me.
Mr. Jagne (Gambia): Let me begin by thanking you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo with a
view to finding a way forward in that seemingly intractable
conflict. Let us hope that at the end of the day the voice of
reason will prevail over the logic of war. We also
acknowledge the presence of the Secretary-General amongst
us this morning, and we thank him for coming. In the same
vein, we salute the presence of the Minister for Human
Rights of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The tragic situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has been a cause for serious concern to my
Government. Quite apart from the real threat that a
combination of factors poses to the country's sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence, the entire Great Lakes
region itself has virtually been transformed into a powderkeg. In the process, there have been serious allegations of
massacres and other forms of gross violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law. Consequently, the
security situation remains precarious; and, as it continues to
deteriorate, the number of refugees and internally displaced
persons also increases. Let us seize this opportunity to
remind the parties of their obligations to respect and protect
human rights and also to respect international humanitarian
law, including the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their
Additional Protocols of 1977. We also urge them to allow
access of humanitarian assistance to those in need, and to
ensure the safety of all humanitarian personnel.

3987th meeting
19 March 1999
It is against this background that we are meeting
today to see what we can do, through a concerted
international effort, to find a peaceful solution to the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and, by
extension, in the Great Lakes region. It appears that
history is about to repeat itself, but it should be our
common resolve to make sure that the mistakes of the
past are not committed again. It will be recalled that the
process of the Congo’s decolonization was like a painful
childbirth, followed by callous cold-war calculations; and
what ensued is an open secret. A whole generation was
thus wasted! Barely emerging from that unfortunate state
of affairs, coupled with the vicissitudes of a country in
transition, the Democratic Republic of the Congo was
suddenly plunged into a series of internal and external
problems. This war has so far produced no benefit for any
of the parties. At best, the net result is massive
displacements of civilian populations, an untold amount
of suffering and loss of life, food shortages, the spread of
diseases and economic misfortunes.
Since the problem has regional implications, my
delegation has always expressed support for the regional
diplomatic initiatives geared towards the peaceful
resolution of the conflict. In this connection, my
delegation would again like to commend the efforts of the
Southern African Development Community, which
mandates President Chiluba to undertake these efforts. It
is our firm belief that through the Lusaka process, the
collective security of all the countries in the region could
be adequately addressed. It is the fervent wish of the
Government and the people of the Gambia that the parties
hear the voice of reason and cease hostilities immediately,
accept a ceasefire framework, as already agreed to in
principle as part of the Lusaka process, and enter into
negotiations on implementation and monitoring
arrangements. The proximity talks commenced with the
rebels is a step in the right direction and should therefore
be pursued.
We believe that in this difficult and complex
conflict, negotiation is the way forward. A military
solution is certainly not the best option. The parties to the
conflict should therefore take the Lusaka process
seriously. It is our fervent hope that today’s meeting will
serve as a catalyst to reactivate that process. The
belligerents should not miss this golden opportunity to
transform the troops’ present standstill into a formal
ceasefire. This, in turn, would pave the way for the
United Nations to step in and play a more active role by
deploying a peacekeeping force. It is the long-awaited
rendezvous with history that we have been calling for, but

7

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
for this to happen the parties to the conflict must first and
foremost agree on a ceasefire, without which there is very
little that the rest of the international community can do to
help them. They must understand that the security of their
countries is inextricably linked, and therefore it is in their
interest to work together for the collective security of all of
them. An international peace conference could then be
envisaged to address all other issues.
The President (interpretation from Chinese): I thank
the representative of the Gambia for his kind words
addressed to me.
Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (interpretation from
Spanish): I would like to thank you for having taken the
initiative of holding this open debate, with the presence of
the Secretary-General, on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. There can be no doubt that this is
a legally complex and politically sensitive topic. We are
convinced that the first step to solving a problem is
recognizing that it exists. This is what we in Latin America
and the Caribbean have done in the past with our own
problems. With the understanding and support of the
international community and motivated by the desire to find
real, definitive and peaceful solutions to disputes, we
successfully moved forward and created peace and tangible
progress for our peoples. Accordingly, we can understand
the complexity of the current situation in some parts of
Africa.
We take a respectful approach to the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We are guided by a
real desire to defend peace and to encourage the parties to
turn to the path of negotiation.
This conflict is legally complex. In our view, it is
neither exclusively internal nor exclusively international.
The influence and extent of each of these aspects could be
debated, but certainly they both exist. At the same time, the
conflict is politically sensitive because, either directly or
indirectly, it involves major countries of the subregion and
has the dangerous potential of spreading.
There can be no doubt that the main responsibility for
resolving the conflict lies with those directly involved. No
third party can impose a lasting solution if the parties lack
the political will to adopt it. Nonetheless, we still believe
that it is important to explore options that might encourage
or point the way towards such a solution. In this regard,
Argentina strongly supports the regional efforts that are
under way, as well as the Lusaka process. This does not
exclude the Security Council from playing a role by

8

3987th meeting
19 March 1999
providing concrete support to the regional initiative during
its various phases. During the current phase the priority
is to obtain an effective ceasefire. The second phase is
securing and consolidating this ceasefire by means of a
peacekeeping operation. United Nations assistance is
essential in both these phases.
While negotiations in such conflicts are essentially
political, this does not exclude the implementation of
principles and norms of international law. In the case of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we believe that
the following legal principles are essential.
First, there is an obligation to peacefully resolve the
dispute. This obligation applies not only to the means but
also to the ends. Therefore, we think that — with the
necessary flexibility and without prejudging the legal
status of the actors in this sensitive conflict —
mechanisms for inclusive dialogue should be sought.
Secondly, once again it should be noted that the use
of force does not bring territorial rights or legitimize
changes in established borders. The rule of the
immutability of colonial borders is a principle of general
international law and applies to the African continent as
it does to the American.
In this regard, respect for the principle of the
territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is essential. This is not incompatible with the
principle of protecting minorities. As has been
successfully done elsewhere, it is possible to establish a
system of safeguards that protects minorities’ ethnic and
cultural identities.
Among these essential legal principles, we wish to
reiterate the principle of non-interference in the domestic
affairs of other States, a principle that is incompatible
with the presence of foreign forces. Through negotiations
and dialogue, and with the United Nations assistance if
necessary, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
together with its neighbours, must resolve all the security
questions that affect their shared borders.
In this, the legal, context, we would like to reiterate
once again that the serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law that have taken place and
continue to occur on the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are also the essence of the
problem. These horrible violations deserve our concern
and more firm and open condemnation. We urge that
these events be duly investigated and punished.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
We believe that a long-term solution to the problems
that affect the Democratic Republic of the Congo today
cannot be found in an insolated manner, but rather must be
found within a politically stable regional context and with
certain expectations for economic and human development.
This is why we believe that convening an international
conference on the Great Lakes region — as has been
proposed by France — could, under the proper
circumstances and at the appropriate time, provide an
appropriate forum to analyze all these aspects of the
regional situation in a comprehensive manner.
Finally, Mr. President, I would like on behalf of the
Government of Argentina to thank you for your
condolences.
The President (interpretation from Chinese): I thank
the representative of Argentina for the kind words he
addressed to me.
Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): The Security Council
convened at the level of Foreign Ministers on 25 September
1997 to address concerted international efforts to promote
peace and stability in Africa. On 16 April 1998, the
Secretary-General, at the request of the Security Council,
submitted his report on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in
Africa (S/1998/318). That, indeed, was and remains a
timely event, for Africa — today more than ever — needs
peace and development for the prosperity of all its peoples.
Neither nations nor peoples can do without cooperation for
the good of all. Humanity requires solidarity and sharing in
all the benefits derived from the common heritage of us all,
on the basis of equality, mutual respect and mutual support
for a common future. It is in this context that we view
today’s meeting.
The invasion of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
by Uganda and Rwanda has plunged that country into a
devastating war that has resulted in intra-African fighting
on the battlefield: a war from which the region and Africa
at large stand to gain nothing; a war whose premises are
against the purposes and objectives enshrined in the charter
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU).
It has been said, and rightly so, that in the 1960s
independent African States inherited colonial boundaries
together with the challenge which that legacy posed to their
territorial integrity and to our attempts to achieve national
unity. It was because of that shared and collective vision
that the OAU decided in 1964 to accept the boundaries
inherited from colonial authorities. What remains, therefore,

3987th meeting
19 March 1999
is for Africa to forge national unity, good-neighbourliness
and cooperation. Any deviation from these principles will
have serious and unimaginable consequences for Africa.
What we are seeing in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo as a result of expansionist ambitions should be
condemned; it must not be accepted as the norm in
Africa.
The Inter-State Defense and Security Committee
meeting of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), held in Cape Town, South Africa,
in 1995, decided to take collective action in the event of
attempts to change the legitimate Governments of member
States by military means. Therefore, the Southern African
Development Community has a stated obligation to ensure
that the legitimate Government of a fellow SADC
member should not be removed by invasion. Namibia
adheres to that principle and believes in the nonviolability of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
States. These are sacred principles that compelled us,
together with Angola and Zimbabwe, to intervene in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo at the expressed
invitation of President Kabila and his legitimate
Government. The sole purpose of our requested
intervention is to prevent the collapse of the State
machinery and the violation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of a fellow SADC member State. The
Namibian involvement is for democracy, peace, human
rights and regional cooperation.
Furthermore, the SADC Summit held in Mauritius
on 13 and 14 September 1998, among other things,
expressed deep regret at the outbreak of war in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to remove the
Government of President Kabila from power.
Furthermore, the Summit welcomed the initiatives by
SADC and its member States intended to assist in the
restoration of peace, security and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In that regard, the
Summit reaffirmed its call for an immediate cessation of
hostilities and commended the Governments of Angola,
Namibia and Zimbabwe for providing troops in a timely
manner to assist the Government and people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to defeat the illegal
attempt by rebels and their allies to capture the capital
city, Kinshasa, and other strategic areas. The Summit
emphasised the need for all political actors in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to commit themselves
to orderly and peaceful transition to multiparty
democracy, primarily through constructive consultations
and negotiations involving all stakeholders.

9

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
It is therefore important for all States Members of the
United Nations to subscribe in earnest to the principles
enshrined in the Charter and to respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. There must be a clear distinction between invited
and uninvited foreign troops in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Let me stress that as freedom fighters we never relied
on ethnicity to win victory against oppressors, for we knew
too well that apartheid colonialism was anchored in the
principle of divide and rule. As Africans, we must avoid
the politicization of ethnicity, for it can only be detrimental
to African unity. We must also guard against ongoing
attempts by external forces to exploit ethnicity for their own
purposes. Of late, we have witnessed efforts to assist Africa
in addressing its economic problems. We commend the
United States-Africa ministerial meeting that took place in
Washington a few days ago. But how can sustainable
development take root in Africa in general, or, for example,
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in particular,
when sustained efforts are being made to plunge that
country further into conflict?
The security concerns of any State are, indeed,
legitimate. However, we should refrain from defining our
security needs beyond our own borders without working
within the framework of the United Nations and of the
OAU. The unprovoked invasion of the Congo and the
violation of its sovereignty and territorial integrity constitute
an act of interference in the internal affairs of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Namibia advocates peace and stability as a
precondition for development and economic growth.
Consequently, we wish for the disruption of the
democratization process to cease and the reconstruction of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to resume soon.
Our deepest desire is to help create an environment
conducive to normal political life in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have suffered enough, for too many
decades. They need space and time to reconstruct their
country. As indicated in the communiqué of the SADC
Summit meeting on the Democratic Republic of the Congo
held on 23 August 1998, the reconstruction of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as an independent,
sovereign, united, peaceful, stable and prosperous country
is critical to the achievement of the same objectives in the
region and in the rest of the African continent.

10

3987th meeting
19 March 1999
The OAU and SADC are continuing to make efforts
to bring an end to the conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. In Victoria Falls, the heads of State or
Government made a political commitment to put an end
to the fighting and to search for peace collectively. This
was followed by a meeting of Defence Ministers and
other senior military personnel in Addis Ababa to work
out modalities, a timetable, a calendar and resources, as
well as monitoring, verification and the details of the
respective troop withdrawals, in cooperation with the
OAU. Regrettably, however, this process has come to a
standstill.
On 18 January this year, at the request of President
Yoweri Museveni of Uganda, my country hosted a
summit of the countries that are involved in the fighting
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Namibia agreed
to host that summit, for we believed that the request was
made in good faith. The aim of the summit was for the
respective leaders to exchange views on how best they
could cooperate to achieve the signing of a ceasefire
agreement on the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
That meeting resolved that a ceasefire agreement should
be signed without further delay. Unfortunately, what
followed was continued attacks on Government and allied
forces. This cannot be tolerated.
In our view, the time has come for the Security
Council to become actively involved, in accordance with
its Charter obligation to maintain international peace and
security. We are therefore encouraged by the action taken
by the Security Council today. Let me therefore take this
opportunity to express to you personally, Mr. President,
and to your delegation our appreciation and thanks for the
efforts you have made to focus your presidency on
African issues. We are most grateful.
Unless all the parties involved negotiate in good
faith and honour their commitments, the war in the Congo
will continue raging. It is therefore imperative that a
ceasefire agreement which will bring an end to the
suffering of the Congolese people be signed. For our part,
we still stand by the decision of the Windhoek summit.
We are encouraged by the positive developments of
the liberalization of political parties in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo announced by President Kabila at
the end of January 1999. It is our sincere hope that
political activity in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
will return to normal in the not-too-distant future.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
Finally, I should like to say that the cold war has
indeed ended, but external intervention in Africa has not
ended — it has only diminished. But only Africa can make
the African continent peaceful and prosperous. The
international community can only assist.
The President (interpretation from Chinese): I thank
the representative of Namibia for the kind words he
addressed to me and to my delegation.
Mr. Valle (Brazil): The Brazilian delegation considers
it a timely initiative to convene an open debate on the
peaceful settlement of the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and we express our sincere
appreciation to you, Sir, for having made it materialize.
In paragraph 8 of his important report of 13 April
1998 on the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and development in Africa (S/1998/318), the
Secretary-General, who honours us with his presence here
today, pointed out that at the Congress of Berlin of 1885,
“Kingdoms, States and communities in Africa were
arbitrarily divided; unrelated areas and peoples were
just as arbitrarily joined together.”
As underlined by the Secretary-General, the decision
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) in 1963 to
accept inherited borders has provided the continent with a
powerful tool to prevent territorial conflict. The task of
nation-building, however, remains a daunting challenge for
present and coming generations of Africans.
In his wisdom, the Secretary-General proposed a set
of ideas to respond to the many situations of conflict that
afflict the continent. Those ideas approach the short-term
problems from the perspective of peacemaking,
peacekeeping and humanitarian assistance. He also raised
the issue of building durable peace and promoting
sustainable economic growth, with special emphasis on
good governance.
In its reaction to the report of the Secretary-General,
this Council held an open debate on the issue and adopted
a programme of work that produced resolutions addressing
the efficacy of arms embargoes, the reduction of flows of
small arms and the strengthening of the coordination
between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations. In dealing with the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we should increasingly
resort to the options that have been developed throughout
the past year.

3987th meeting
19 March 1999
Placed in the very centre of the continent, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo shares borders with
nine other African States. It belongs to the central, eastern
and southern subregions and can be either the hub for the
promotion of economic integration and prosperity or a
focus for discord and strife. Throughout their long history,
African nations have been subjected to undue and
disruptive foreign interference. Uninvited involvement in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo should cease, and
a political formula to promote national reconciliation
should be negotiated.
A few weeks after receiving a notification from the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Security Council reaffirmed, on 31 August 1998, the
obligation to respect the territorial integrity and national
sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
called for a ceasefire, the withdrawal of foreign forces
and the initiation of political dialogue. While upholding
the principle of non-interference, Brazil recognizes the
right of a State threatened by foreign invasion to call for
external assistance. We should differentiate those foreign
forces within the Democratic Republic of the Congo that
were invited by the Government from those whose
presence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
reflects different motivations.
Resolution 1197 (1998), adopted on 18
September 1998, stresses the responsibility of regional
organizations. The OAU and the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) have played a leading
role in the attempts to solve the impasse in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. There is, however, a
need for increased political will on the part of the many
players, as was expressed at the ministerial-level meeting
of the Security Council on Africa last September.
The security of any State has a direct link with the
security of its neighbours. Therefore any attempt to
resolve the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will have to take into account the safety of other
countries of the region, some of which feel the impact of
episodes of lawlessness from across their borders. The
restoration of law and order is also a requisite for the full
enjoyment of human and political rights.
The States of Central Africa have already pondered
such questions. The Democratic Republic of the Congo
belongs to the group of countries that, within the
framework of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa,
organized a Subregional Conference on Democratic

11

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
Institutions and Peace in Central Africa, held at Bata,
Equatorial Guinea, in May last year. The Bata Declaration,
which was unanimously adopted, recognized that the
process of democratization in the region must lead to a
political system capable of allowing the full expression of
the people’s will. It states that such a system should be
based, inter alia, on the principles of respect for the rule of
law; political pluralism; organization of free, transparent
and fair elections; freedom of the press; independence of
the judiciary; respect for human rights and human dignity;
and the practice of dialogue and tolerance.
The Governments of the region should be supported
and encouraged to fully apply those principles. That is the
only route to prevent internal discontent from leading to
armed conflict.
The international aspects of the conflict must be
addressed by improving the mechanisms of cooperation
between the United Nations, the OAU, SADC and other
relevant subregional organizations. In this respect we
support President Chiluba’s efforts. The convening of a
conference on the Great Lakes should also be pursued. The
Security Council has reaffirmed the importance of holding
such a conference. It has also stressed that the Council is
prepared to assist, through effective measures, in the
implementation of a ceasefire agreement and in an agreed
process for a political settlement of the conflict.
OAU Secretary General Salim Salim addressed the
Council last October. He expressed the view that there is
consensus on the need to maintain the territorial integrity of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the legitimacy of
President Kabila’s Government, the need to create political
space for the opposition forces, and the recognition that
some of the neighbours of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo have real security concerns that need to be
addressed.
Those four points are essential in the quest for a
solution. A fifth element relies on political will, both on the
part of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the opposition parties, to engage in true
negotiations that could allow for the fair and meaningful
participation of all parties in the political process. The
international community as a whole is expected to provide
the financial, technical and political cooperation needed for
this dialogue to prosper.
The President (interpretation from Chinese): I thank
the representative of Brazil for his kind words addressed to
me.

12

3987th meeting
19 March 1999
Mr. Déjammet (France) (interpretation from
French): The conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has been raging for almost eight months now. It
involves not only Congolese rebel groups but
approximately half a dozen African countries, and
military operations are being conducted over an everwidening area of the territory of that country.
Regional organizations, the Organization of African
Unity and the United Nations have not remained inactive
since the outbreak of the crisis, but we must acknowledge
that their appeals for a cessation of hostilities have not
been heeded.
In our debate today — requested by the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and approved by the members of
the Council — we must explore ways and means to
achieve a peaceful settlement of this conflict. In this
connection, the French delegation would like to make the
following comments.
We will not attempt to go into the causes of the
conflict. It is well known that they are numerous and that
their analysis can itself be a source of disagreement
among the parties. But we are aware of the effects of the
crisis, particularly the risks of political destabilization in
the States of the region and the humanitarian
consequences — the flows of refugees. The territorial
integrity and national sovereignty of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are in jeopardy. The principle of
non-interference in the domestic affairs of States, as set
out in the Charter of the United Nations, has not been
respected. France deplores these violations and calls for
their immediate cessation.
What would be the components of a settlement of
the conflict? We can isolate three aspects: the conclusion
of a ceasefire, the implementation of a process of national
reconciliation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and the conclusion of the necessary arrangements to
guarantee security and stability in the region.
Concluding a ceasefire is a matter of priority. Efforts
have been undertaken, in particular by President Chiluba,
to reach an agreement. France supports these efforts. We
hope that ways and means can be found to ensure that a
cease-fire is observed by all parties to the conflict.
Considerable work has already been done in the context
of the Lusaka process to define the modalities of a
ceasefire and its implementation. Today the parties must
conclude such an agreement.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
In its presidential statement of 11 December, the
Council declared itself ready to contemplate the active
involvement of the United Nations, in coordination with the
Organization of African Unity, in order to assist in the
implementation of such an agreement.
Two points should be emphasized. The support of the
United Nations for the implementation of a ceasefire will
require a considerable effort on the part of the
Organization. France hopes that the United Nations will
fully play its part.
It is equally necessary for the Members of our
Organization to call upon the parties to cease hostilities.
There is no military solution to the conflict that could at the
same time represent a genuine solution to the crisis, and
this should be kept in mind. It is noteworthy also that
donors will find it much more difficult to maintain the
provision of assistance from their budgets to countries that
continue to opt for a military solution.
Secondly, a peaceful solution to the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo also would depend on
the implementation of an authentic process of national
reconciliation. Dialogue must of necessity be instituted
among all Congolese. President Kabila committed himself,
during the Africa-France Conference held in Paris last
November, to pursuing the democratization process. We
urge him to follow up on his commitment in specific terms.
We take note of his recent proposal to organize a national
debate, and it is our hope that this will take place in a
genuine spirit of reconciliation.
It is clear that this dialogue among the Congolese must
be embarked upon forthwith. It would be facilitated if, at
the same time, a ceasefire were concluded and respected.
The third aspect of the settlement would involve the
parties’ negotiating and concluding the necessary
arrangements to guarantee the security, stability and future
development of the region. These principles, recalled in the
presidential statement of 11 December, were respect for the
territorial integrity and the political independence and
national sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and other States in the region, and, in this context,
the orderly withdrawal of all foreign forces; arrangements
for security along the international borders of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; and the reestablishment of the authority of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo over the whole territory
of the country. In addition, respect for human rights and

3987th meeting
19 March 1999
humanitarian law are paramount, as well as the need to
tackle the question of refugees.
The United Nations should provide the necessary
assistance to the countries of the region so that these
objectives can be attained. In this regard, France recalls
the potential usefulness, at the appropriate time, of
convening an international conference on peace, security
and development in the Great Lakes region under the
auspices of the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity. A return to stability must also include the
implementation of an authentic process of national
reconciliation and democratization in all the countries of
the region.
Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): The
ongoing conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
represents one of the gravest threats to peace, stability
and development in sub-Saharan Africa in decades.
The current conflict in the Congo has led to a
deepening humanitarian crisis, exacerbated the plight of
refugees and internally displaced persons, impeded the
delivery of critical food and medical assistance, and in
general hampered international and domestic efforts
towards development and democracy. If this crisis widens,
the implications for the region and the subcontinent could
be catastrophic.
In Washington, the United States just concluded a
ministerial meeting with representatives of over 40
African countries. Participants agreed on a partnership
agenda, a blueprint for the future of United States/African
relations and the future of the continent. Both the goals
discussed — the economic integration of African States
into the global economy, good governance, human rights
and democratization — and the substantial progress the
region has made in recent years could be jeopardized by
the growing conflict in the Congo.
That is why the United States, among others, has
been actively engaged in extensive shuttle diplomacy in
support of regional mediation efforts to help end the
conflict. Our approach is guided by a set of basic
principles: the preservation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo; the belief that there can be no military solution to
the underlying problems of the region; and the belief that
the human and humanitarian rights of all peoples in the
conflict must be respected.

13

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
The United States fully supports the regional
mediation efforts currently underway, particularly those led
by the Southern African Development Community, known
as the Lusaka process. We continue to encourage these
efforts, as well as work being done by the Organization of
African Unity and the United Nations to bring about a
comprehensive, peaceful settlement. This goal of peace,
however, has proven elusive and will require steady,
persistent engagement by all.
As the war is prolonged, it grows ever more
dangerous, leading to consequences that cannot be foreseen.
Every leader in the region, and the international community
itself, must be seized with the goal of ending the killing
now.

3987th meeting
19 March 1999
In this regard, the United States welcomes the
Congolese Government’s recent invitation to the United
Nations human rights investigator Roberto Garretón. We
are pleased that Mr. Garretón was able to travel to the
Congo and we look forward to his report. We urge the
Congolese authorities to guarantee continued access for
competent international investigators to look into all
reported atrocities. All persons who commit or order the
commission of grave breaches of international
humanitarian law are individually responsible for their
actions. In this context, we welcome the decision taken by
regional leaders and President Clinton at the Entebbe
Summit of March 1998 to begin work on the creation of
an international coalition against genocide.

We believe it is critical that a ceasefire be agreed upon
as soon as possible. Direct talks between President Kabila’s
Government and the rebels are essential to that end. Any
agreement must be accompanied by an inclusive national
political process and the creation of a mechanism to address
both the internal and external security concerns of the
Congo and its neighbours.

The United States calls on members of the
international community to redouble efforts to limit arms
flows to this region of conflict. The United States also
calls for safe and unhindered access for humanitarian
agencies to all those in need and for unrestricted access
by the International Committee of the Red Cross to all
detainees. All parties must guarantee the safety and
security of United Nations and humanitarian personnel.

The United States condemns the reported massacres,
summary executions, torture, rape and ethnically motivated
harassment and detention of civilians taking place in the
Congo. We abhor the recruitment of child soldiers, the
killing of combatants who lay down their weapons, hate
propaganda and other abuses perpetrated by all sides. We
remain deeply concerned by the danger of renewed
genocide in the region and urge all parties to respect
international human rights and humanitarian law.

President Clinton has made our position clear: The
United States would consider supporting a peacekeeping
operation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo if
there were a comprehensive agreement among the
belligerents to end the conflict and to observe a ceasefire.
Any monitoring force should be limited in size; its
mandate should be to observe and monitor, not to enforce
the peace or to maintain the security of the Congo’s
borders.

In particular, my Government is deeply troubled by
the ethnicization of this conflict. We are concerned by the
apparent willingness of some regional States to collaborate
militarily with ex-FAR and interahamwe, known
genocidaires. We are also concerned by any developments
that encourage insurgent movements, including UNITA, to
threaten and destabilize neighbouring States from Congolese
soil. Any agreement reached by the Congolese Government,
the rebels and external state actors will be unsustainable if
an effective means to contain these groups is not found.

An internal Congolese dialogue is essential. A sound
political process must be inclusive and open and have the
confidence of all Congolese. By helping develop such a
process, the Organization of African Unity and the United
Nations can play an important role in building a stable,
peaceful path to democracy and national reconciliation in
the Congo.

United Nations investigative reports have pointed
towards atrocities and violations of international
humanitarian law in the Congo since 1996. Until recently,
the Government of President Kabila and other parties have
failed to cooperate with United Nations efforts to
investigate these abuses.

14

Mr. Dangue Réwaka (Gabon) (interpretation from
French): The ongoing crisis in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is of grave concern in that it has inflicted
untold suffering on the Congolese people, is thwarting the
efforts of the Government to reconstruct the country and
threatens peace and stability in the region.
The destabilization of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which shares a border with nine countries and
occupies an important place in Africa — particularly in

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
the light of its size, population and potential — would have
incalculable repercussions. That is why we are particularly
keen to ensure respect for that country’s territorial integrity
and sovereignty. Similarly, we must not tolerate any
violation of the provisions of the Charters of the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity with respect
to non-interference in the internal affairs of States.
In that region, where cross-border populations play a
very important role and can be used as a pretext by one
State or another to interfere inappropriately in the affairs of
its neighbour, strict respect by all sides of the principle of
non-interference would make it possible to create a climate
of mutual confidence that would help to promote sounder
and more friendly relations.
In this connection, it should be noted that the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee On Security
Questions in Central Africa, which met at Libreville from
28-30 April 1998, recommended that its member States
cooperate closely in the struggle against illicit trafficking in
arms and that sanctuaries for armed groups not be
established in neighbouring States.
Even if we appear to be stating the obvious by
asserting that resort to force as a means of resolving
conflicts provides only transient solutions, whereas
dialogue, consultations and negotiations ensure lasting
solutions, my delegation would still like to emphasize this
point.
Not only does the use of arms complicate the search
for a peaceful resolution of differences, but it is also a
source of much human suffering: the displacement of
populations, the destruction of socio-economic
infrastructures acquired at the cost of great efforts, massive
flows of refugees into bordering countries and the sudden
spread of disease. This list is not an exhaustive one by any
means.
For all these reasons we reiterate our condemnation of
the massacres of civilian populations carried out in SudKivu and ask that the Council order an international inquiry
so that those responsible can be found and brought to
justice.
The time has come for the United Nations, specifically
the Security Council, to give active and concrete support to
African regional initiatives aimed at finding a negotiated
and definitive solution to the crisis that has spread through
the Democratic Republic of the Congo since 2 August 1998.

3987th meeting
19 March 1999
To that end the Security Council should ask the
parties to the conflict to sign without delay the ceasefire
agreement that they have already agreed to in principle.
In order to enforce this ceasefire, the United Nations, in
cooperation with the Organization of African Unity,
should start thinking now about deploying in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo a neutral international
peacekeeping force. In addition to monitoring borders,
this force would also be mandated, inter alia, to
demobilize armed groups, collect and destroy weapons
and control illicit arms flows.
In view of the interrelatedness of the problems
facing the Great Lakes region, we believe that the
convening of a carefully prepared international
conference, as suggested by France, under the auspices of
the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity,
would help extinguish the hotbeds of tension, re-establish
confidence and strengthen peace and security in the
region.
Mr. Türk (Slovenia): Slovenia welcomes today’s
open meeting of the Security Council, which is devoted
to the situation concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We consider that situation as one requiring the
urgent attention of the Security Council and of the
international community at large. Moreover, we consider
the meeting today an opportunity for a genuine open
orientation debate. The Security Council has already heard
the views of the delegation of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which we welcome at this meeting. We look
forward to hearing the views of all those Members of the
United Nations that have chosen to speak today. The
Security Council needs the input of the United Nations
Members that are currently not members of the Security
Council.
The situation in and around the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is a situation of an armed conflict with farreaching consequences. It is a situation characterized by
human suffering and humanitarian problems which have
reached dramatic proportions. It is a situation involving
important, indeed, fundamental principles of international
law and one affecting the long-term stability of a large
part of Africa. For all these reasons, it needs to be
considered most seriously and with the highest possible
degree of intellectual and moral accuracy. All of us
speaking today bear a heavy responsibility to ensure that
the debate is serious, honest and productive.
The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is not new. Quite to the contrary, it is a situation

15

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
on which the recent history of the Great Lakes region of
Africa has cast some of its longest and darkest shadows. It
is necessary to discern which among the causes of the
current conflict need to be identified in the effort to grasp
the situation with the necessary accuracy.
Some of those causes stem from the genocide in
Rwanda in 1994 and the subsequent developments which
have affected the Democratic Republic of the Congo, then
Zaire. In the aftermath of the defeat of the forces
responsible for the genocide in Rwanda, the winds of
change brought a new Government to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Government established in
1997 offered a promise of transition to democracy, the rule
of law and political stability. These were positive
developments. Those of us who had the opportunity to
attend the Organization of African Unity (OAU) Summit in
Harare, Zimbabwe, in May 1997, will never forget the
atmosphere of promise and hope which resulted from the
change in the Great Lakes region at that time and which
generated the atmosphere of optimism in Africa.
However, much of that promise has remained
unfulfilled to date. The allegations regarding crimes against
humanity and massive human rights violations allegedly
committed in 1996 and 1997 were not thoroughly
investigated, and the cooperation of the new Government in
that regard was not forthcoming. The political processes
necessary to create conditions for power-sharing, for proper
treatment of minorities and for democracy were not started.
Much precious time was wasted and many opportunities
were missed at that time. The resulting instability was
bound to affect security in the region. All these
developments were unfortunate, and one can legitimately
ask whether a more vigorous and committed attitude of the
international community in 1996 and in 1997 could have
made a difference.
The situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
deteriorated seriously in 1998. The developments since
August last year have been especially disturbing. The
rebellion grew to large proportions. Military interference by
two neighbouring States, while motivated by seemingly
genuine security concerns, transformed the crisis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo into a regional threat to
international peace and security. The subsequent military
assistance of some other countries from the region to the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
not brought a solution. Indeed, a military solution is very
unlikely. A protracted military conflict in a vast area in the
heart of Africa has the potential to become a long-term
crisis and a breeding ground of widespread instability.

16

3987th meeting
19 March 1999
The military action of the two neighbouring States
against the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo represents a serious challenge to the basic
principles of international law concerning the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of States.
The entire international community has to express its
concern and reject such practices, which undermine the
fundamentals of the international order and of stability in
Africa.
Speakers before me have addressed the issues related
to the search for peace. I agree with what was said. It is
imperative that a ceasefire be agreed to immediately and
that provision be made for an orderly withdrawal of all
foreign troops and for the re-establishment of the
authority of the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo throughout its territory. All States must be
called upon to respect the territorial integrity and the
sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
We encourage the African leaders, with the
assistance of the Organization of African Unity and the
Secretary-General, to redouble their efforts to achieve an
early agreement on a ceasefire, which will open the way
to addressing all the other problems. The United Nations
should be ready to assist, when a ceasefire is reached, in
the maintenance of the ceasefire and in stabilizing the
security situation in the region.
I wish to turn now to the humanitarian issues and to
the problems of human rights.
Slovenia strongly condemns violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law committed
during the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We condemn massacres of the civilian population
which have taken place mostly in the South Kivu
province since the outbreak of the conflict in August
1998.
In August we learned about the massacre in Kasika.
Later, in November 1998, as we learned from reports,
more than 1,300 civilians were killed in the towns of
Samba, in the Maniema province, and Aketi, in the
Orientale province. From 30 December to 1 January, 500
civilians were massacred in the area of Makobola, in the
south-east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. And
very recently, on 5 March, more than 100 civilians were
massacred around the town of Kamituga in the province
of South Kivu. Most often the victims are innocent
civilians, children, women and elderly. The spread of the

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
practice of genocide in the region must not be tolerated.
Such violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law against the civilian population require
specific action to bring those responsible to justice.
It is encouraging that the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has already
demonstrated its readiness to act. We noticed with
appreciation that a Ministry of Human Rights has been
established in order to promote the much-needed respect for
human rights in the country. We welcome today the
presence among us of Minister Léonard She Okitundu, who
spoke at the beginning of this meeting. We also welcome
the cooperation of the Government with the Special
Rapporteur Roberto Garretón, and we hope that this
cooperation will continue and lead to satisfactory results.
We wish also to express our strong hope that the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
other parties to the conflict will allow the relevant
international agencies unhindered access to all persons
detained within the territory of the country. Furthermore,
we wish to stress that all the military forces are responsible,
in accordance with international law, for the humanitarian
situation in the territories under their effective control.
Furthermore, restrictions on the work of non-governmental
organizations, media personnel and human rights
organizations have to be eliminated so that assistance can
be provided to the people in need.
We believe that, notwithstanding the military conflict,
steps for creating a normal democratic environment should
be taken very soon. The Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo should create conditions that will
allow a democratization process that is genuine and
inclusive and that fully reflects the aspirations of all the
citizens. The international community needs to stress the
importance of internal political dialogue among all political
and civil-society actors in the country. The process of
democratization should be carried out through the
establishment of democratic institutions and the holding of
free and fair and democratic elections as soon as conditions
permit.
A country’s internal political situation of course is an
internal affair of each sovereign State, but certain principles
are of general importance and can be implemented. We
would like to draw attention especially to the principle of
power-sharing. Efforts aiming at the establishment of good
governance and power-sharing merit full international support.

3987th meeting
19 March 1999
The international community should strongly
encourage the dialogue among the leaders of the countries
in the Great Lakes region. Through the dialogue regional
leaders should honestly address problems and face them.
In this regard, Slovenia has supported and continues to
support the idea proposed by France of an international
conference for the Great Lakes region. We also agree that
such a conference should not be a single event but a
process that would include and address all the critical
issues faced by the countries in the region. Such a process
would include but would not be limited to the issues of
security and power-sharing.
Let me make a general concluding remark. Action is
needed to end the war and to create an environment for
the development, in all fields, of public life and of the
lives of Congolese citizens. Allow me to quote in this
context an American politician, William Jennings Bryan,
who, at the turn of the century, said,
“Destiny is not a matter of chance; it is a matter of
choice. It is not a thing to be waited for; it is a thing
to be achieved.”
Today’s open debate in the Security Council is the
first concrete step taken here in the Security Council, but
the final solution to the problem lies with the Congolese
people themselves and with the other countries in the
region, in particular the parties to the conflict. Support for
the regional efforts for a peaceful solution to the conflict
has to be rendered by the international community as a
whole. The Security Council needs to play an active role
now and at later stages. However, the final and lasting
solution to the problems lies with the Congolese people
and the peoples of other countries in the region.
Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): The Netherlands is
deeply concerned about the further deterioration of the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
therefore welcome the opportunity to address this question
in an open debate of the Security Council. It goes without
saying that we associate ourselves entirely with the
position of the European Union, as it will later be
expressed by the German Presidency.
It is particularly worrying that, after a promising
start, the peace process has reached an impasse. We must
collectively find a way out of this impasse before the
conflict develops into a full-scale war of unforeseeable
proportions.

17

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
It is not only the fighting itself that demands our
immediate attention. Widespread violations of human rights
on both sides and the collapse of the economy are plunging
ever more inhabitants of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo into misery.
We are convinced that a structural political solution
can be found only through a process of negotiations. We
call on President Kabila to enter forthwith into a dialogue
with all parties involved in the conflict.
The success of these negotiations depends on the
political will of all sides to confront the key issues, in a
common endeavour. Respect for the principles of
sovereignty and territorial integrity is one of those key
issues at stake here. Respect for the legitimate security
concerns of the countries neighbouring the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to the east is another.
As for the internal situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, a political dialogue, with the
participation of all parties in Congolese society, must be
launched without delay. The Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo should take up its responsibility in
this regard. The Netherlands expresses the hope that the
Government’s announcement of a national debate on a new
constitution will pave the way for further democratization
of the country.
The scope of the crisis and the inherent risk of further
escalation require that the international community involve
itself and facilitate the process of peace in every possible
way.
Some of the groundwork for such a process has
already been laid in regional efforts. We trust that a more
active involvement of the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity will further the cause of
peace. The Netherlands is prepared to support the
negotiations between the parties to the conflict and the
national dialogue in an appropriate way. Ultimately, an
international conference on peace and security in the Great
Lakes region should bring about a durable peace in that
region.
We should like to reiterate our view that the illegal
flow of arms is one of the root causes of conflicts in the
region. Peacemaking makes no sense if the international
community cannot address this problem more effectively.
Mr. Al-Dosari (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
My delegation wishes to express its sincere thanks to you,

18

3987th meeting
19 March 1999
Mr. President, for organizing this important meeting at
this particular time, when conflicts are tearing apart the
African continent.
The subject of the peaceful settlement of conflicts is
an important topic that is of particular concern for the
Security Council. The Council encourages all the Member
States of the United Nations to resort to peaceful means
of settling conflicts, in keeping with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
As our meeting today is being held to discuss the
ongoing conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, my delegation wishes to express its serious
concern that, due to the great number of parties involved,
this continuing conflict poses a threat not only to the
peace, security and stability of the Great Lakes region,
but also to the entire African continent. My delegation
also wishes to express its concern over the very serious
humanitarian repercussions that the conflict has had on
the civilian population throughout the country. Hundreds
of thousands of persons have been displaced and are
living under the most appalling health conditions because
the absence of security has made access to their territories
by humanitarian agencies almost impossible.
Our delegation wishes to affirm that the settlement
of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
will not be achieved through military means. A permanent
solution can become a reality only through negotiation
among all the parties involved. We would like to support
all the diplomatic initiatives aimed at finding and reaching
a peaceful settlement of the conflict. In particular, we
would like to welcome the initiative proposed by the
Secretary-General in the course of the twentieth
Conference of Heads of State of Africa and France, held
in Paris from 26 to 28 November 1998. The aim of that
initiative is to achieve a settlement of the conflict and to
reach an agreement on an immediate and unconditional
ceasefire. We believe that the States of that region can
play a very important role in encouraging the parties to
the conflict to sign a ceasefire agreement, in response to
the Secretary-General's initiative, as a first step towards
the peaceful settlement of the conflict.
The solution to the problems of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must stem from a process of
national reconciliation that includes all parties, that is
acceptable to all the Congolese and that leads to free and
fair elections as soon as possible.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
We appreciate the important role assumed by the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) in this respect. We
hope that its efforts will be crowned with success and that
it will be able to convince all the parties to the conflict to
reach a ceasefire agreement as a first step towards reaching
a peaceful settlement of the conflict, thereby ending the
hostilities and bringing about security and stability in these
African States in order to avoid the possible harmful
consequences of the war's continuing for a long time
without a solution.
Furthermore, our delegation would like once again to
reaffirm the importance of respecting the territorial
integrity, political stability and national sovereignty of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as the principle
of non-interference by other countries in its internal affairs.
Our delegation would also like to support the idea of
holding an international conference on peace, security and
development in the Great Lakes region — at the
appropriate time and under the aegis of the United Nations
and the OAU — in order to put an end to such conflicts in
the region and to enable the countries of the region to
devote their resources to development.
In conclusion, our delegation wishes to support the
efforts of the Secretary-General and his consultations with
the OAU and all the parties concerned with the aim of
finding a peaceful and permanent settlement to the conflict.
The President (interpretation from Chinese): I thank
the representative of Bahrain for his kind words addressed
to me.
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation welcomes the
decision to hold an open meeting of the Security Council
on the question of the peaceful settlement of the dispute in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This formal meeting
not only provides an opportunity for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to be heard on an issue of vital
importance to it, which is its inherent right enshrined in the
Charter, but it also allows members of the Council — as
well as the larger membership of the Organization — to
express their views on the important issue of peace and
security in Africa. Indeed, the views and perspectives of the
larger membership of the Organization on this subject are
pertinent and should be heard, as nowhere is the need
greater or the significance for the future of Africa more
profound, than in the peaceful resolution of the conflict in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

3987th meeting
19 March 1999
If the third-largest nation in Africa were to be
allowed to languish in factional violence, this would have
grave implications for the peace, security and stability of
the entire region. In this regard, Malaysia notes with
dismay and concern the further deterioration of the
situation in Africa as a whole, less than a year since
Secretary-General Kofi Annan issued his report — on 13
April 1998 — on the causes of conflict and the promotion
of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa
(S/1998/318). Clearly, the African renaissance that South
Africa's Vice-President Thabo Mbeki eloquently talked
about cannot take place unless and until these conflicts
are resolved and a new structure of peace and security
and legitimate order emerges on the African continent.
The disintegration of the regime of the late President
Mobutu in May 1997 has been characterized by some as
the beginning of a new era in post-colonial Africa, amid
high expectations of positive change and renewal.
Unfortunately, the new Government in the Congo, headed
by President Laurent Kabila, inherited a country that was
deeply divided, demoralized and financially bankrupt.
Nevertheless, the promise of change and transformation
of the system that was left behind by President Mobutu
on the basis of democratic institutions and the
restructuring of the economy were welcomed and
applauded by the international community. However,
these hopes were dashed on the rocks of the inter-ethnic
conflict and rebellion that threatens the very survival of
the newly installed Government, which was compelled to
seek the support and assistance of friendly neighbouring
countries.
The involvement of a wide range of protagonists in
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
indeed regrettable and has raised the prospect of a major
war on the African continent, with serious risks to the
stability and integrity of not only the Congo itself but also
all of its neighbours. The situation in the Congo is
particularly alarming given the fact that the war there
interlocks with other conflicts in the region, thereby
rendering any effort at mediation an extremely difficult
one.
Malaysia notes with concern the cross-border
character of the conflict in the Congo, which further
complicates what is already a very complex internal
situation. Clearly, there can be no lasting solution unless
both the internal and external factors of the conflict are
addressed and resolved. In this regard, we support fully
the efforts being made, notably by President Chiluba of
Zambia, to bring all those involved in the Congo conflict

19

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
to the negotiating table. That could result in an immediate
and unconditional ceasefire, thereby paving the way for a
negotiated settlement of the conflict and providing for the
orderly withdrawal of all foreign troops currently in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. That would have to be
followed by efforts at national reconciliation and
democratization, including the holding of free and fair
elections in the country. In this regard, Malaysia commends
the diplomatic efforts that have been made by African
leaders — namely, those of South Africa, Mozambique,
Namibia and Zambia — aimed at seeking a peaceful
solution to the conflict. We believe efforts at regional
diplomacy represent the most viable approach in resolving
the conflict and deserve the strong and sustained support of
the international community and this Council.
My delegation believes that the process of rebuilding
the Democratic Republic of the Congo can succeed only in
a climate of peace and stability which would allow the
Congolese people to enjoy their long-denied rights,
including the right to development. African leaders can help
by advocating a non-violent solution to the conflict and
promoting African models of cooperation, which have
worked in a number of conflict situations. The international
community can and must play a major and continuing role
in supporting these efforts by working with the countries
involved to promote reconciliation, broaden political
participation, lay the groundwork for economic recovery
and help build systems of justice that are fair, credible and
effective.
The worsening humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is a stark reminder of
the destabilizing effects of war, with badly needed
resources, which could have been channelled to education,
health and other sectors, being drained to finance a
devastating war. Throughout the Great Lakes region, interethnic violence has resulted both in great human tragedy
and in new obstacles to political and social progress. There
cannot be a real future for the Great Lakes region unless
the cycle of violence is broken once and for all. This will
happen only if the people of the region can chart a new
course of inter-ethnic relations based on genuine
reconciliation and peaceful relations rather than on revenge
and the settling of old scores. It must, however, be
predicated on the need to mete out justice to the
perpetrators of the massacres and other crimes against
humanity, and on respect for the principles of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States in their
external relations.

20

3987th meeting
19 March 1999
My delegation also believes that international efforts
to promote peace and stability in Africa should not ignore
the magnitude of the socio-economic problems
confronting the continent as a whole. The SecretaryGeneral himself has emphasized the importance of social
and economic equity and the imperatives of socioeconomic development in the quest for a durable peace.
Also stated in his much-acclaimed report was the need for
a holistic approach to the issue of peace and security in
Africa, encompassing not only peacekeeping but also
peacemaking and post-conflict peace-building. For the
international community, helping build a new, democratic
and prosperous Congo is both a challenge and an
opportunity to redress past failures and to contribute to
the building of a stable and peaceful State for the benefit
of Central Africa and the continent as a whole.
What has transpired in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is part of a long drawn out saga, one for which
the nations of the region and the international community
must share responsibility. We believe it is critical that
appropriate steps be taken to lay the foundation for longterm stability and progress in that troubled country. We
encourage President Kabila to begin that process on the
basis of open dialogue.
Unfortunately, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo remains for now one of several theatres of conflict
in Africa in which the continuation of hostilities has
jeopardized efforts at finding solutions to the continent's
other critical problems, which demand the urgent attention
of its Governments. In this regard, we strongly urge the
Congolese people and all the concerned parties to
summon the political will to resolve their problems not
through military means, which will not bring a durable
solution, but through dialogue and negotiation. For its
part, the Security Council must make every effort, in
coordination with the Organization of African Unity and
subregional initiatives and mechanisms, specifically those
of the Southern African Development Community, to
secure an immediate and effective ceasefire in the Congo
and to continue to explore an appropriate role for the
United Nations in determining concrete, sustainable and
effective measures in the implementation of any ceasefire
agreement and subsequent efforts at post-conflict peacebuilding in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In this
regard, my delegation considers the proposal of France
for an international conference on the Great Lakes region
at an appropriate stage, which has been supported by
others, to be a constructive approach, and we welcome it.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
Russian): First of all, I should like to thank you, Mr.
President, for the condolences you expressed to the
Government and the people of the Russian Federation in
connection with the death of Russian citizens as a result of
the tragic incident involving a helicopter of the United
Nations Mission in Haiti. I should also like to join you in
expressing condolences to the Governments and the people
of the United States of America and of Argentina.
Moving on to the subject of today's discussion, I
should firstly like to welcome the Minister for Human
Rights of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. She
Okitundu, to our meeting today. The Russian delegation
shares the serious concern expressed at the ongoing conflict
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which represents
a serious threat to regional peace and security. Russia has
constantly advocated achieving a peaceful political
settlement of the crisis while preserving the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We are certain that acts of violence will not make
it possible to achieve a long-term resolution of the conflict.
We have consistently supported the efforts of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) and individual regional
leaders to explore ways of finding a peaceful way out of
the conflict.
We believe that it is important to emphasize once
again the need for all States to abide by the principles of
non-intervention in the internal affairs of other countries
and the non-use of force, in accordance with the Charter
and the aims of the United Nations. We believe that the
basis for regulating the protracted conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo should be the approach
suggested by the countries of the subregion, based on a
ceasefire agreement, the withdrawal of foreign troops from
the territory and guarantees of peace and security along its
borders with contiguous States. One of the key provisions
of such a settlement should be ensuring the territorial
integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In this
context, we believe that the desirability and the modalities
of involving the rebels in the regional negotiating process
should be determined by the regional mediators, together
with the legitimate Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
As a matter of principle, however, it is quite obvious
that lasting peace and security in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo cannot be achieved unless the Congolese
themselves organize a nationwide dialogue with the
participation of all segments of Congolese society, as

3987th meeting
19 March 1999
contemplated in the regional settlement scheme. We are
convinced that at this stage efforts should be focused first
and foremost on speedily achieving a ceasefire agreement.
Otherwise, it will be impossible to set in motion the
machinery for a peace settlement. Continuing the
stalemate in the negotiating process and opting for a
military resolution of the conflict would be likely to
worsen the situation and lead to a large-scale
humanitarian catastrophe and further destabilize the
situation throughout the region, and we cannot rule out
the possibility that the Democratic Republic of the Congo
will disintegrate.
Our delegation cannot fail to be concerned at news
of the mass atrocities perpetrated against the civilian
population throughout Congolese territory and of human
rights violations and persecution on ethnic grounds. We
support the need for a careful and speedy investigation of
these communications.
The Russian delegation actively supports the policy
of strengthening the coordination of the activities of the
United Nations, the OAU and SADC in order to reach a
political settlement of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We believe that the initiative of
the Secretary-General to send a special envoy to the
region is a timely one.
The possibility of the future deployment of a United
Nations peacekeeping operation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as well as the desirability and
modalities of such an operation can be determined only
after a stable cease-fire has been achieved. The Security
Council’s decision on this matter should necessarily be
preceded by a very careful and thorough analysis of the
situation, both in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and in the region.
The Russian delegation supports the idea of holding,
in due course and under the auspices of the United
Nations and the OAU, an international conference on
peace and security in the Great Lakes region. We are
convinced that this will be possible only if consensus is
achieved among the participating States regarding the
purposes of such a forum.
Russia will continue to help to promote the
peacekeeping process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in the spirit of the recommendations of the
Security Council, making use of its contacts with the
OAU, the SADC, the States of the region and other
interested countries.

21

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): We
welcome this open debate, even though the subject before
us is sensitive for many. It concerns a country, a fellow
State Member of the United Nations, which desperately
needs international help; a region which has been too long
in crisis, with horrific humanitarian consequences; and a
continent whose tribulations must be successfully addressed
by the United Nations system as a whole, or that system
will show itself incapable of meeting the increasing
demands put on it. If we can turn the tide for Africa, we
can turn the tide for the United Nations.
The United Kingdom is prepared to make a special
effort to establish how non-Africans can best help Africans,
and specifically the Organization for African Unity (OAU),
to end the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Late last month British Minister of State Tony
Lloyd went to the region, as the Special Envoy of Prime
Minister Blair, to explore what scope there was for ending
the war.
The Minister encountered an overwhelming sense of
frustration. He found fatigue on all sides with the war and
common ground among the parties on what needed to be
done to stop the fighting. No one questioned the need for
dialogue among all parties in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, including the rebels, to pave the way for a more
inclusive government. And it was widely acknowledged that
the security concerns of the neighbours of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo were genuine, that an end to the war
could come about only through some arrangement or
mechanism which addressed them.
But the Minister also found a startling lack of political
will and creative thinking among the parties to get the
building-blocks of a settlement into place. This is not for
want of external pressures and external offers of help.
Numerous envoys have visited the region. Three Presidents
have been tasked by the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) and the OAU to mediate. Fifteen
conferences, 10 of them at the Head of State level, have
been held. But the conflict, and its dreadful human rights
and humanitarian side-effects, goes on. Having met the key
leaders involved in the war, Tony Lloyd judged that they
could stop the war if they really wanted to.
The role of the international community, and this
Council, has to be to make them want to. The United
Nations system, other international institutions and
individual countries, through their bilateral relationships,
can all play a part. This is particularly the case with the
European Union, whose position will be made clear by the

22

3987th meeting
19 March 1999
German presidency later in this debate. We all have
diplomatic, political and financial resources which could
make a big difference to the Governments and
populations in the region. There are enormous reserves of
goodwill towards the peoples of these beleaguered
countries. We need to use these resources to construct a
motivation for peace and economic regeneration among
the regional leaders. They must together be persuaded that
a continuation of this war is not in their interests and that
there is a different way out. It is encouraging that there is
such a clear consensus among representatives who have
spoken today on the steps that need to be taken, not
excluding the Minister for Human Rights of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Let me try to summarize those steps. The first step
is a cease-fire agreement. The key to unlocking this is
direct talks with the rebels. A military solution, as so
often elsewhere in Africa, is a chimera. We must use
international experience to help President Kabila and the
Congolese people shape a framework in which a
constructive political dialogue can take place. The
innocent civilian population of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo deserves no less. The statement made this
week by the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo about the need for national reconciliation is
encouraging. Its intentions need to be implemented.
The second step is the withdrawal of foreign troops.
This will require a tough negotiation process among all
the parties, and some substantive, creative ideas. The
United Kingdom is fully committed to the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We would not countenance any suggestion of
partition. But the bare fact is, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo’s neighbours will have no incentive for
withdrawal unless some credible mechanism can be
developed which will bring about the disarmament of
rebel groups, particularly the ex-Rwandese Armed Forces
and Interahamwe, on their borders, and ensure border
security into the future. We must start mapping out the
potential arrangements for this. The United Nations and
certain Member States can help, but the principal
contribution must be African and regional.
The third step is coherent international involvement
to motivate, monitor and sustain these processes. We
applaud the efforts of SADC and the OAU, through
President Chiluba, to try to mediate this complex,
sprawling conflict. But the continued resistance of the
parties to these efforts demonstrates the need for further
inputs, leverage and pressure from outside the region.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
As part of this process, the Security Council has
already indicated its readiness to consider how it could
assist in the implementation of a cease-fire and settlement.
The United Kingdom, with several partners, has already
done work on possibilities for a peacekeeping presence. We
must continue to refine and develop these ideas and feed
them into the negotiating process. What the United Nations
and the international community could do to make an
agreement stick will be a key factor in making it happen.
The fourth step is a framework for tackling the wider
and deeper problems in the Great Lakes region. The United
Kingdom fully supports the holding of an international
conference on peace and security in the Great Lakes. But
a conference of this kind will work only by careful
preparation, and preparation will take time. We should
begin this work now. Only by mapping out the paths
towards a more secure and stable region will the incentives
for ending the current conflict become clearer. They must
include arrangements for promoting and protecting human
rights and for the economic regeneration of the region.
Hence the fifth step: the economic angle. With
political understanding advanced and security arrangements
in place, development and investment resources will be
attracted in. We therefore need to plan for an economic
development conference for the Great Lakes, drawing
together major bilateral assistance partners, the United
Nations and its agencies, the European Union and the
international financial institutions, either as part of or in
parallel with a conference on peace and security.
The challenges and the burden for the international
community in each of these steps will be significant, but
none of these ideas will get even to square one without a
dramatic change in political will on the part of the parties
to this conflict, and above all the leaders of the sovereign
nations of the region who have its future in their hands. It
is they who must take the steps to bring this senseless war
to an end. If they do, the Security Council, the broader
United Nations and the international community will act in
immediate support. This is the conclusion which the
Governments involved in the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must draw from today’s debate.
The President (interpretation from Chinese): I thank
the representative of the United Kingdom for his kind
words addressed to me.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of China.

3987th meeting
19 March 1999
The conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has lasted over half a year, causing deep concern
among African countries and the international community
at large. China, too, has been very concerned over
developments in the Great Lakes region. We are deeply
disturbed by the loss of life and property caused by the
ongoing conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and its grave impact on the peace and stability of the
Great Lakes region and the entire African continent. As
a friend of the African countries and peoples, China is
deeply worried at the fact that the conflicts in the Great
Lakes region have been dragging on for so long.
Since the very start of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, China has maintained that the
parties concerned should reach a ceasefire as soon as
possible. On the basis of full respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the parties concerned should find an effective way
to solve their differences, disputes and other problems
through dialogue and negotiations, proceeding from the
overall benefits of peace and development to Africa and
the fundamental interests of the African peoples, and in
the spirit of African unity and national reconciliation.
Only if they do so will the conflicts come to an early end
and peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo as
well as good-neighbourly relations between countries in
the region be restored.
China supports the active efforts of African countries
and regional organizations to secure a political settlement
of the Congo question. At the same time, we strongly
believe that the international community, especially the
Security Council, should respond to the legitimate
requests and appeals of the African countries, show
genuine concern for African questions and take effective
steps in this connection. In particular, it should give
political and financial assistance to African countries and
regional organizations in their efforts to solve their own
problems and play a positive and meaningful role in
helping African countries to settle the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as soon as possible.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The next speaker is the representative of Burkina
Faso. I invite him to take his place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (interpretation from
French): The African States on whose behalf I speak wish

23

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
first to express their satisfaction at seeing you, Sir, preside
over the Security Council and to congratulate you. Your
country, the People’s Republic of China, has always
supported the African cause, through the dark times of the
struggles for independence, in the various international
bodies and even in the bipolar confrontation, where it was
always at our side. It is hardly surprising, then, that, in the
course of your presidency of the Security Council, faced
with exasperation at the instability in Africa, you should
have taken the initiative of convening this debate on one of
the conflicts currently of concern to Africa and the entire
world.
This is not to say that the situations between Ethiopia
and Eritrea, in Angola, Sierra Leone, Somalia, the Comoros
and elsewhere are not worrisome. Far from it. But the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo —
because of its polymorphic nature, the overt and covert
involvement of the countries of the region and its stakes for
the belligerents — entails serious dangers whose
ramifications can harm the entire African edifice.
It will therefore be clear that our problem — how to
find a solution to the conflict — is complex. Forgive me
for saying, Sir, that it is a veritable Chinese puzzle. Since
it is an inextricable situation, it is easy to understand why
neither the OAU meetings nor the efforts of the countries
of the subregion have led to a conclusive settlement.
The futility of these efforts may have left the
unfortunate impression that Africa is complacent to the
tragedy in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Such
thinking would be meagre thanks to all the good will of all
the apostles of peace who have devoted and continue to
devote themselves to restoring peace to that country.
This tireless quest for peace led the current Chairman
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) to envisage a
special summit, to be held late this month, in order
“to consider all the ongoing initiatives and mediation
efforts and to find the deep-rooted causes of and
reasons for the problem of conflicts in Africa, their
persistence and the relative lack of success of attempts
to find ways and means of bringing our actions to
fruition.”
Unfortunately, this special summit was a still-born
project, but nothing will stop the efforts being made, both
in Africa and by the international community, to find a just
solution to the conflict in the Congo.

24

3987th meeting
19 March 1999
At the African level, the OAU has taken
praiseworthy steps. In particular, the most recent summit
meeting of the Central Organ of its Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution, held on
17 December 1998, reaffirmed the guiding principles,
contained in the OAU charter, which alone can guarantee
a lasting settlement of the Congolese crisis.
First, it enjoined the parties to the conflict to respect
the sacrosanct principle of the inviolability of the frontiers
inherited from colonialism, passed down to us by the
founding father of the OAU in resolution AHG/Res. 16
(1) adopted in Cairo in 1964. Non-respect for borders in
Africa would open a Pandora’s box from which disputes
without end would emerge. In the case of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, this is all the more necessary
because the country’s size — 2,345,000 square
kilometres — and the dissimilarity of its peoples could be
the source of irredentist claims. The OAU therefore
recalls that this is an essential point that cannot be called
into question short of a tacit agreement to do so between
the States themselves.
Another fact of paramount importance is that the
African heads of State reaffirm their support for the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo as
the sole legitimate authority, representative of the entire
Congolese people. Accordingly, they call on the rebels to
lay down their weapons with a view to promoting the
opening of talks with the Government. By this appeal,
they are addressing all the parties to the conflict.
However, the OAU takes into consideration another
requirement of its charter: that all African disputes must
be settled by peaceful means; in other words, negotiation
should always prevail. Therefore, the various sides in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must concretely
demonstrate political will. In this regard, we are pleased
to see that there has been positive development. Long
distrustful of considering such an eventuality, Congolese
power seems to have yielded to the inevitable reality that
only a discussion with the armed opposition can open the
path of genuine national reconciliation. It seems therefore
that henceforth neither the principle itself or the question
of venue will be an obstacle to this dialogue among the
Congolese.
We therefore appeal to the wisdom, patriotism and
political will of all the actors to silence the weapons and
to promote the establishment of real national accord. It is
clear that in order to be viable, this sincere peace should
be rooted in democratic values such as liberty, respect for

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
human rights, tolerance and so on. These, we believe, are
the basic considerations that can help define a platform of
understanding to bring calm to the situation.
It is also increasingly becoming a question of an
interposition force — a peacekeeping force — and an
international conference on the Great Lakes. Any peaceful
solution to extricate ourselves from the quagmire must
receive the support of the African countries. From this
standpoint, it should be noted that there is no antagonism
between the United Nations and the Organization of African
Unity on the Congolese question. To the contrary, their
actions are complementary. How can it be otherwise, given
their shared ideal of promoting the search for peace? On
many occasions, the OAU has shown expertise in the area
of conflict settlement. For proof we need look no farther
than the platform it proposed for resolving the dispute
between Ethiopia and Eritrea, of which the Security Council
has recognized the relevance in recent resolutions. The only
obstacle thwarting its efforts is the critical lack of logistical
means. We expect that the United Nations and the
international community, will help reinforce those
capacities.
We wish, through this debate, to reach concrete
proposals which, together with the efforts of the
Organization of African Unity and of the Southern African
Development Community, will bring the long-awaited peace
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo for the greater
well-being of the Congolese people, for it is clearly their
destiny that is at stake.
The President (interpretation from Chinese): I thank
the representative of Burkina Faso for the kind words he
addressed to me.
Mr. Kastrup (Germany): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The Central and
Eastern European countries associated with the European
Union — Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania and Slovakia — and the
associated country Cyprus align themselves with this
statement.
The European Union is very concerned about the crisis
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which has
escalated into a large-scale regional war. Due to a complex
set of strategic alliances, a series of previously unconnected
conflicts in the Great Lakes region has blended into one
huge crisis which has turned the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and parts of the territories of neighbouring
countries into a battleground. This crisis has created

3987th meeting
19 March 1999
immense human suffering, it has dramatically increased
the already high number of refugees and displaced people
in this region and it is gradually destroying the social and
economic base of the countries of the Congo basin and
the Great Lakes region.
The European Union recognizes that the root causes
of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
are very complex. However, we sincerely hope that
today's debate will not dwell on mutual accusations
between interested parties, but will instead contribute to
generating a forward-looking approach focused on
solutions and results.
The European Union reiterates its support for the
principles of the territorial integrity and respect for the
sovereignty and security of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and its neighbouring countries. In this context,
the European Union agrees with the statement of the
President of the Security Council of 11 December 1998
and affirms the obligation to respect the territorial
integrity, political independence and national sovereignty
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and of other
States in the region, including the obligation to refrain
from the threat or use of force against the territorial
integrity or political independence of any State or in any
other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United
Nations. It also reaffirms the need for all States to refrain
from any interference in each other's internal affairs in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. The
European Union strongly calls on all States to comply
with these principles. It continues to be concerned about
the involvement of several countries of the region, an
involvement which has not led to the intended
stabilization, but has led to a dangerous escalation which
now threatens the stability of the region as a whole.
The European Union reiterates that the current
conflict can be solved only through a negotiated
settlement between all the parties concerned with a view
to an urgent political solution to the conflict, leading to
the withdrawal of foreign troops from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and allowing the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and other countries in the region
to find peace, stability and democracy.
The European Union would like to emphasize that it
is most important that all warring parties in the conflict
show their unconditional willingness, through concrete
steps, to speed up this peace process. In this context, the
EU welcomes President Kabila's preparedness to enter
into negotiations with all parties to the conflict, including

25

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
the rebel movement, and encourages him to conclude a
ceasefire agreement as soon as possible. The EU also urges
all other parties involved in the conflict, both the rebel
movement and external actors, to participate in a
constructive manner in ongoing peace efforts.
The EU calls for the conclusion as soon as possible of
a ceasefire among the various parties to the conflict and for
its prompt implementation. It emphasizes the need for a
political process which must rest on two elements addressing, first, regional security problems by finding a
mechanism that meets the legitimate security concerns of
neighbouring countries, and, secondly, the internal situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo by initiating an
all-inclusive political dialogue with the aim of establishing
a democratic society in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
In this context, the EU emphasizes the need for a
continuous and inclusive negotiating process with a format
that allows the active participation of all major
stakeholders. The EU reiterates its support for an
international conference on peace, security and development
in the Great Lakes region, which would help to consolidate
a peace agreement in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and to ensure the stability of countries in the region.
The EU emphasizes the need also to address the question
of the proliferation of arms and the illicit trafficking of
commodities in the region, which fuels this proliferation.
The need to reintegrate disaffected soldiers and other
combatants into civil society must also be addressed.
The European Union strongly supports the regional
peace initiatives undertaken by, among others, the Southern
African Development Community troika led by the
President of Zambia and supported by the Presidents of
Mozambique and of Tanzania, and the Organization of
African Unity (OAU). The EU would welcome more active
involvement by the United Nations and by the OAU to
coordinate and streamline the various peace efforts. The EU
is supporting regional peace efforts, inter alia through the
assistance of the EU Special Envoy for the Great Lakes
Region, Mr. Aldo Ajello. It would be prepared to consider
a rehabilitation programme for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in the event of an effective cessation of
hostilities and internal progress on peace, democracy and
respect for human rights. It reiterates that it might find it
increasingly difficult to continue its present level of
budgetary assistance to countries involved in this conflict
should they persist with the military option. Considerations
in this regard would not, of course, affect purely
humanitarian assistance.

26

3987th meeting
19 March 1999
We welcome the statement by the President of the
Security Council of 11 December 1998, expressing the
preparedness of the Council to consider, in the light of
efforts to achieve peaceful resolution of the conflict, the
active involvement of the United Nations to assist in the
implementation of an effective ceasefire agreement and in
an agreed process for a political settlement of the conflict.
The EU also stands ready to support efforts that might be
undertaken by the United Nations to assist in the
implementation of a ceasefire agreement.
The European Union strongly condemns acts of
violence perpetrated against the civilian population since
the beginning of the crisis, and calls for an independent
investigation of allegations of major human rights
violations reportedly committed by all parties to the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In this
context, the EU expresses its deep concern about recent
reports of new mass killings in the Kivu region.
The EU is deeply concerned at the recent kidnapping
and brutal murder of eight tourists and one park warden
in Uganda, killings that were apparently politically
motivated. The EU expects the authorities of all countries
concerned to do their utmost to arrest the perpetrators and
bring them to justice, and to prevent similar incidents.
The European Union welcomes the visit of the
United Nations Special Rapporteur, Mr. Garretón, and
hopes that this will help to foster progress in the
development of the human rights situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It also welcomes the
work of the United Nations human rights field office in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and supports its
strengthening.
The EU firmly calls on the parties to the conflict to
respect human rights and humanitarian law and to abstain
from inciting ethnic hatred. It calls on all parties to
guarantee the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel and their unhindered access to the affected
civilian population in need. The EU strongly condemns
the recruitment and use of child soldiers and other
combatants, and urges all parties to abstain from this
practice. The EU further urges all parties to refrain from
laying landmines.
The EU welcomes the assurances by the parties to
allow a respite in fighting, called “days of tranquillity”,
later this year, which will be needed to allow the World
Health Organization and the United Nations Children’s
Fund to carry out an urgently needed polio immunization

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
campaign for some 10 million Congolese children. We are
encouraged by this development and strongly hope that the
parties will stand by their commitments. I would like to
conclude my statement on this more positive note by
appealing once more to the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the rebel movement
and the external actors to urgently enter into serious

3987th meeting
19 March 1999
and constructive negotiations on a political settlement of
the conflict. Finally, the EU emphasises on this occasion
the need for a continuing process of genuine national
reconciliation and democratization in all States of the
region.
The President (interpretation from Chinese): There
are a number of speakers remaining on my list. In view
of the lateness of the hour, and with the concurrence of
the members of the Council, I intend to suspend the
meeting now.
The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.

27
