General AHemhly--Sis.da. SeHion

:,~,O (VI). Question of the full participation of
Italy in the work of the Trusteeship Council

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind resolution 310 (VIII) of the Trusteeship Council concerning the position of Italy,
Noting that Italy has been charged by the United
Nations 1 with the administration of the Trust Territory
of Somaliland, and that it is at present exercising its
responsibilities towards the United Nations as an Administering Authority as they are defined in Chapters
XII and XIII of the Charter,
Considering that Italy should be enabled to exercise
those responsibilities with complete effectiveness,
Being of the opinion, therefor~, that it is necessary
for Italy to become a member of the Trusteeship Council and for that purpose to be admitted to the United
Nations, and having regard to the fact that Italy satisfies the conditions prescribed in Article 4, paragraph 1,
of the Charter for membership in the United Nations,
Recommends the Security Council to give urgent
consideration to the present resolution with a view to
recommending the immediate admission of Italy to
membership in the United Nations.
352nd plenary meeting,
7 December 1951.
1

See General Assembly resolution 442(V).

551 (VI). Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories: revision of the Standard Form
The General Assembly,
Co,nsidering the importance of the advancement of
the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories as set
forth in the Declaration contained in Chapter XI of
the Charter of the United Nations,
Considering that the information transmitted by the
Members responsible for the administration of NonSelf-Governing Territories is of increasing interest to
the General Asst:mbly,
Noting that this information, which has been compiled in accordance with the Standard Form for the
guidance of Members annexed to resolution 142 (II)
adopted by the General Assembly on 3 November 1947,
together with the -supplemental in formation placed at
the disppsal of the Secretary-General, is becoming of
increased value,
Considering, nevertheless, that this Standard Form
requires adaptation in the light of e:icperience,
1. Decides that the Standard Form annexed to resolution 142 (II) shall be replaced by the annexed text;
2. Invites the Members responsible for the transmission of information under Article 73 e of the Charter to undertake all necessary steps to render infnrmation as complete ·and up to date as possible and for this
purpose to take into account the sections of the revised
Standard Form.
352nd pu:nary meeting,
7 December 1951.
