--

TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
th
MEETING: 18 MARCH 1968

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1398) , . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . ,

1

Expression of welcome to Mr. Malik, Permanent Representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics . . . . . . . . . . , . . , , . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . , , . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/5488)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Operation in Cyprus
(S/8446)
.. .. .. .... .. .. ... .... ............. ...........

1

SlPV.1398

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
Supplements of #he Official Recordi

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

eld in New York
President:

on

ay, 118 March

Mr. Ousmane SocC DIOP (Senegal),

3. The PRESIDENT
(translated from French): The
Security Council will now proceed to discuss the question
on its agenda.

Present:
The representatives
of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

4. Before calling upon the speakers on my list, I should
like to draw the attention of members of the Security
Council to the Secretary-General’s report on the United
Nations Operation in Cyprus for the period 9th December
1967 to 8th March 1968 [S/8446/.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l398)

1. Adoption
2.

5. I should also like to announce that as a result of
consultations agreement has been reached on the text of a
draft resolution. I shall now call on the Under SecretaryGeneral to read out the text in English, after which it will
be read out in French,

of the agenda

Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/5488)
Report
by the Secretary-General
on the United
Nations Operation in Cyprus (S/8446).

6. Mr. NESTERENKO

“The Security Council,
‘Noting from the report of the Secretary-General of
9 March 1968 (S/8446) that in the present circumstances
the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus is still
needed if peace is to be maintained in the island,
“Noting that the Government of Cyprus has agreed that
in view of the prevailing conditions in the island it is
necessary to continue the Force beyond 26 March 1968,
“Noting, from the observations in the report, the new
conditions prevailing in the island,
“I, Reaffirms its resolutions 186 (1964) of 4 March,
187(1964)
of 13 March, 192 (1964) of 20 June,
193 (1964) of 9 August, 194 (1964) of 25 September and
198(1964) of 18 December 1964, 201 (1965) of 19
March, 206 (1965) of 15 June, 207 (1965) of 10 August
and 219 (1965) of 17 December 1965,220 (1966) of 16
March, 222 (1966) of 16 June, 231 (1966) of 15 December 1966, 238 (1967) of 19 June and 244 (1967) of 22
December 1967; and the consensus expressed by the
President at the 1143rd meeting on 11 August 1964 and
at the 1383rd meeting on 24 November 1967;
“2. urges the parties concerned to act with the utmost
restraint and to continue determined co-operative efforts
to achieve the objectives of the Security Council by
availing themselves in a constructive manner Of the
present auspicious climate and opportunities;
“3, Extends once more the’ stationing in Cyprus of the
United Nations Peace-keeping Force, established under
Security Council resolution 186 (1964), for a further
period of three months ending 26 June 1968, in the
expectation that by then sufficient progress towards a

The

PRESIDENT
(translated from French): Before
on the agenda for this afternoon’s meeting,
members of the Council will, 1 am sure, permit me in my
capacity
as President to extend a warm welcome to
Ambassador
Malik, the Permanent Representative of the
Soviet Union. We are pleased to have the opportunity to
work
with him and we offer him our most sincere
co-operation,

starting

Adoption

(Under Secretary-General, Depart.

ment of Political and Security Council Affairs): The text of
the draft resolution reads as follows:

Expression of welcome to Mr. Malik, Permanent
Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
I.

1968, at 3 p.m.

of the agenda

7?1e agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent
Representative
of Cyprus addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/5488)
Report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations
Operation in Cyprus (S/8446)
2. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): In accordance with the previous decisions of the Security Council I
propose, with the permission of members, to invite the
representatives of Cyprus, Turkey and Grt?ece to take places
at the Council table in order to participate without vote in
the discussion.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Z. Rossides
(Cyprus),
Mr. 0. Eralp (Turkey)
and Mr. D. S. Bitsios
(Greece) took places at the Council table.
1

Nicosia. The lifting of all restrictions on the freedom of
movement “has unmistakably demonstrated”, the report
states, “that Greek and Turkish Cypriot people desire to
live in peace and harmony and seem already prepared to
accept and support reasonable compromises” [ibid .1

final solution will make possible a withdrawal or substantial reduction of the Force.”
7. The PRESIDENT
(translated from French): Before
calling upon those members of the Security Council who
have asked to speak before the vote, I shall give the floor to
the representative of Cyprus.

para. 153f.

14. The spirit of conciliation and the yearning for a return
to normal conditions has long shown itself among the
Cypriot people, both Greek and Turkish, and was particularly stressed by the Secretary-General in his reports of
March 1966 /S/7191, para. 861 and of June 1966 [SfirXjO.

8. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): May I at the outset address a
very warm welcome to the distinguished representative of
the Soviet Union to &heUnited Nations, Ambassador Malik.
And, before proceeding further may I on behalf of my
Government pay a whole-hearted tribute to the SecretaryGeneral for his unrelenting and dedicated efforts towards
easing the situation in Cyprus and towards a solution of the
problem of our Island. We of Cyprus owe him a debt of
gratitude for what he has been doing with such devotion to
the cause of peace and the principles of the Charter.

parfz. 88/.

IS, The earnest desire for conciliation from both sides lias
now become more convincingly manifest. In his observations the Secretary-General notes how gratifying it was“to
observe the . . . ease with which ordinary people of bath
communities were beginning to resume their former
amicable relations” (S/8446, para. 1491.

9. I also wish to place on record my Government’s
appreciation of the significant contribution by his assistants
in this endeavour, the Under Secretaries-General, Dr. Ralph
Bunche, and Mr. Jod Rolz-Bennett. A special mention is
due also to the valuable work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in Cyprus, Mr. Osorio-Tafall, for
his contribution in the effort towards a return to normality;
and an equal mention is due to the efficient services of the
Commander of the Force, General Martola. We fully
appreciate the work done in Cyprus by the UNFICYP and
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
towards normalisation. I would further wish to express my
Government’s gratitude to those countries which are
contributing forces to the UNFICYP, and also to those
which are financially supporting the project.

16. I can think of no greater satisfaction than to see amity
and peace naturally starting to flower again in the hearts of
a people whose mutual relationship had been traditionally
one of friendliness and who in recent years had found
themselves embroiled, almost unawares, in unwanted
hostility and strife suddenly thrust upon them. Nothing can
be more moving than the smile of budding reconciliation to
replace the frown of sombre days. We hope that this may
come to pass in Cyprus. It is this spirit of goodwill among
the people of Cyprus that holds out the promise for a
constructive move towards mutual understanding and I
peaceful solution of the problem, a solution within the
tenets of justice and the principles of the Charter, For an
enduring solution and peace can be achieved only through a
sense of unity and co-operation for the common benefit, in
one common and undivided country.

10. The Council, on this occasion, meets for the renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Force in Cyprus at
whdt seems to be a hopeful juncture in the course of the
discussion of the Cyprus problem. We have before us the
most encouraging report by the Secretary-General since the
beginning of the trouble in Cyprus. It presents a lucid and
observant exposition of the situation in The Island. We
express our deep appreciation of this report.

17. My President, Archbishop Makarios, speaking after his
re-election by the vote of an overwhelming majority of the
Cypriot people, said:
“The experience gained up to now must have convinced
all that the problem of Cyprus cannot be solved by the
use of force or on the battlefield, but only within the
framework of t!ie United Nations and around the
conference table. And it can be solved by no other
country, but by the people of Cyprus themselves through
discussions within the framework of the good offices uf
the Secretary-General .”

11. The three-month period covered in the report is
described as “one of the quietest since the disturbances that
broke out in 1963” [Ibid., para. 1481. That period of
relative calm has made it possible for the Government to
extend to the entire Island the pacification measures and
the lifting of restrictions already initiated by it in September 1967. Thus a11 Government restrictions affecting
Turkish Cypriots were entirely removed throughout the
country as of 7 March.

18. I shall now turn to the initiatives which the SecrctaryGeneral intends to undertake in an endeavour to harmonir.e
relevant actions of the parties concerned, as outlined in
paragraph 155 of the observations.

12. It is now hoped and expected that the Turkish Cypriot
leadership will complete the freedom of movement of the
Turkish Cypriots by lifting any existing restrictions in their
movement out of the enclaves.

19. The first is to urge the Turkish Cypriot leadership to
respond positively to the Government’s pacificnlion
measures and abandon the policy of preventing accessbS’
the Greek Cypriots to the area under Turkish Cypriot
control. To continue such restrictions would, as the report
points out, be inconsistent with the claim for c0111pk1e
freedom of movement for Turkish Cypriots-a claim which,
by the recent Government measures, has been fully
satisfied. We hope, therefore, tlrat such a response will 110

13. The report refers to thgse normalization measures by
the Government of Cyprus as deserving “special mention”
[Ibid., para. 2491 for their beneficial effect in contributing
to the relaxation of tension, particularly after they have
been extended to the main Turco-Cypriot enclave in
2

longer be withheld,
climate.

par:lcularly

in the present auspicious

ment and that of Greece to repair the damage done to their
bilateral relations.

20. Second in the Secretary-General’s outline comes a call
upon both the Government of Cyprus and the Turkish
Cypriot leadership to accept proposals for military decon.
frontation, thus reducing areas of possible friction and
incidents. This is an important step forward on the road to
peace. My Government, in a spirit of co-operation towards
normalization, has indicated its willingness to consider such
proposals favourably. They can well fall within the pro.
posed talks envisaged in the said initiatives.

27. The second is an attitude of mind reflected in certain
statements of Greek Cypriot leaders which, if genuine,
would greatly contribute to a peaceful solution of the
problem. In this context I should like to refer again to a
statement made by Archbishop Makarios on 29 February,
which is mentioned in paragraph 90 of the Secretary.General’s report [S/8446/ and which Ambassador Rossides
has just read out to the Council. Archbishop Makarios
declared that: “the experience gained up to now must have
convinced all that the problem of Cyprus cannot be solved
by the use of force”. That is indeed a welcome statement,
inasmuch as we have always contended that the root of the
problem of Cyprus was an attempt on the part of one of
the parties to impose its views on the Turkish community
through the use of force. My Government has always bee3
faithful to the view that this question should terminate in a
peaceful solution and an agreed settlement, as envisaged in
the Security Council resolution 186 (1964) of 4 March
1964, and not in reliance on positions created by the use of
force.

21. Thirdly, the Secretary-General in sub-paragraphs (iii)
and (iv) of the outline of initiatives, declares his determination to continue to exercise his good offices and calls upon
the parties to show the spirit of accommodation essential to
making progress in the discussions. I can assure the Security
Council of the readiness of IIIY Government to co-operate
with the Secretary-General towards a solution of the
problem within the framework of his good offices, both
here and in Cyprus.
22. We are ready to have talks in a spirit of understanding
and co-operation. We look for peace and progress in
Cyprus, and the first prerequisite is the mutual understanding and the unity of the people concerned-unity of the
people in an independent, sovereign and integral country.
That is in the vital interest not only of the people of Cyprus
themselves, but also more widely. For peace in Cyprus will
also make an important contribution to the peace in that
disturbed area and in the world at large.
23. The PRESIDENT (translated from Frmch):
on the representative of Turkey.

28. Thirdly, there are certain measures recently taken by
the Greek Cypriot administration, which have been explained in the Secretary-General’s report. There is no doubt
that these measures, which mainly consist in the lifting of
severe restrictions on the Turkish community, restrictions
unilaterally and arbitrarily established by the Greek
administration, would be very useful in reducing tensions in
the island.
29. The reaction of my Government, as well as that of the
Turkish community, to this recent development has been
favourable. In a statement which he made in this connexion, Dr. Fazil Kiiciik, the Vice-President of Cyprus,
declared:
“Certain restrictions which had been arbitrarily imposed by the Greek Cypriot Administration and which
had made the daily living conditions of members of the
Turkish Cypriot Community extremely difficult during
the last four years have recently been removed by the
same Administration in the same manner as they were
imposed.
“It is hoped that this action will help reduce tension in
the Island and bring to a fruitful result the good offices
proferred by U Thant for the realization of the pacification measures contained in his appeal dated 3 December
1967. But as has been indicated by the Secretary-General
himself in his recently published report there has not
been any positive development in these pacification
measures.
“We wish to believe that these restrictions have been
removed as a result of a genuine desire for a settlement of
the problem and that this removal is of permanent
character, If, in practice, further developments prove this
to be the case, we may consider such reciprocal measures
as would not prejudice our security requirements.”

I now call

24. Mr. ERALP (Turkey): For the first time after four
tragic years, the Security Council meets today in an
atmosphere of comparative optimism, as reflected in the
report of the Secretary-General which is now before us.
Although much remains to be done by all concerned, my
delegation feels that its first duty at this stage is to give full
credit to the patient and statesmanlike endeavours of the
Secretary-General and his immediate collaborators for
steering the course of the dispute away from inflamed
passions towards sanity, from recriminations towards
reason and from the clash of arms towards peaceful
dialogue. We are grateful to the Commander and the
personnel of UNFICYP, as well as to the Special Representative of the Se’cretary-General in Cyprus, Mr. OsorioTafall, for their diligent and skilful handling of very delicate
situations and problems with a view to bringing about
peaceful conditions in the island. We also owe a debt of
gratitude to those countries which, by contributing to the
maintenance of UNFICYP with manpower and financial
help, have nobly served the cause of peace in our troubled
area.
25. The atmosphere of relative optimism to which I have
referred is based, in our view, on the four following
elements:

30. It is therefore obvious that the Turkish community
intends to consider favourably in principle the suggestion of
the Secretary-General expressed in paragraph 155 (i) of his

26. The first is the withdrawal from the Island of Greek
Royal Army forces and a renewed attempt by my Govern3

we have no difficulty

report for greater freedom of movement in Turkish
controlled areas, In doing so, it is our understanding that
they will act on the conviction that a principle enunciated
in another report of the Secretary-General will be scrupulously applied. I refer to paragraph 274 of the SecretaryGeneral’s report of 11 March 1965 /S/6228/ where he
says: L&e. . UNFICYP .‘. . cannot act as an instrument of the
Government in helping it to extend its authority by force
over the Turkish Cypriot community in the areas now
under its control .”

in subscribing to the measures

proposed by the Secretary-General in paragraph 155 of his
report, particularly in regard to the action which he
proposed to take under sub-paragraph (v) of that paragraph

and which directly concerns my Government. It suffices for
me to recall that Greece has always contributed to efforts
of all kinds and on all sides to find a solution, or to
establish conditions propitious to that search.
36. The memory of the Greek Government’s efforts at
in recent months
is still fresh in our minds. I shall not waste the Council’s
time by recalling those efforts; I shall merely remind the
Council that the preservation of peace in November 1967
was chiefly due to the Greek Government’s moderation and
sense of responsibility and to its attachment to the
principles of the United Nations Charter.
pacification, conciliation and moderation

31. And yet, it would seem to my delegation that this
process of imposing and later lifting restrictions, and
perhaps imposing them again, as has been done in the past,
at the discretion of one of the parties-this procedure of
hot and cold showers-is not the best way of dispelling
tensions and bringing about a return to normal conditions.
The establishment of genuine peaceful conditions can best
be achieved by lasting agreements between the sides. In that
respect, we cannot hide our disappointment at the failure,
so far, of the efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General
within the framework of the good offices proffered in his
appeal of 3 December 1967 [S/8248/Add.6, para. I/ and
endorsed and confirmed by the Security Council in its
resolution [24#/ of 22 December 1967. We are, nevertheless, relieved to read in paragraph 155 (iii) of the SecretaryGeneral’s report [S/8446/ that he intends to continue with
the exercise of such good offices in that direction.

37. By heeding the Secretary-General’s appeal and accepting his offer of good offices, Crc:ece has demonstrated its
faith and its confidence in the United Nations, its organs
and its procedures.
38. On another level too, Greece has tried to bring about a
relaxation of the tension. Members of the Security Council
are well aware that relations between Greece and Turkey
have passed through various phases of tension, In a desire to
bring this state of affairs to an end as soon as possible, the
Greek Government reached agreement with the Turkish
Government to explore the possibilities for the settlement
of various questions which, on the bilateral level, were
weighing heavily upon relations between the two countries.
That process has just begun and is under way at the
moment,

32. Lastly, we welcome the initiatives enumerated in
paragraph 15.5 of the present report of the SecretaryGeneral. Any exploratory unofficial contacts between the
two communities of the Island will have the encouragement
of my Government, on the clear understanding, of course,
that the question of Cyprus can only reach an over-all final
solution through negotiations and agreement between all
the parties to the dispute as recognized and affirmed in the
4 March 1964 resolution of the Security Council in an
atmosphere of peace and calm.

39. Having, shown every evidence of goodwill and of a
desire to work for the solution of the Cyprus problem,
Greece cannot but endorse the proposals which the
Secretary-General has addressed to the parties most directly
concerned.

33. After long and painful years of strife and suffering we
now see, for the first time, a glimmer of hope that goodwill
and sanity may prevail. My Government can be relied upon,
as always, never to turn down the alternative of negotiation
and peaceful settlement. It is our fervent desire that within
the next three-month period of UNFICYP the efforts to
reach a peaceful and agreed settlement may be successful so
that the Security Council and the United Nations may have
the satisfaction of having closed an effort at peace-keeping
and peace-making which may be an example to all,

40. The Secretary-General’s report paints a most eloquent
picture of the constructive and decisive contribution made
by the Government of Cyprus in implementing normalization measures which, if there are no new obstacles, will
facilitate a return to a completely normal state of affairs.
The only proviso is that everyone in Cyprus will have to act
in the same positive and constructive spirit in which those
measures have been conceived, given expression and carried
into effect; and all parties concerned with the Cyprus
problem and its contingencies will have to show moderation, a sense of responsibility and realism, and will have to
accept as their principal aim the maintenance of peace in
the area and the safeguarding of justice and equity-in
short, the very principles of the United Nations Charter.

34. Mr. BITSIOS (Greece) (translated from French): At
the moment when the Security Council is discussing
whether to extend the mandate of the United Nations
Force in Cyprus for a further period of three months, it is
encouraging to read in the Secretary-General’s report that
the atmosphere is now more propitious than it has ever
been for accelerating a return to normalcy and for
redoubling efforts to make useful progress, resolutely and
in good faith, towards a solution of the Cyprus problem.

41. We are convinced that the presence of the United
Nations Force in Cyprus will contribute in a positive and
constructive fashion to such a desirable development both
of attitude and of practical achievement,

35. Greece cannot but be gratified at this, since all our
efforts and initiatives have constantly been directed
towards the establishment of such an atmosphere, Hence

42. I should not like to conclude this brief statement
without echoing my Government’s appreciation and grati.tude for the untiring efforts of the Secretary-General and
4

his collaborators and for the services rendered to the cause
of peace and security in Cyprus by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and by the United Nations
Force and its commander. Our thanks are also addressed to
those countries which, in their dedication to the cause of
peace, continue to contribute handsomely to the financing
of UNFICYP.

50. The Hungarian delegation gladly observed the sense of
goodwill, co-operation and optimism expressed in the
statements of speakers representjng the interested parties,
who have preceded me. It is for this reason that we
welcome the measures of normalization of the Cyprus
Government which have contributed a great deal to the
favourable developments in the recent three-month period.
We hope that this trend will continue and that both
communities will find it- possible to initiate negotiations on
the outstanding issues.

43, Mr. CSATORDAY (Hungary): Mr. President, before
commencing my statement permit me to join you in
greeting the Permanent Representative of the friendly
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Ambassador Yakov A.
Malik, who is a new representative in the Security Council,
but for whom the Security Council is not new. In fact, he is
more farililiar with its operations than many of us. We are
convinced that his rich experience and his vast knowledge
in’ the field of international problems confronting the
United Nations will further enhance the sincere efforts to
consolidate the cause of peace and security in the world,

5 1. We hope that they will arrive at a solution which will
satisfy both the Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots, thus
strengthening the independence and sovereignty of the
Republic, which should lead to the withdrawal of all
foreign military personnel, national and international.
52. We understand, however, that under the present
circumstances the Secretary-General, with the consent of
the Government of Cyprus, found it necessaiy to recommend the extension of the stationing of the United Nations
Forces in Cyprus for another three-month period,

44, Since this is the first occasion that my Government
can make its views known on the Cyprus question in
general and on the Secretary-General’s report in particular
before the Security Council, I shall briefly outline the
position of Hungary.

53. My Government does not object to this recommendation provided that the extension is based entirely upon the
provisions of Security Council resolution 186 (1964) of
4 March 1964, including the voluntary financing of the
United Nations Forces in Cyprus.

45. First, and above all, we consider the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Cyprus as prerequisites of the Island’s internal and international peace. Therefore, we are firmly in favour of
strengthening
these prerequisites of peace and, consequently, are against any attempt which might be detrimental to them.

54. For all these reasonsmy delegation is ready to support
the draft resolution.
55. Mr, PARTHASARATHI
(India): I should also like to
begin by extending a warm and sincere welcome to
Ambassador Yakov Malik, the representative of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics. As he has served before, with
g’reat distinction, as his country’s Permanent Representative
to the United Nations, Ambassador Malik is of course no
stranger to our Organization. More recently, in his capacity
as Deputy Foreign Minister of the USSR, Mr. Malik dealt
with important international issues. My delegation feels
assured that in the days and months ahead the Council will
greatly benefit from Mr. Malik’s experience, wisdom and
probity in the conduct of its work, as well as in the
discharge of its responsibilities in the maintenance of
international peace and lecurity.

46. The presence of foreign military forces and bases on
Cyprus, remnants of a by-gone colonial era, are certainly
serious obstacles in the way of total and genuine independence and sovereignty. Therefore, this presence must be
discontinued: the military bases should be abolished and
foreign troops of all kinds should be completely withdrawn.
47, As for the substance of the Cyprus question, as it is an
internal affair of the Republic of Cyprus, the solution
should be worked out by the people of Cyprus, without
any qutside interference.
48. The solution must be arrived at through peaceful
means, since, as the tragic events of the past several years so
clearly demonstrated, the use of force can bring about no
solution, but dkstruction, hatred and fear. A lasting and
permanent solution should be based upon democratic
principles, taking into account the lawful rights and
legitimate
interests of the national communities. Any
negotiation between the interested parties requires that the
political climate of the Island should improve; fear and
distrust, based upon past experiences, ought to give way to
confidence.

56. We have before us the Secretary-General’s repdrt
[S/8446] which gives us his assessment of the situation in
Cyprus and of the accomplishments of the United Nations
presence there. We are gratified to note that the SecretaryGeneral has been able to report that the three-month period
covered by this report has been one of the quietest since
the disturbances that broke out in December 1963, and
that the general relaxation of tension has also been
reflected in a short reduction of shooting incidents and in a
welcome beginning of military disengagement in some
places. My delegation is further gratified by the fact that
since the meeting of the Council on 22 December 1967
[1386th meeting/ not only has the threat of a clash in the
area-which then appeared imminent-receded,
but the
conditions there have fast been improving and the process
of normalization has been started.

49. In this respect it is very encouraging to note in the
report of our Secretary-General his comments regarding the
relaxation of tension in Cyprus. We share the SecretaryGeneral’s hope that the time may have come “to move
purposefully, with determination and good faith, towards a
solution of the Cyprus problem”. [Ibid., para. 151.1
5

For&g11
Minister Malik had won the UniVerSd
respect and
admiration of all his colleagues. We have no doubt that
Ambassador Malik will, like his predecessors, bring to bear
the prestige, influence and weight of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and his own wisdom, experience and
consummate skill to strengthen international
peace
and
security based on justice and OII the ligh principles of the
United Nations Charter.

57. It might be of some use if I were at this stage to state
the basic position of the Government of India’ with regard
to the question of Cyprus. Before Cyprus became independent, India had consistently advocated that there must
be an end to the British colonial rule on the Island. After
the independence of Cyp.rus, we took the position that no
action should be taken which might jeopardize the
sovereignty, the political independence and the territorial
integrity of Cyprus. In this connexion, I should like to
quote from the statement issued by the Government of
India on 25 November last year: “The Government has
always supported and continues to support the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus”.

63. In Cyprus we are relieved and happy to note the
refreslcng contrast that now prevails in the Island compared
to the situation which obtained during the months of
November and December 1967. The Secretary-General in
his report observes: “The three-month period covered by
this report has been one of the quietest since the
disturbances that broke out in December 1963 , . .”
(,S/8446, para. 148/. In the view of our Secretary-General
this welcome change may well be due to the fact that both
the Greek and Turkish Cypriots have now realized the
urgent need to compromise their differences following the
crisis in November last year. Had that crisis not been
averted, Cyprus and a broader area in the Eastern Meditcrranean would have been plunged into war.

58. India, along with the other members of the Council,
recognizes that there is an acute problem within the Island
which concerns the relationship between the majority and
minority communities. We firmly believe that, in order to
safeguard peace and security not only within the Island but
arpund it, it is necessary that there should be a rapprochement between the majority and the minority communities.
In this context, it is gratifying to note, as reported by the
Secretary-General, that the normalization measures taken
by the Government of Cyprus have already contributed to
the relaxation of tension in the island. The SecretaryGeneral has said:
“The relaxation of restrictions has unmistakably
demonstrated that Greek and Turkish Cypriot people
desire to live in peace and harmony and seem already
prepared to accept and support reasonable compromises.”
(Ibid., para. 153.1

64. My delegation would like to express its sincere
appreciatiorl of the restraint and spirit of conciliation
shown by both communities in Cyprus as well as by the
Governmbnts of Turkey and Greece. The statements of the
representatives of those countries that we have just heard
confirmed that the parties concerned are animated by a
sincere desire to eschew the use of force and work for a
peaceful solution of the Cyprus problem. If the ground has
been prepared for such a solution and the atmosphere in
the Island is more propitious now than at any other time, it
is largely due to the dedication of our Secretary-General to
peace and his unremitting efforts to promote it.

59. It is our conviction that adequate and urgent steps
should be taken to sustain and enlarge this processtowards
normalization so that the people of the Island might rapidly
move towards the peaceful solution of the problems facing
them. As the Secretary-Geperal has pointed out: “. , , there
has been no better opportunity in Cyprus for meaningful
steps towards a settlement than there is now”, [Ibid.]

65. I should also like to express the appreciation of my
delegation of the role of his Special Representative,
Mr. Osorio-Tafall. The Secretary-General has stated that the
measures of normaliz?ion that have been taken by the
Government of Cyprus to facilitate freedom of tiovement
of persons and of goods have contributed to a relaxation of
tension. In his special report, /Sf8248/Adds6/ ,I the
Secretary-General proffered his good offices to the parties
concerned for the pacification and the realization of
quietness and peace in the Island. All the three Governments concerned welcomed and accepted the offer of good
offices as set forth in the penultimate paragraph of the
Secretary-General’s special report.

60. It is our view that the parties should seize this
opportunity and arrange a lasting settlement of their
problems. The Secretary-General has enumerated some
steps which he thinks should be taken in the search for a
solution of the Cyprus problem. We fully endorse the
course of action suggested by him and we earnestly trust
that the parties will accept the suggestions made by the
Secretary-General.
61. My delegation fully supports the draft resolution
before US with the hope that the parties concerned will
constructively avail themselves of the present auspicious
climate and momentum in order to achieve the objectives
of the Security Council.

66. In his current report on Cyprus the Secretary-General
given
an outline of the initiatives which, in his view,
should be taken without delay towards a settlement. We
note that, amongst other things the Secretary-General
would like his Special Representative to initiate talks
between leading Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot personalities on the Cyprus problem. We consider his proposal for
talks to be both a timely and constructive suggestion. At
the same time, my delegation is of the view that our best
hopes for a productive outcome appear to lie in the
has

62. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): I should like to associate
myself with my other colleagues in extending a warm
welcome to the Deputy Foreign Minister and Permanent
Representative of the Union of Soviet, Socialist Republics,
Ambassador Malik. He returns to the United Nations after a
lapse of fifteen years, having served as his country’s
Ambassador to the United Kingdom and as Deputy Foreign
Minister, an office which he continues to hold. During his
previous tOUr of duty at the United Nations, Deputy

1 Ibid., kentpsecond
and December 1967.

6

Year, Supplement for October, November

?yillingness of the two sides to address their dialogue to
their mutual relationships in the context of the present
situation in Cyprus and oriented towards the realization of
the aims and objectives of Security Council resolution
186 (1964) of 4 March 1964, namely, a peaceful solution
and an agreed settlement of the basic issues between all the
parties in accordance .with the Charter of the United
Nations, having in mind the well-being of the people of
Cyprus as a whole and the preservation of international
peace and security.

,

that we would welcome fresh initiatives at the political level
which would lead towards a solution. Subsequently, the
clouds of war gathered over Cyprus and the future seemed
bleak indeed.
73. Against this background, it is encouraging indeed that
the Secretary-General’s report indicates that fresh initiatives
at the political level are in the offing, that tensions have
been markedly reduced, that the general atmosphere has
improved, and that hope for a solution has been revived.

67. The Secretary-General’s report makes it clear that,
notwithstanding the encouraging developments that have
taken place since last year, the possibility of a reversal of
the present trend towards peace and normality and a drift
again towards a crisis still remains. While the chances for a
recurrence of fighting have receded, the danger is by no
means over. There is therefore little room for complacency.
As has been rightly emphasized by the Secretary-General, it
is imperative that all the parties concerned should make
renewed efforts to move purposefully and with determination and good faith towards the solution of the Cyprus
problem. This solution must be based on full respect for the
legitimate rights and int:rests of the two communities on
the Island and strict observance of the rights and obligations flowing from international treaties and agreements.

74. In the circumstances, it seems appropriate that the
Council should note the existence of the new conditions
and should urge all parties concerned to take advantage of
this improved atmosphere to continue moves towards a
peaceful settlement. In the hope that the present momentum towards a political settlement can indeed be maintained, I believe it is also appropriate for the Council to
extend UNFICYP for a further period so that current
opportunities for progress can in every way be explored. It
is in the light of the considerations I have just mentioned
that Canada will be able to support the draft resolution
which was read out to us at the beginning of this meeting.
75. It is clear that UNFICYP continues to have a helpful,
steadying influence, the benefits of which must be recognized. At the same time, we may perhaps be allowed to
hope that, as the situation improves further, there will be
less and less need for the presence of UNFICYP, at least at
its current strength. Meanwhile, so long as UNFICYP is
required, I would again urge the parties concerned to
maintain and improve their co-operation with the Force.

68. Before concluding I should like to state that, in the
light of the prevalent conditions in the Island as set forth in
the report of the Secretary-General, my delegation concurs
in the recommendation
of the Secretary-General that the
stationing of the United Nations Force in Cyprus be
extended for a further period of three months.

76. My delegation has noted, and indeed shares, the
Secretary.General’s concern at the financial deficit in
UNFICYP’s accounts. In the circumstances, I would very
much hope that the signs of progress outlined in the
Secretary-General’s report will encourage a wider group of
countries to make voluntary contributions for the support
of this important peace-keeping operation which has made
such a constructive contribution towards the maintenance
of peace.

69. I should also like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to the Commander of UNFICYP, General Martola,
and his officers and men for their devotion to duty and
their untiring efforts in the discharge of their onerous
responsibilities. The continued maintenance of peace in
Cyprus, however troubled and fragile it may be, is in no
small measure due to the presence of this force on the
Island.

77. In concluding, I should again like to commend the
Secretary-General and his collaborators, both here and in
Cyprus, and also the Commander of UNFICYP, for their
efforts in the’ interests of a peaceful settlement of the
Cyprus problem. Arid of course I should like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the characteristically capable
and skilful way in which you have handled the current item
on our agenda.

70, Mr. IGNATIEFF
(Canada): Mr. President, I should
also like to associate myself with your well chosen words of
welcome to the Deputy Foreign Minister ahd Permanent
Representative of the Soviet Union, Mr. Malik. I am all the
happier to extend this welcome to Mr. Malik because I
believe that I am one of the few around this table who were
here twenty years ago when he represented his country
with such distinction, although I was in a junior capacity at
that time. ’

78. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated from Russian): May I ,first express my heartfelt

71, At a time when there are many shadows on the
international horizon, the Canadian delegation particularly
welcomes the rays of hope conveyed in the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report on the situation in Cyprus and on
the role of UNFICYP and as reflected in the statements of
the representatives of the parties directly concerned in the
Council.

gratitude to you, Mr. President, and to the representatives
for their welcome and for the kind words they have spoken
on my account. Many changes have taken place in the
world since I was first called upon to represent the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics in this Organization.
79, The historical changes which have taken place in the
world arena since that time have naturally brought considerable changes in the situation of the United Nations.
The Orgmization has grown considerably and has become

72. When I spoke in the Council last June (1362nd
nzeeting/, I expressed Canada’s concern at the lack of
progress towards a settlement of the Cyprus problem. I said
7

the Organization and a permanent member of the Security
Council has, in pursuance of its policy of peace, firmly and
consistently defen,ded the interests of peace and the
security of peoples against the aggressive schemes of
imperialist forces, and has energetically supported the just
cause of the struggle.of peoples for freedom and national
independence. The Soviet Union will continue to follow
this policy and to fight for the unity within the United
Nations of all States which are for peace and against
aggression, and which seek to increase the role of this
Orgamzation and to maintain peace and ensure the liberty
and security of peoples.

more representative; I am especially glad to see today
among the members of the Security Council representatives
from African and Asian countries friendly to the Soviet
Union, who have recently been enabled to expand their
participation in the work of this Council.
80. The number of problems discussed and settled by the
Organization has increased during these years. However, the
main task of the United Nations, as defined in its Charter,
“to save succeeding’generations from the scourge of war”,
remains an urgent and important matter. In carrying out
this task the activity of the Security Council is of special
significance, since according to the United Nations Charter
it bears “primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security”.

86, Once again, Mr. President, I wish to thank you and the
members of the Council.

8 1, When the United Nations was set up, the principle Of
peaceful coexistence of States, excluding all interference in
the internal affairs of other countries and peoples, was
proclaimed as a basic principle of the Charter.

87. Turning to the question of Cyprus, I should like to
make the following statement, The position of the Soviet
Union on the question of Cyprus is well known. It has more
than once been set forth in declarations by the Soviet
Government and in the statements of its representatives,
including those made in the Security Council. I should like
to .point out that this position fully retains its force and
validity.

82. An ever-increasing number of countries are now taking
a realistic approach to the changes which have occurred in
the world, realizing as they do that the preservation and
strengthening of peace can be based only on strict
observation of the principle of peaceful coexistence of
States having different social systems. The United Nations
plays an important and responsible role by harmonizing, as
the Charter emphasizes, the activities of States in the
development of friendly relations based on the principle of
the equality of rights and self-determination of peoples, and
by encouraging international co-operation in the economic,
social, cultural and humanitarian fields. The Organization
can play this role only on condition that the basis of the
laws regulating its activity, the United Nations Charter, is
unswervingly and strictly observed. It is precisely such
deviations from the Charter and attempts to revise its
fundamental principles which have caused the difficulties
with which the Organization has in the past more than once
been confronted.

88. The Soviet Union has always been guided by the fact
that the Cyprus question should be settled by peaceful
means in the interests of the Cypriot people and with a
view to reducing tension in that important part of the
world.
89, The Soviet Union firmly supports the struggle of the
Cypriot people for full independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Cyprus, which is a full Member of the
United Nations. There is not and cannot be any doubt that
the solution of the internal problems of Cyprus is a matter
for the Cypriots themselves.

94
th
Ul
as
fir
pr
rej
:lt
ur
9:
to
th
SU

ta
re
of
9t
ne
N
W.

ar
G
ar
e,
El
u
fi

30. The Cyprus question musr be solved without interference from outside. The legal rights of the Greek and
Turkish populations of Cyprus must be fully respected by
all concerned. The Soviet Union is firmly opposed to
attempts to infringe the sovereignty of the Repubhc of
Cyprus and to any intentions of solving the Cyprus
question behind the back of its people, against their
interests and to the advantage of the imperialists.

83. In implementation
of its policy of peace and the
peaceful coexistence of States, the Soviet Union has from
the very first day of its participation in the United Nations,
bound by the obligations it assumed as a Member of the
Organization, remained faithful to the spirit and principles
of the United Nations Charter. The Soviet Government
attaches great importance to United Nations activities as an
instrument of peace, and regards the Organization as an
important international forum for active political struggle
in the interests of peace and the security of peoples against
aggression and interference in the internal affairs of States
and against colonialism and racism.

91. We are deeply convinced that to ensure the complete
independence and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Cyprus, all foreign troops must be withdrawn from its
territory and the foreign military bases there must be
removed,
92. The Soviet delegation would also like to stress the
need for all Member States of the United Nations to refrain
from actions which might complicate the Cyprus situation,
in accordance with the Security Council resolution of
4 March 1964.

84. The head of the Soviet Government, Alexei
Nikolayevich Kosygin, speaking at a session of the highest
legislative body in our country, the Supreme Soviet of the
USSR, said on the subject of the main lines of Soviet
activity in internal and external policy: “We attach great
importance to the United Nations, which is called upon to
play an important role in maintaining peace and ensuring
the security of peoples ,”

93. Today the Security Council is again examining the
Cyprus question in connexion with the report by the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Operation in
Cyprus for the period 9 December 1967 to 8 March 1968
[S/8446], That report contains a recommendation that the

85. The long history of the United’ Nations provides
convincing evidence that the Soviet Union, as a Member of
8

9
e
1

h
P
s
a
Sl
d
1
S

presence of United Nations armed forces in Cyprus should
be extended for an additional three-month period.

this report confirming that, owing to the circumstances and
as a result of various measures which have been carried out
in the Island, the three-month period covered by the
observations of the Secretary-General has been one of the
calmest that Cyprus has seen since the disturbances of
1963. Nonetheless, the report does not disguise the fact
that the fundamental questions have not yet been solved
and that, in the last analysis, only the parties themselves
can initiate the developments necessary to bring about a
fina settlement .

94. In this connexion the Soviet delegation must state
that, as is quite obvious, such a protracted presence of
United Nations armed forces in Cyprus cannot be regarded
as normal. About four years have passed since those forces
first went to Cyprus, but their presence has in no way
promoted a solution of the Cyprus problem. That fact is
recognized in the report submitted to the Council, which
notes in particular that in spite of certain improvements in
the i3yprus situation “the basic issues remain as yet
unresolved” [Ibid., para. 1.54].

101. It is certainly along those lines, that is, by starting
talks on a broad basis among all the parties concerned, that
progress can and must be made towards true peace.

95. As for the draft resolution submitted for consideration
to the Security Council, in which it is proposed to prolong
the presence of United Nations troops in Cyprus for a
supplementary period of three months, we should first like
to point out that the draft confirms the Security Council
resolution 186 (1964) of 4 March 1964 and other decisions
of the Council on the Cyprus question.

102. It is in this spirit and with this hope that the French
delegation, which pays a tribute to the efforts of the
Secretary-General and his representatives in Cyprus, gives
its approval to the retention of the United Nations Force in
Cyprus for a further period of three months.
103. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): There
are no further names on my list of speakers wishing to
address the Security Couucil before it begins its discussion
of the draft resolution. I therefore now propose, with the
Council’s consent, to ask your opinion on the draft
resolution which has been read out to you. If there are no
objections, I shall take it that the draft resolution is
adopted unanimously.

96. Although the Soviet Union does not consider, and
never has considered, that the further presence of United
Nations troops in Cyprus is justified, the Soviet delegation
will not oppose the prolongation of their presence for
another three months if this accords with the wishes of the
Government
of Cyprus and the other parties concerned
and, of course, on the firm condition that such an
extension shall be carried out in full conformity with the
provisions of the Security Council resolution to which I
have referred, namely that the present functions of the
United Nations Force in Cyprus and the existing system of
financing-that
is on a voluntary basis-will be retained.

The draft resolution wasadopted unanimously. 2
104. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I shall
now call upon those speakerswho have asked to address the
Council after the vote.

97. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated fYom French):
Mr. President, it is with great pleasure that my delegation
warmly associates itself with your words of welcome to the
new representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. This is not the first time that Mr. Malik has been in
this Organization and this Council. His name and his deeds
are well known in United Nations circles. We are sure that
his distinguished mind, his authority and his experience will
contribute most effectively to our endeavours.

105. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): In speaking in
explanation of my vote in favour of the resolution just
adopted by the Council, I have deliberately chosen to speak
after the vote. We all agree that today our task is not to
encourage controversy or to deepen dispute. Today we all
wish to emphasize the need for agreement and the hopes
for conciliation. It is in that spirit that most of the speeches
have been made. I shall. therefore not comment on them.

98. The Security Council has met once again to take a
decision regarding the retention in Cyprus of the United
Nations Force whose mandate is due to expire on 26
March. The French delegation would like briefly to explain
its views on the draft resolution that has been read out to

106, Before turning to my explanation of vote, I should
like to welcome most sincerely the new Soviet Ambassador,
Mr. Yakov Malik. I do not need to remind him or the other
representatives here that we members of the Security
Council live a hard life. Fatigue and frustration are our
constant companions, We are not unfamiliar with failure.
Our reward is no more than the knowledge that we never
abandon the quest for common ground of agreement. We
trust that to that continuing joint effort Ambassador Malik
will bring the weight of his vast and varied experience.

US.

99. My delegation has no objection to the short-term
extension of the mission as defined in the resolution
186(1964)
of 4March 1964. We do wish to point out,
however, as we had occasion to ,do last December, that the
presence of the Force should obviously not be regarded as a
substitute for the settlement of the question. To adapt
ourselves to the status quo and once again to postpone the
search for a permanent settlement can only lead to
dangerous stagnation.

107. We have often witnessed in this Council the ritual
dance of cold-war invective. In the steps of that ritual dance
Ambassador Malik has in the past, so we hear, shown
himself to be a master, No doubt he will live up to his
reputation both for robust rhetoric and for sturdiness in
negotiation, We are confident that those qualities will be

IOO. The latest report of the Secretary-General includes
some distinctly encouraging aspects. It is gratifying to find

2 See resolution 247 (1968).

9

tempered by the courtesy and good humour for which he is
also so well known, particularly in my own country.
108. A famous actor has come back to the world stage on
which his early fame was won. We warmly welcome him
and we congratulate ourselves. We do so in the hope that he
will play the part not of the villain but of the hero. And we
are encouraged in that hope by the earlier part of his speech
this afternoon and by the statement he made on the day of
his return, when he said that the cold war brings “neither
glory nor honour”. How whole-heartedly we agree with him.
It will be glory and honour enough if we can end the cold
war. I like to think that it is in that role-the role of a
deliverer from the cold war-that the very distinguished
Ambassador of the Soviet Union will play his finest part.
109. I turn now to the resolution just adopted unanimously by the Security Council.
110. When I was in Cyprus ten years ago, we used to say
in jest that anyone who understood the situation in Cyprus
had been misinformed. Certainly the beautiful island has
produced a situation always complicated and sometimes
baffling and often exasperating. No one would be so unwise
as to mistake an improvement for a solution. There are still
deep-seated suspicions to be removed and old wounds to be
healed and many basic problems to be solved.

117. All those factors are encouraging. They open the
door to a settlement, Now we come t0 the resolution just
passed unanimously by the Security Council. My country is
ready and anxious to continue t0 play a full part in the
renewed effort towards a final settlement. My Government
will maintain its military contingent in the United Nations
Force and will continue to meet the fdl costs of that
contingent for the period of three months ahead of us. My
Government, moreover pledges itself today to make, in
addition, a contribution of $1 million towards the costs of
the Force during that period.

misc,
move

118. We appeal for a new and unprecedented effort by all
the parties concerned to go forward to tackle the difficult
and dangerous questions still remaining with a new determination to succeed.

125
Unitf
in th
very

119. Mr. BUFFUM (United States of America): At the
outset of this statement, I should like to add my voice to
yours, Mr.President, and to those of the other representatives at the Council table in welcoming to our midst the
distinguished new representative of the Soviet Union,
Ambassador Malik. Actually, after the ver’y eloquent
statement of welcome and appeal just made by my good
friend Lord Caradon, there is very little left to be said, I
would make only tivo very brief remarks.

126.
SuppI

124,s
suppi
the t
this 1
inter1
for 17
the I
CYP

127.
Gene
finan
conf:I
128.
giWll1

120. First, I should like to assure Ambassador Malik that
in the discharge of our responsibilities as the host country
we shall do everything we can to make him feel welcome
and at home in New York.

111. Nevertheless, let us count our blessings. We are
deeply thankful that there has been peace in the Island
since we last met three months ago. We pay tribute to the
restraint and goodwill of all those concerned, which has
made that important advance possible.

121. Secondly, I would point out ert passarzt that, like
Lord Caradon, we read with great interest the stateml::lt
made by Ambassador Malik to the press on his arrival last
week, in which he seemed at least implicitly to endorse an
end to the cold war. We assure him that, for its part, the
United States welcomes any step in this direction and that
we shall not be found wanting in contributing to that
objective in this body.

112. The United Nations Force, under its very distinguished Commander, General Martola, has continued to
give a welcome example to the world of the efficiency and
effectiveness and the resource and steadiness of an international military peace-keeping force. The imp*ortance of
that achievement transcends even the value of the contribution to peace in Cyprus. The successof the United Nations
Force in Cyprus has good lessons for the world.

122. I turn now to the item on our agenda. The United
States has joined with all other members of the Security
Council in voting’ to extend the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus for three months. We have cast
this affirmative vote with a sense of gratification, encouragement and hope. We are both gratified and
encouraged that there has been a definite improvement in
the situation in Cyprus since the Council last met to discuss
this question. We join in congratulating the distinguished
Secretary-General, his able Special Representative in Cyprus
and the United Nations Force for the important contribution they have made to this process.

113. Ambassador Osorio-Tafall is ‘I representative of the
United Nations whose patience and persistknce and judgement make us all proud of him, and more than grateful to
him.
114. The Secretary-General has presented to us a thorough
and hopeful rep&t, and we all eagerly welcome and support
this and every initiative directed towards understanding and
agreement and peaceful co-operation. We greatly hope it
will lead to progress.

Natii
SuppI
tions
Repri
prove
join 1
unitr
wllicl
keepi
fim:n

129.
by ;LI
you ;
Perrfl
Rep1
130.
unan
tion

tions
peric
are s
the 1
That
the I:
now

123. The Secretary-General’s report /S/8446/ has stressed
the beneficial effect of the normalization and pacification
measures adopted by the Government of Cyprus. The
United States welcomes this development. We very much
hope that these positive developments and the improved
climate to which they have contributed will lead now to
further progress towards resolving the problems which have
kept true peace from that Island for too long. We trust and
urge that all the parties
involved will be inspired to make
such progress and will demonstrate the spirit of compro-

115. The Secretary-General’s report enables us to look to
the future with more hope and confidence than for many
anxious years past, and we very much appreciate what he
and those who work with him have done.
116. There has, moreover, recently been spectacular practical advance in removal of barriers of restrietibn and
distrust wl$ch opens up new expectations of happier
relations all round.
10

13f.
Gene
of 13
plays
and
by

1x1

dispc
salpe
crea t

misc, goodwill and mutual accommodation so necessary to
move ahead.

cumstances to make a determined effort towards that
solution of the basic problems which, in the last resort,
only they themselves are in a position to work out.

124. We have taken special note of the Secretary-General’s
support for the concept of talks between representatives of
the two Cypriot communities. The United States supports
this concept or any other means which will permit the
interested parties to find a mutually agreeable procedure
for reaching a settlement. We remain ready to co-operate to
the best of our ability so that a viable solution to the
Cyprus. problem may be found.

132. Mr. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (translated from
Spanish): Mr. President, when in your capacity as President
of the Security Council and on behalf of its members you
welcomed Mr. Malik, the new Permanent Representative to
the United Nations and representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics on the Security Council, my
delegation felt that you were speaking on its behalf. If I had
had anything further to say it would have been to endorse
your words,

125. FinaIly, with regard to the problem of financing the
United Nations Peace-keeping Force, which was also raised
in the Secretary-General’s report, I should like to make two
very brief points.

133. My delegation joined with the other members of this
Council in adopting the draft resolution which we now have
made by unanimous vote a decision of the Council, The
reasons why we did so are self-explanatory in the light of
the text of the resolution, but I feel I should make a
number of additional comments.

126. First, the United States will continue to give financial
support to this extremely important peace-keeping effort.
127, Secondly, we cannot but share the SecretaryGeneral’s concern over the continued deficit in the
Financing of the Force, and his appeal for actions and
zontriburions to overcome that deficit.

134. First of all, with regard to the political climate at
present prevailing on the Island of Cyprus; in his report to
the Security Council, the Secretary-General, in referring to
the period covered by the report, namely the last three
months, said that the period-and I quote the same
paragraph as others have already quoted-“has been one of
the quietest since the disturbances that broke out in
December 1963”[ibid, para.148/.

128. Despite the welcome and very necessary support
given by those who contribute their forces to the United
Nations, the simple fact of the matter is that the financial
support which we have given and the generous contributions of others-the United Kingdom and the Federal
Republic of Germany, to mention but two-have not
proved sufficient to meet the needs. There’fore, we would
join the representative of Canada in urging Members of the
United Nations, and particularly those in this Council
which give their political support to this important peacekeeping operation, to match that support in practical
financial terms as well.

135. 1 am concerned here solely with the political climate.
The basic problems remain, but the importance of the
political climate and conditions at the present time cannot
be denied. I sincerely hope they will improve still further
with a view to establishing and consolidating normal
conditions and peace on the Island as soon as possible, in
the interests not only of the free and independent State of
Cyprus and other States, but also of the United Nations as a
whole and of international peace and security, which
otherwise might be affected.

129, Mr. BORCH (DenmarkG:,Mr. President, may I begin
by associating myself with the warm welcome extended by
YOU and by our other colleagues to Ambassador Malik, the
Permanent Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics.

136. The road to a solution of the basic differences is long
and bristling with obstacles, but there is no road so long
that it cannot be negotiated and no difficulties so great that
they cannot be solved by a whole-hearted effort of will on
the part of those concerned; it is in that will that we place
our highest hopes.

130. Now that the resolution on Cyprus has been adopted
unanimously, I should like to express briefly the satisfaction and the approval of my delegation about the observaLions the Secretary-General has made in his report for the
period from 9 December 1967 to 8 March 1968 (ibid/. We
are satisfied that the Secretary-General has confirmed that
the period was one of the quietest since December 1963.
Though no tangible progress towards discussion between
the parties directly concerned has as yet been made, there is
now a momentum towards the restoration of normalcy.

137. Before concluding this brief explanation of my
delegation’s vote, since this is the first time that my
Government and my country have participated in the
debates on the Cyprus question, I should like to pay two
tributes-the first to the Secretary-General and his representative for their untiring efforts in the Island, and the second
to the Slates which, by supplying troops or by making
financial contributions, have made it possible for the forces
established by resolution 186 (1964) of 4 March 1964, and
essentially designed to create peace, to continue their
peace-keeping function until the time-which we trust is
not far off-when their presence in Cyprus will no longer be
needed.

131. We all owe a debt of gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral for the results so far obtained, and we &sure him
of our support in his future endeavours. UNFICYP has
played an important role in keeping the peace in Cyprus
and we shall certainly also continue to support that Force
by maintaining our military and police contingents at the
disposal of the United Nations. We hope, however, at the
sanle time that the parties will now use the motnentum
created by a number of concurrent favourable cir-

138. The PRESIDENT (translated frori? French): I call
upon the representative of Cyprus.
11

144. The .PRESIDENT (translated from French):
call upon the representative of Turkey.

139. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): Mr. Presidentithe fact that
I am taking the floor in right of reply does not necessarily
mean a controversy, nor, I hope, does the fact that I am
replying to the representative of Turkey, Ambassador
Eralp, mean recrimination. No, on the contrary, I want to
clarify certain points which were raised by my colleague,
and to reassure the Security Council and the representative
of Turkey that the Government of Cyprus always wanted
to lift those restrictions, but that it was not possible to do
it earlier for the following reasons,

I now

14.5. Mr. ERALP (Turkey): I have no intention of
prolonging the rights of reply, but I am grateful to
Mr. Rossides for having replied to me and put himself and
his Government on record for continued good intentions in
the establishment of peaceful conditions on the Island.
146. There is one point which I want to bring out. He said
that if it had not been possible up to now to take these
measures of pacification unilaterally, it was because there
were no conditions of peace and quiet reigning on the
Island. This is the point I want to bring out. If there were
no such conditions of peace and quiet, it was not the fault
of the Turkish Cypriot community. Nor is it entirely the
fault of the Turkish Cypriot community that up to now it
has not been possible for the two communities to get
together and work out means of pacification on the Island.

140. It was not possible unilaterally to lift the restrictions
at a time when there wastension, military preparations and
the building of fortifications in the Island; armed Turkish
Cypriot fighters ,could not ‘be allowed ,to move freely in
those circumstances to transport military material for the
construction of additional fortifications.
141, Yet, even in that period, when the UNFICYP had
proposed, in October 1964, a bilateral restoration of
freedom of movement on all roads throughout the country,
and the lifting of restrictions by the Government, and a
corresponding lifting of restrictions on the Turkish Cypriot
leadership in ,the enclaves, the Government of Cyprus
accepted; the Turkish Cypriot leadership did not accept. So
the effort failed.

147. Once again, I am grateful. that my remarks have
provoked the statement from ,Mr. Rossides and I am sure
that it will be coniforting to the Council to hear that,this is
indeed the intention of the Greek Cypriot administration.
148. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
Mr. President, thank you for
giving me. the floor. I shall be brief. I should like to thank
those representatives who have welcomed me and said kind
words about me since I made my statement. I should also
like to take this opportunity of stating that I listened with
particular attention to the statements of the representatives
of the United Kingdom and the United States who said that
they agreed with my comment made in conversation with
correspondents, that the “cold war”, a concept which, as
you know, wasoriginated by an eminent Western politician,
has not brought and will not bring either glory or prestige
to anyone.
(translated

142. Again, later, in 1966, the President of Cyprus himself
proposed a bilateral defortification and the removal of
checkpoints, and the establishment of freedom of movement. Again, unfortunately, it was not accepted by the
Turkish Cypriot leadership. It was not at the time possible
to take these steps unilaterally. But once there was some
relaxation of tension and relative calm prevailed, the
Government found itself in a better position to proceed
unilaterally to lift the restrictions. And so, gradually, step
by step, starting in September 1967 and up to and
including this month every restriction on the Turkish
‘Cypriots has been lifted, and they now have complete
freedom of movement everywhere.

from Russian):

149. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): There
are no further speakers on my list wishing to address the
Council after the vote; but before the meeting is adjourned
I have an announcement to make to members of the
Council. I have to inform them that, as a result of
consultations, some members of the Council have requested
that the meeting scheduled for tomorrow morning at
lo:30 a.m. to consider, the question of Southern Rhodesia
be adjourned until tomorrow afternoon at 4 p.m. If there is
no objection, it will be so decided.

143. We are happy to say that the desire of the Government is to continue in this spirit of co-operation and
mutual understanding and trust. We hope that any suspicion and mistrust that may exist will be dispelled so that
there can be real progress towards a solution. As was
mentioned by some members of the Council, once the fear
and suspicion disappear, the road is open for co-operation. I
can assure the Council that as far as we are concerned, we
are ready to proceed, without fear or suspicion, towards
co-operation for a solution of the ‘problem and for peace.

It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

12

HOW

TO

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

be

United
Notions
pubiicotionr.may
the world.
Consult
your
bookslore
or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Ler publications
der
d6posilaires
du monde
Notions
Unier,
Section

COMO

CONSEGUIR

Las publicaciones
en todas
parles
Ventor,

Litho

in U.N.

Nueva

del
York

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Soles
Section,

LES PUBLICATIONS
Nations
Unier
sont
entier,
lnformez-vour
des venter,
New York

PUBLICACIONES
de

PUBLICATIONS
obtained
or write

DES NATIONS

UNIES

en vente
dans
les libroiries
eupr&
de votre
librairie
ou
ou Genbve.

DE LAS

NACIONES

Ios Nocianes
Unidor
est6n
mundo.
Consulte
q
su librero

en vento
o ditijose

throughout
New York

et ler agencer
odresrer-vous
b:

UNIDAS
en

librerios
y cosos distribuidoror
o: Naciones
Unidas,
Secci6n

de

o Ginebro.

Price:

$U.S.

0.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

35191-May

1971-2,100
