S/PRST/2007/49

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 December 2007
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5812th meeting of the Security Council, held on 19 December 2007, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Somalia”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the briefing it received on 17 December
2007 from the Secretary-General’s Special Representative (SRSG) for
Somalia, Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah, in which he made proposals on the
political and security fronts and called on the international community to
commit itself to a clear course of action. The Security Council looks forward
to hearing more details on the SRSG’s proposals. The Security Council
strongly supports the efforts of the SRSG to work towards lasting peace and
stability in Somalia.
“The Security Council reaffirms its respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, political independence and unity of Somalia.
“The Security Council welcomes the appointment of the new Prime
Minister of Somalia, and looks forward to the early establishment of an
effective government. The appointment of Nur Hassan Hussein offers a
renewed opportunity to make further progress on dialogue and political
reconciliation, on addressing the humanitarian crisis in Somalia, and on
implementing the outcomes of the National Reconciliation Congress, leading
to a roadmap for the remainder of the Transitional Period and democratic
elections in Somalia, as set out in the Transitional Federal Charter. The
Security Council urges all Somali parties to reject violence and, with the
support of the SRSG, to enter into a substantial dialogue aimed at achieving a
full and all-inclusive national reconciliation.
“The Security Council also welcomes the briefing on 6 December 2007
by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Co-ordinator, John Holmes, which included an account of his visit to
Somalia. The Security Council expresses its deep concern at the deteriorating
humanitarian situation, aggravated by the prevailing security conditions in
Somalia, and emphasizes again the need for strengthened efforts to provide
humanitarian relief assistance to Somalia. The Security Council demands that
all parties in Somalia ensure unfettered access for all humanitarian assistance
to vulnerable populations, fulfil their responsibilities and obligations under

07-65423 (E) 191207

*0765423*

S/PRST/2007/49

international humanitarian law, and take the necessary measures to protect
civilians.
“The Security Council reiterates its strong support for the African Union
Mission to Somalia (AMISOM), calls on all Somali parties to co-operate fully
with it, urges again the international community to provide financial resources,
personnel, equipment and services for the full deployment of AMISOM, and
repeats its request that the Secretary-General consult with the African Union
Commission on what further support might be provided to AMISOM.
“The Security Council also reiterates its request that the SecretaryGeneral develop the existing contingency plans for the possible deployment of
a United Nations peacekeeping operation to succeed AMISOM, as set out in
resolution 1772 (2007). The Security Council requests the Secretary-General
to report by 8 February 2008 on progress made in this regard.”

2

07-65423
