S/2013/764

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 December 2013
English
Original: French

Letter dated 20 December 2013 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to my letter of 14 October 2013 (S/2013/606), in
which I recommended the deployment of a static United Nations guard unit to
strengthen the security of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM) compound within Mogadishu International Airport.
I also have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 2124 (2013), and
more specifically to paragraph 22 thereof, in which the Council took note of my
intention to deploy an appropriate United Nations static guard unit to strengthen
security at UNSOM compounds and looked forward to receiving further details of
its deployment.
In keeping with my recommendations for the establishment of UNSOM
(S/2013/239), a United Nations guard unit would form part of the overall security
concept by providing “inner ring” static protection for the compounds of UNSOM
and the United Nations Support Office for the African Union Mission in Somalia
(UNSOA), located inside Mogadishu International Airport.
More specifically, the United Nations guard unit would carry out the following
functions: (a) provide static security, patrols and access control for UNSOM and
UNSOA facilities and installations in Mogadishu, including should UNSOM move
outside Mogadishu International Airport; (b) act as a deterrent against possible
attacks by extremist elements on those facilities and installations; (c) provide rapid
extraction capability within Mogadishu International Airport; and (d) support
AMISOM and the Somali National Security Forces in extracting and relocating
United Nations personnel who are outside the airport area in the event that they are
under imminent threat of physical violence.
Should other situations warrant the use of the guard unit, especially in the
regions, I would revert to the Council with advice on supplementary measures that
may be required. I intend to review the continuing need for the presence of the
United Nations guard unit on an annual basis by conducting a security assessment.
The United Nations guard unit will comprise a guard battalion and an
extraction and reinforcement team supported by an adequately composed logistics
company. These would be provided as contingents by Member States to form part of
UNSOM. The President of the Federal Republic of Somalia, His Excellency
Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, has welcomed the deployment of the guard unit on
this basis. Based on the assessment of a reconnaissance team that I recently

13-63255 (E) 261213 261213

*1363255*

S/2013/764

dispatched to Mogadishu, and on the assessment of the prevailing situation, I
propose that the guard unit consist of 410 personnel.
The status-of-mission agreement for UNSOM is still under negotiation.
Pending the incorporation in a concluded agreement of provisions that would extend
the necessary legal protection to the guard unit and to the State or States
contributing contingents, it would be understood that the provisions of the model
status-of-forces agreement (A/45/594, annex) that apply to, and in respect of, the
military personnel of national contingents assigned to the military component of a
United Nations operation and to the property, funds and assets of the States
contributing those contingents shall apply provisionally to, and in respect of, the
military personnel of national contingents assigned to the guard unit and to the
property, funds and assets of the States contributing those contingents.
Recognizing that AMISOM and the Somali National Security Forces are the
primary providers of security to UNSOM in Somalia, the deployment of a United
Nations guard unit will require continued partnership and close coordination with
AMISOM and the national authorities. I take this opportunity to express my
appreciation for the support and assistance provided by the African Union to the
United Nations in this regard.
I would be grateful if you could confirm that these arrangements are
acceptable to the Security Council. If so, it would then be my intention to proceed
with the establishment and deployment of the guard unit as soon as possible.
In keeping with existing practice, I would, in due course, notify the Security
Council of the concurrence of the troop-contributing country or countries whose
units would be deployed to Mogadishu.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

2/2

13-63255
