S/PV.7242

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7242nd meeting

Friday, 15 August 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Sir Mark Lyall Grant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mrs. Ogwu
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Ms. Power

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

14-50733 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1450733*

S/PV.7242

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Security Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
invite the representatives of Iraq and the Syrian Arab
Republic to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda. Members of the Council have
before them document S/2014/589, which contains the
text of a draft resolution submitted by Australia, Chad,
Chile, France, Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria,
the Republic of Korea, Rwanda, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Chad, Chile, China, France,
Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria, Republic
of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 2170 (2014).
I shall now give the floor to members of the Council
who wish to make statements following the voting.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United Kingdom.
The United Kingdom welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2170 (2014). We are grateful
for the strong support from Council members for this
initiative and for the clear sense of unity that enabled
this strong Chapter VII resolution to be agreed so
quickly. Today, the Council has sent a clear political
message to the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), Jabhat Al-Nusra and other Al-Qaida-inspired
terrorists and has taken important practical steps to
combat the threat they pose.
2/9

15/08/2014

That threat is growing. ISIL, Jabhat Al-Nusra and
other Al-Qaida-inspired terrorists are undermining the
stability and security of the people of Iraq and Syria.
They threaten the wider Middle East region. We have
watched with horror their brutal actions — attempts
to wipe out entire communities on the basis of their
religion or belief, indiscriminate killing, illegal and
savage executions, deliberate targeting of civilians and
appalling levels of sexual violence, especially against
women and children.
Resolution 2170 (2014) represents the international
community’s comprehensive rejection of those terrorist
groups and expresses its determination to respond. The
Council has taken a firm and united stand. There is
already a strong response under way to the short-term
threat from ISIL, including military and humanitarian.
The United Kingdom is participating fully in the
humanitarian response in both Iraq and Syria. We are
supporting efforts to establish inclusive governance
and to strengthen moderate elements in both countries.
However, this resolution provides an additional
framework for a longer-term and strategic international
response to the threat. In particular, it sends a clear
political message that the international community
utterly condemns ISIL’s brutal and mindless terrorist
acts, rejects its violent extremist ideology and is united
in its resolve to oppose and confront it. The resolution
contains measures to stifle recruitment and to target
the growing phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters.
It tackles the financing of terrorism, calling on all
Member States to immediately cease all trade and
materiel support that enables ISIL and other terrorist
groups to function. It sanctions six key ISIL and
Jabhat Al-Nusra individuals under the United Nations
Al-Qaida sanctions regime, sending a clear signal that
there is no impunity for those who seek to support
Al-Qaida or its splinter groups.
Today, the Council has shown that it will not
stand idle in the face of terrorism and violations of
human rights. The resolution is not the final word. The
framework that it provides will need to be developed and
refined, but the Council’s unity on the text establishes a
strong basis for doing that. We must be resolute, active
and creative in considering what further measures
should be taken to tackle that terrorist scourge.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation supported resolution
14-50733

15/08/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

2170 (2014), adopted today, on the basis of its consistent
position on the need for an uncompromising fight
against terrorism and for united efforts to that end.
We have repeatedly called on the Security Council to
condemn the terrorists running rampant in Syria and
Iraq.
Today, terrorism is rapidly becoming an
independent political factor in the Middle East. In
such circumstances, there is no place for ad hoc
approaches and for dividing terrorists into good and
bad. In February of this year, the Russian delegation
proposed the adoption of a draft presidential statement
condemning the terrorists in Syria. Unfortunately, it
was not supported by certain members of the Council.
In July, on Russia’s initiative, the Council adopted
presidential statement S/PRST/2014/14 on countering
the use by terrorists of revenue from Syrian and Iraqi
oil.
We hope that the resolution adopted today will be a
significant step in the common fight against terrorism
and will affirm the support of the international
community for the Governments of the Republic of
Iraq and of the Syrian Arab Republic in their efforts
to counter the scourge. Although the resolution has
been adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, it cannot be seen as approval of the use
of military action.
At the same time, we must note some aspects that
complicated the task of negotiating such an important
document. We are concerned about the departure from
the procedure established by the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, for
the inclusion of new names on the sanctions list. Such
a step undermines the credibility of a key subsidiary
body of the Council and leads to the weakening of the
established procedures operating effectively within
its framework that enable States to take balanced and
informed decisions. We agree that the fact of inclusion
on the list of the names of abhorrent sponsors of
terrorism deserves to be made widely known. However,
we believe that it is counterproductive to waive the
rules that govern the work of the subsidiary bodies of
the Security Council.
It was only in a spirit of compromise, given the
disastrous situation in the region due to the Jabhat
Al-Nusra and Islamic State terrorist organizations, that
we agreed with the use in the resolution of certain terms,
such as atrocities and abuses, that are not enshrined

S/PV.7242

in international legal instruments and that distort the
scope of international humanitarian and human rights
law. We are fundamentally opposed to their use in
future Security Council resolutions.
Ms. Power (United States of America): The growth
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), the
Nusra Front and other associates of Al-Qaida represents
a grave threat to the people of Syria and of Iraq, as well
as to the region and the larger international community.
Through its rapid and brutal advance across
northern Iraq, ISIL has secured heavy weapons and
used them to push back the Iraqi and Peshmerga forces
who are trying to defend towns and cities. It has seized
some of the country’s precious natural resources and
taken control of critical infrastructure. ISIL now has
the ability to block the flow of electricity and to control
access to the water supplies on which people depend.
ISIL and the Nusra Front have used Syria’s civil
war and Iraq’s instability to claim territory, into which
they attract others who are bent on violent extremism
and from which they can potentially launch attacks
across the region and to other parts of the world. That is
the new front of the terrorist threat, with a devastating
human cost. ISIL’s recent attacks in Ninewa have
displaced an estimated 200,000 people, bringing the
total number of internally displaced persons in Iraq
since January to a staggering 1.4 million.
The stories that have emerged from ISIL’s bloody
wake are the stuff of nightmares. Christians have been
driven from their homes with the threat of “convert
or die”. Earlier today, I met with a bishop who was in
Iraq just after the fall of Mosul. He described one ISIL
attack on a hospital. A Christian patient who refused
to convert was shot in the head. Two who agreed to
convert, denounced as infidels, had their throats slit.
Yazidis have been buried alive, beheaded or killed
in mass executions. Thousands were forced to flee to
Mount Sinjar, where many ultimately perished from
thirst or exposure to the elements. The Iraqi Ministry
of Human Rights estimates that 500 Yazidi women and
girls have been abducted. There are reports of them
being raped, trafficked and killed.
ISIL and Jabhat Al-Nusra continue to carry out
similar atrocities in Syria with seeming pride, posting
gleeful images to the Internet. ISIL also continues to
confiscate much-needed humanitarian aid bound for
thousands of civilians in eastern Syria. They have no
shame whatsoever.

14-507333/9

S/PV.7242

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

15/08/2014

Today’s resolution 2170 (2014), which the United
States is proud to co-sponsor, represents the Council’s
strong and unified position that all Member States
must disrupt the terrorist financing and foreign fighter
recruitment networks that are fuelling the violence
perpetrated by ISIL, the Nusra Front and other associates
of Al-Qaida in the region. By imposing sanctions on six
individuals, the resolution demonstrates the Council’s
sense of urgency and its willingness to take concrete
action against those who carry the guns and those who
supply them.

on counter-terrorism to target those groups. ISIL
is a major and lethal threat to the people of Iraq and
Syria, including through its indiscriminate targeting of
civilians, its mass executions and extra-judicial killings,
sexual violence and widespread, potentially genocidal
persecution based on religion or belief. It is imposing
its own abhorrent rule and butchering those who do not
submit. The impact of its violent extremism on civilian
populations and stability in Iraq, Syria and the region
is immense. It is a threat to the global community itself,
and we must all rally to counter the scourge.

Unchecked, the current terrorist financing and the
foreign fighter recruitment networks will only prolong
the terror that we have seen unleashed in the region. The
numbers of foreign fighters in Syria and Iraq, as well as
their source nations, are unprecedented. Reportedly, as
many as 12,000 have participated in the conflict, and
the return of radicalized and battle-hardened jihadists
to their home countries or other vulnerable destinations
has the potential to widen the scope of the violence. The
resolution should help to stem the flow of money and
people, and I urge all Member States to expend every
effort to help achieve such goals.

We welcome the targeted United States air strikes
against ISIL that have relieved the siege of Mount Sinjar.
Australia joined the United States and United Kingdom
in air-dropping humanitarian supplies to civilians,
and we will continue to work with other partners in
responding to this humanitarian crisis. We are relieved
to see the political situation in Iraq stabilizing, and
welcome the nomination of Haider Al-Abadi as Prime
Minister-designate as an important step towards the
formation of a new, inclusive Iraqi Government. Iraq’s
leaders must now work together, including in meeting
the threat posed by ISIL.

The United States is proud to have taken
unprecedented steps to protect and assist the Yazidis
who were trapped on Mount Sinjar. Today, we join with
others on the Council in calling on all parties to prevent
or to stop the widespread or systematic attacks directed
against any civilian populations because of their ethnic
background, political views, religion or beliefs. We
believe that Iraq’s future political success will depend
on preserving its unity and on maintaining its vibrant
diversity.

Today’s resolution is a clarion call to Member
States to continually review their national counterterrorism measures in order to keep pace with the
evolving threat so starkly and lethally embodied in
those two entities. All Member States must take action
to prevent the movement of terrorists and terror groups,
including foreign fighters, across borders, to prevent
the financing and supply of weapons to terrorists,
and to counter the emergence of violent extremism.
On 5 August, the Australian Government announced
its intention to adopt specific new measures to target
the evolving terrorist threat. They will strengthen
our border controls to prevent terrorists from leaving
Australia and make it easier to prosecute foreign
fighters. They will inhibit terrorist training and enable
greater engagement with those at risk of radicalization
or who may resort to extreme violence.

We were encouraged by Prime Minister Al-Maliki’s
decision to support Prime Minister-designate Al-Abadi.
That peaceful and historic transition of power
demonstrates that Iraq is on its way to developing the
kind of fully inclusive Government that it will need if
it is to unify all Iraqis in the fight against ISIL. The
international community must support Iraq to that end.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank the United
Kingdom for its strong leadership in putting resolution
2170 (2014) forward for adoption today.
The resolution is a decisive step by the Council. It is
an unambiguous condemnation of the brutal and savage
acts of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
and the Nusra Front and an expression of determination
to harness the full force of Security Council tools

4/9

Australia already has a sophisticated counterterrorist architecture in place nationally, but it is clear
that the threat from extremism and terrorism is real and
growing, and that all countries should ensure that their
own counter-terrorism measures match this evolving
threat. Today’s resolution is also a timely reminder of
the role of the Council’s Al-Qaida sanctions regime
in disrupting the activities of groups such as ISIL
and Jabhat Al-Nusra. It underlines that anyone who

14-50733

15/08/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

provides material support to those entities for either the
recruitment or travel of foreign fighters, or by providing
financing through donations or the illicit trade in the oil
the groups now control, can be subject to the Al-Qaida
sanctions regime. Today’s listing of six key individuals
in ISIL and Jabhat Al-Nusra is an important step, but
the Committee established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning Al-Qaida
and associated individuals and entities, needs Member
States to identify ISIL and Jabhat Al-Nusra’s agents and
enablers, wherever they are, and to bring information
to the Committee in support of their inclusion on the
Al-Qaida sanctions list.
Ultimately, the success of the sanctions and
preventive counter-terrorism measures specified in
today’s resolution will depend on their implementation
by Member States. To that end, the Council itself must
energize its own existing systems to assist Member
States in doing that, and it must continue to keep a very
close eye on the effectiveness of its own measures to
counter the evolving threat from terrorism. The report
required within 90 days under resolution 2170 (2014)
on the threat from ISIL and Jabhat Al-Nusra, and above
all, the requested recommendations for additional
action to address that threat, will be important.
It will be essential that the Council address those
recommendations quickly.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): The
Jordanian delegation welcomes the initiative of the
United Kingdom that has led to the Council’s adoption
of resolution 2170 (2014) today. It aims to counter the
terrorist threats represented by the Islamic State in Iraq
and Syria (ISIS) and the Nusra Front in Syria and Iraq.
It also condemns the recruitment and financing of those
terrorist groups. Through it we are sending a significant
political message from the Security Council to the
effect that the international community is determined
to confront the terrorist activities of those and every
other terrorist group. We are also resolved to counter
those groups’ military threat and their crimes in Iraq
and Syria. The resolution also enables us to add several
individuals and entities in ISIS and Jabhat Al-Nusra
to the sanctions list. The crimes against humanity
committed recently by ISIS against innocent civilians
underscore the importance of showing determination in
confronting their barbarous acts, which go against every
standard of acceptable human behaviour. Such crimes
against humanity are an outrage to our consciences and
our cultures.

S/PV.7242

We cannot overemphasize the importance of
ensuring that the political process in Iraq includes
every group of Iraqi society and excludes none. It is also
vital that the Government adopt policies that respect
human rights and put Iraqi national interests first. That
will benefit Iraq, its people and the region. It is also
the best possible way to combat terrorists, including
those of ISIS. In that context, we stress that ISIS and
other extremist groups do not represent Sunnis in Iraq.
We reaffirm that the Sunni community in Iraq must
be an essential part of any inclusive political process,
which should include all sectors of Iraqi society. Jordan
welcomes the latest positive political events in Iraq,
that is, the announcement of a new President, Prime
Minister and Speaker of Parliament.
We reiterate that terrorism in Syria is one factor in
this crisis and not its cause, because it is the policies of
the Syrian regime and the security methods it uses to
respond to the legitimate aspirations of its people — not
to mention its marginalization and suppression of the
moderate opposition — that are the main causes of the
crisis in Syria. We therefore reaffirm how important
it is that the efforts to combat terrorism in Syria be
accompanied by efforts to put an interim Government
in place.
Jordan is well aware of the regional and international
threat posed by terrorist and extremist groups in Syria
and Iraq. Like the rest of the international community,
we are also very worried about the geographic expansion
of such groups. That demands that we work together
and pool our efforts at the regional and international
levels in order to confront this scourge. Jordan will
also continue to make every possible effort to promote
cooperation with all the parties concerned at the
regional and international levels to combat terrorism.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
supports the Security Council’s adoption of resolution
2170 (2014), aimed at combating such terrorist groups
as the Islamic State in the Levant (ISIL) and the Nusra
Front. Recently, ISIL and the Nusra Front have been
rampantly and deliberately attacking civilians and
persecuting people of other religions and ethnicities,
resulting in large numbers of casualties among innocent
civilians and the displacement of millions of civilians.
That has become a serious threat to peace and security
in the Middle East and the world as a whole.
China calls upon the international community to
faithfully implement the resolution just adopted and to

14-507335/9

S/PV.7242

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

strengthen its efforts to combat such terrorist groups
as ISIL and the Nusra Front by adopting concrete
measures to cut off the supply of arms, personnel and
financing to those terrorist groups from outside so as
to stop the spread of terrorism in countries such as Iraq
and to maintain peace and stability in the Middle East
and throughout the world.
With globalization and the development of
information and communications technology, terrorist
groups such as ISIL and the Nusra Front are increasingly
using the Internet and social media to spread terrorist
propaganda video and audio products, to recruit for,
incite, plan and execute terrorist acts and to raise
funds for their terrorist activities. China welcomes
the adoption of resolution 2170 (2014), which contains
provisions on sanctions against terrorist groups such as
ISIL and the Nusra Front in terms of their use of the
Internet and social media to recruit people and obtain
weapons and financing. We hope that the international
community will attach great importance to this
issue and will enhance their cooperation to combat
cyberterrorism together.
China is also a victim of terrorism. We strongly
oppose all forms of terrorism and will continue to
actively participate in international counter-terrorism
cooperation and to combat the threat of terrorism
together.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2170
(2014), which demonstrates the Security Council’s
determination to act against the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant. Following the Security Council’s firm
condemnation in July of the abuses perpetrated by
that terrorist organization against ethnic and religious
minorities, the resolution enables us to go further in the
fight against terrorism.
The resolution is also a new milestone in the
necessary mobilization of the international community
to address the threat posed to all by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant. The sanctioning of six
individuals connected to that organization and the
Nusra Front is a decisive step in the fight against those
groups. France, which has made the struggle against
the phenomenon of foreign fighters a national priority,
welcomes this decision to sanction those individuals
who are continuing to provide foreign fighters to those
networks.
The fight against terrorism is a key issue in Iraq, in
which France is playing its full role alongside the Iraqi
6/9

15/08/2014

authorities. However, that does not mean that we can
forget the crucial need to find a political settlement.
France welcomes the designation of Mr. Al-Abadi as
Prime Minister as an important step towards forming
an inclusive Government that represents all Iraqis,
which will make it possible to find a lasting solution to
Iraq’s challenges. It is crucial that the Prime Minister
form a Government as soon as possible, within the
timetable set out by the Constitution. France reiterates
its full support to Iraq at this crucial moment.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the United Kingdom for having taken
the initiative of presenting resolution 2170 (2014). We
welcome its unanimous adoption.
Chad voted in favour of the resolution and sponsored
it, because terrorism is a scourge that has neither a face
nor a border and is a threat not only to the region, but
to international peace and security. We continue to be
concerned by the flow of foreign fighters into Iraq and
Syria, as it is a clear threat to the region and a source of
concern for the rest of the world.
The resolution that we have just adopted sends a
strong message by the international community to
all terrorist groups around the world, including those
operating in other regions, such as in Africa. While
reiterating the need for a relentless campaign against
terrorism around the world, Chad reiterates its belief
that the barbarous and reprehensible acts perpetrated
by the Islamic State in the Levant, the Nusra Front and
groups associated with them cannot be attributed to one
religion, nationality or community, much less to one
civilization.
Chad welcomes the designation of Mr. Haidar
Al-Abadi as the future Prime Minister of Iraq. We hope
that the new Iraqi Government will be able to establish
the necessary conditions to maintain the cohesion,
unity, integrity and stability of the country while
respecting the diversity of Iraqi society.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to start by thanking the United Kingdom
for preparing resolution 2170 (2014), which the Council
has just adopted. We also thank Member States for their
flexibility in achieving consensus.
Chile sponsored the resolution because we believe
that, through it, the Security Council is responding to
the urgent need to put a stop to the advance and attacks
by the Islamic State in the Levant (ISIL) in Iraq and
Syria. In that context, we hope that the unanimous
14-50733

15/08/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

adoption of the resolution will serve as a reminder of
how important it is to decisively condemn and combat
the terrorism affecting the region. We would like to
appeal to Member States to fulfil their obligations
in implementing and enforcing compliance with the
financial sanctions and to take targeted measures to put
an end to the flow of foreign terrorist fighters.
Chile would like to underscore the universal
validity of human rights and international humanitarian
law, including the rights of minorities. Observing
and ensuring respect for those rights is essential for
democratic governance and social peace in culturally
and religiously diverse States.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting.
We have today adopted an important resolution
(resolution 2170 (2014)) that was eagerly awaited by all,
particularly those of us in the Syrian Arab Republic,
in the shadow of the growing threat posed by the two
terrorist groups, the Islamic State and the Al-Nusra
Front, as well as other groups and terrorist organizations
related to Al-Qaida. Those organizations have adopted
a violent and extremist doctrine that, in recent years,
has tried to promote an obscurantist culture that has no
connection with Islam or the Mashreq in general and
no connection with the society, history or civilization
of Syria.
For more than three years, Syria has been engaged
in an exhausting war against the terrorism of Takfiri
organizations, in the name of humankind in its entirety.
During this difficult and bitter period of Syrian history,
the Syrian Government has tried by all possible means
to draw the attention of the States Members of the
United Nations to the threats that the region and the
world are facing as a result of the practices of those
organizations. However, States with influence on the
Arab, regional and international scenes have dedicated
huge efforts to covering up the facts and have pursued
their support for and arming of terrorist groups, and
have offered safe harbour, financing, media and
political coverage, making those organizations pass at
times for a moderate armed opposition and for a jihadist
opposition at others.
Hundreds of letters and supporting documents,
photos, videotapes and other forms of communication

S/PV.7242

have been transmitted by the Syrian Government to the
Security Council and other entities and bodies of the
United Nations in order to draw attention to the crimes
committed by numerous terrorist groups such as the
Islamic State, Jabhat Al-Nusra and the Islamic Front.
Those organizations have committed the worst forms
of murder, torture and intimidation against innocent
Syrians. They have targeted civilians and committed
genocide against certain categories of both Iraqi and
Syrian society, in addition to undertaking the organized
destruction of the infrastructure of different sectors in
Syria.
Those organizations are also pillaging the wealth
of the Syrian people and are engaging in the stealing,
trafficking and selling Syrian oil through European and
Turkish brokers. I would like to ask the Council about
its adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2014/14,
which was submitted by the Russian Federation.
Specifically, I would like to ask the Council about the
identity of those who buy Syrian oil from the Islamic
State and how stolen Syrian oil makes its way to Europe
through Turkey. I would also like to know why the
members of the Security Council have not responded
to our repeated complaints for over three years about
Takfiri organizations’ exportation, initially from
Libya, of terrorism and weapons to my country through
Turkey and Lebanon, despite the reports of the Panel
of Experts created in accordance with resolution 1973
(2011), on Libya, which clearly revealed that issue.
The official documents that have been sent by Syria
have been deliberately ignored, with an incredible lack
of political seriousness. If those important documents
had been taken into account and if the past resolutions of
the Security Council had been implemented, especially
those touching on the fight against terrorism, we would
not be obligated today to adopt a new resolution. We
hope that resolutions adopted will be implemented in
a non-discriminatory and non-selective manner, and
fairly, and that they do not harm the sovereignty of the
States concerned or undermine their independence and
territorial integrity, with the cooperation of various
Governments. That is especially so as today we are
witnessing a fight against terrorism that is being waged
with duplicity and selectivity, as those same countries
are offering all kinds of support to the terrorists
themselves.
The fight against terrorism is one of the highest
priorities for the Syrian Government. We have asked
the Security Council several times to take Syria’s

14-507337/9

S/PV.7242

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

concerns in that context into consideration. The issue
has not been discussed with the Syrian Government
despite the fact that Syria is a key player in the fight
against terrorism. Today’s resolution 2170 (2014) was
not discussed with Syria during its drafting phase.
It is crucial that the Security Council promote
serious dialogue with the States concerned in order
to find adequate means for fighting terrorism before
the adoption of these resolutions so that their concerns
and the needs of their peoples are taken into account,
putting special emphasis on the fight against Takfiri
philosophy that allows terrorism to grow in certain
regions and undermines religions, which can only
strengthen terrorists.
The President: I encourage the representative of
the Syrian Arab Republic to conclude his statement
now.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The Security Council should call on various
States to fight this type of ideology and the individuals
who support it. That must be done in a very specific time
frame. We should focus on the language and rhetoric of
certain well-known media of countries of the Gulf and
through certain Takfiri websites that work to promote
extremist terrorist thought and to promote bloody
ideologies. We must place emphasis on the importance
of fighting such media and those who support it.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me,
first of all, to congratulate the United Kingdom on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of August and for its efforts in organizing
the work of the Council. I thank Sir Mark Lyall Grant
and the members of his team for their fruitful efforts in
conducting the Council’s work. I would also like to take
this opportunity to thank the Rwandan delegation for
its outstanding presidency of the Council last month.
The siege of cities, the massacres, the displacement
and the ethnic cleansing practiced by the Islamic State
of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) against the Iraqi people,
the propagation and application of its extremist thought
and the crimes against humanity that it commits against
all sectors of Iraqi society have targeted unarmed
civilians. In that regard, horrible massacres have been
committed, children have been recruited, and churches
and other religious, cultural and historical sites have
been destroyed. ISIL is also persecuting whole religious
8/9

15/08/2014

groups on the basis of their ethnic identity and their
religious beliefs, targeting in particular the Yazidi and
Christian minorities and the Turkmen Shiites. That has
led to the exodus of hundreds of thousands of peaceful
families. Those are the numerous horrible acts that
illustrate its criminal, extremist thought.
The displaced live in tragic conditions. They are
forced to live in tents or to take shelter in schools
and churches, and many of them do not receive
any basic humanitarian assistance. That is why the
United Nations, through Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Nikolay Mladenov, has declared a
level 3 state of emergency, which is the Organization’s
highest level. To date, entire besieged regions continue
to await assistance. Mount Sinjar and the area around
Nahiyat Imberli are completely under attack, as they are
sheltering a large number of Turkmen Shiite families.
My Government continues to make considerable
efforts to mobilize all its materiel and logistical
resources to ease the suffering of the internally
displaced persons. Iraq condemns in the strongest
possible terms the barbaric terrorist acts carried out
by ISIL and groups affiliated with Al-Qaida across
borders. We want to show that the danger represented
by the existence of those terrorist groups is far from
limited to threatening the security of the people and the
State of Iraq; it is a threat to international security and
to all peoples of the region without exception.
That is why Iraq fully supports the adoption of this
resolution at this very difficult time and critical juncture
for our country. We thank the United Kingdom for its
efforts in preparing and circulating the resolution among
the other members of the Council. The importance of the
resolution lies in the fact that it combines all previous
resolutions on combating terrorism and focuses the
efforts of Member States in combating ISIL, Jabhat
Al-Nusra and all affiliated groups. The resolution also
supports human rights, religious freedom, tolerance
and the protection of civilians.
Terrorism is an international scourge that knows
no borders. The proliferation of ISIL across the
Syrian, Iraqi and Lebanese borders is clear proof of
that. That group must be defeated, which requires the
united efforts of all regional and international actors.
Iraq therefore calls for the implementation of all the
resolution’s provisions in order to ensure the following.
First, it is essential to ensure the cooperation of the
international community, including the neighbouring

14-50733

15/08/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

countries, through the adoption of national measures
to paralyse terrorist movements by blocking the flow
across borders of foreign terrorists who are trying to
join the ranks of ISIL and Jabhat Al-Nusra in the field. It
is essential to control the borders and to bring criminals
to justice under international law, while respecting the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Iraq.
Secondly, States need to follow very closely the
individuals and entities on their territory, in particular
those who might be recruited by terrorist groups, by
preventing them from travelling to Iraq or Syria to join
the ranks of ISIL or Jabhat Al-Nusra. It is also crucial
to ban the dissemination of radical documents and
extremist ideology through social networks around the
world.
Thirdly, it is essential to prohibit all kinds of
direct or indirect transactions with ISIL and the Nusra
Front, as well as individuals and entities affiliated with
Al-Qaida, by ceasing to provide them with weapons
and military equipment.

S/PV.7242

Fourthly, States should take strong national
measures to eliminate the sources of financing for
terrorists by freezing the assets of individuals and
entities that finance terrorism.
Fifthly, Iraq calls on all States to criminalize ISIL
and urges them to present the names of individuals and
entities that support such groups.
Sixthly, we need to call for the adoption of an
international statement that clearly states that such
terrorist groups are criminals. That statement must be
endorsed by all States, which must commit to defeating
such terrorist groups.
On behalf of the people and Government of Iraq, I
thank the United States and its President. I also thank
the United Nations and call on the Council to assume its
responsibilities in implementing the resolution.
The President: The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 3.50 p.m.

14-507339/9
