S/2020/966

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 October 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 1 October 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council
As New York City has entered a less restrictive stage of reopening, the Security
Council should not be lagging far behind. As Russia assumes the presidency of the
Security Council on 1 October, we are keen to ensure that the Council resumes its
functioning as much back to normal as feasible. While recognizing fully the need to
be prudent and exercise all necessary precautions, we believe that it is time for the
Security Council to return to in-person meetings in the Security Council Chamber.
We therefore plan by default to conduct meetings in traditional format foreseen by
the Charter of the United Nations and the provisional rules of procedure of the
Council.
The protocol on the Security Council members’ presence in the Chamber
elaborated by us additionally and agreed upon by all Council members and in
consultation with the Secretariat is attached hereto (see annex).
Should the health situation in New York City require a return to discussions via
videoconference as was mostly the case in March–September 2020, the Council
would be guided by the working methods of previous presidencies as set out in the
letter dated 7 May 2020 from the President of the Council ( S/2020/372).
We have requested the Secretary-General as Chief Administrative Officer of the
Organization under Article 97 of the Charter to give necessary instructions to the
Security Council Affairs Division and all relevant United Nations services.
The situation will be further assessed at the end of October or earlier if the need
arises, and may be reviewed, adjusted or discontinued if the Council so decides.
(Signed) Vassily Nebenzia
President of the Security Council

20-12929 (E)

051020

*2012929*

S/2020/966

Annex
Modalities of in-person meetings of the Security Council for
October 2020
In the light of recent positive developments regarding the containment of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak in the City of New York, the Security
Council intends to return to in-person meetings in the Security Council Chamber
while continuing to ensure the safety of the delegations and of United Nations
personnel by taking reasonable precautions. In the event that conditions worsen, the
Security Council may revert to holding videoconferences.
Location and access
Security Council meetings, including briefings and informal consultations, will
be conducted in the Security Council Chamber while complying with appropriate
physical distancing measures. Access to the Security Council Chamber is limited to
no more than two persons per delegation and a required number of United Nations
and Security Council Secretariat staff (approximately 38). The primary participants
will take the place of their country at the table of the Security Council; the additional
participants will have a place assigned by the Secretariat, taking into account physical
distancing requirements. While the Council proceeds with holding meetings at the
Chamber, the Secretariat is encouraged to explore the option of installing Plexiglas
barriers between the seats and around the table where physical distancing is not
possible to reduce the risk of exposure. During open briefings, owing to seating
restrictions, the physical presence at the standard table of up to two briefers or
Member States invited under rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure is possible.
Placing an additional table in front of the Security Council table to increase this
number is a viable option.
For purposes of contact tracing and COVID-19 prevention, conference officers
will register each participant who enters the Security Council Chamber. Means of
sanitation will be provided in the Chamber at all times.
Entrance to and exit from the Security Council Chamber will be adapted to allow
no-touch entry. The entrance to the Security Council Chamber will be organized
through the door adjacent to the quiet room. The door of the Security Council
Chamber facing the Trusteeship Council Chamber will serve as the exit. Doors will
open at 9.30 a.m. or 2.30 p.m. on days where a physical meeting is scheduled.
Delegations are kindly asked to be in the room at least 10 minutes in advance so that
the meeting or consultations can start at 10 a.m. or 3 p.m. sharp.
Public meetings will be broadcast live on UN Web TV. Non-members of the
Security Council may observe the briefings live by means of UN Web TV.
Incoming members are entitled to two observers’ places in the Chamber
assigned by the Secretariat during both meetings and informal consultations, without
setting a precedent for the times when the consultations of the Council are conducted
at the consultations room.
Health and security
In the interest of the health, safety and well-being of all delegates and staff,
anyone not feeling well should not come to Headquarters. Participants are kindly
requested to limit the time they are physically present at Headquarters to the strict
minimum necessary for conducting official business. Physical distancing must be
maintained at all times.

2/3

20-12929

S/2020/966

Within the Security Council Chamber, participants will be asked to circulate
clockwise only and to respect the required physical distance. All persons physically
present inside the Security Council Chamber are required to wear a face covering
mask. Members of the Council and other participants at the Council meetings are
strongly encouraged to wear a mask when delivering their remarks or speaking into
the microphone, for the safety and security of other participants. Masks must also be
worn at all times in common areas of the UN Headquarters.
There will be no distribution of documents in the Security Council Chamber.
Likewise, all delegations should refrain from the distribution of any material or
documents in the Security Council Chamber, at the tables and boards outside the
Chamber or elsewhere at Headquarters. No pens or pencils will be provided. The
delegates are also encouraged to bring their own water in reusable containers.

20-12929

3/3
