VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2. Expresses its warm thanks to those countries
which have already contributed, those which have
pledged contributions and those which have expressed
their intention of contributing to the Voluntary Fund
for the United Nations Decade for Women and/or to
the International Research and Training Institutc for the
Advancement of Women;
3. Requests the Secretary-Gcneral to convcne during the thirty-third session of the General Ass~mb~y a
second pledging conferencc for voluntary contnbutions
for thc purpose of financing:
(a) The Voluntary Fund for the United Nations
Decade for Women;
( b) The International Research and Training Institute for the Advanccment of Women;
4. Further requests the Secrctary-General to organize an information campaign with a view to stimulating the interest of Governments, organizations and individuals likely to contribute to the Voluntary Fund for
the United Nations Decade for Women and thc International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women.
105 th plenary meeting
16 December 1977
32/140.

World Conference of the United Nations
Decade for W ornen

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3520 (XXX) of 15 December 1975, in paragraph 20 of which it decided to convene at the mid-term of the United Nations Dccade
for Women a world conference to review and evaluate
the progress made in implementing the objectives of
the International Women's Year as recommended by
the World Conference of the International Women's
Year and, where necessary, to rcadjust existing programmes in thc light of new data and research available,
Recalling that the Eeonomic and Social Council, in
its resolution 1999 (LX) of 12 May 1966, requested
the Commission on thc Status of Women at its twentysixth session to consider different aspects of the preparatory work for the World Conference of the United
Nations Decade for Women, including its agenda, and
also decided to consider at its sixty-fourth session, in
the spring of 1978, the preparatory work for the Conference,
Recalling also that, in accordance with the rcquest
of the Economic and Social Council, the Commission
on the Status of Women has considcred various aspects
of the material preparations and thc organization of the
Conference as well as the implications of the Conference for the programmc budgct, bcaring in mind a note
by the Secretary-Gcncral, 98
Recalling further that the Economic and Social Council, at its sixty-second session, adopted resolution 2062
(LXII) of 12 May 1976, in which it:
(a) Requested the Commission on thc Status of
Women at its twcnty-seventh session to givc thc highest
priority to the consideration of the prcparatory work
ns E/CN.6/600.

------------

157

for the World Conferencc of thc United Nations Decade
for Womcn,
( b)
Requestcd thc Secretary-General to prepare
for the considcration of thc Commission on the Status
of Wornen at its twenty-seventh session a report outlining a programme of concrete action for the second
half of the Decade,
(e)
Decided to establish, not later than Junc 1978,
a preparatory committce to make recommendations conccrning thc substantive and organizational arrangements
for thc Conference,
(d) Invited the regional commissions to consider
ways and means of contributing cffectively to the Confercncc,
Noting that preliminary exchanges of views on the
prcparatory work for the Conference have also taken
place in the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination at the two special interagency meetings held in
Septcmber 1976 and July 1977, which were brought
to thc attention of the Commission on the Status of
Womcn at its twenty-sixth session and will be brought
to its attention at its twcnty-scventh session,
l. A ccepts the offer of the Government of Iran to
act as host to the World Conference of the United Nations Dccadc for Womcn;
2. Notes that the Confcrence will in principlc be
hcld at Teheran in May 1980 for a period of two weeks;
3. Decides that the first session of the Preparatory
Committee for the World Conference of thc United
Nations Decade for Women, to be convcned pursuant
to Economic and Social Council resolution 2062
(LXII), shall be held at the Hcadquarters of the United
N ations in June 197 8;
4. Notes the efforts made thus far by thc SecretaryGencral and the Commission on the Status of Women
with a view to undertaking the prcparatory work for the
Conference;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to thc
General Asscmbly at its thirty-third scssion, through the
Economic and Social Council, on the work of thc
Prcparatory Committec during its first session.

105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977

32/141.

Voluntarv Fund for the United Nations
Decade for Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision to cxtend the activities of thc
Voluntary Fund for thc International Women's Year,
establishcd by the Economic and Social Council in its
rcsolution 1850 (LVI) of 16 May 1974, to cover thc
period of the United Nations Decade for Women,
l976 (O 1985,BD
Recalling also its rcsolution 31 /133 of 16 December 197 6 containing the critcria and arrangements for
the managcment of thc Voluntary Fund for thc United
Nations Decadc for Women,
:ii, 0(/icial Record.1· uf tlic General Assemb/y, Thirtieth Scssio11, S11¡,¡,lc111cnt No. 34 (A/10034), p. 100, items 75 and 76.

Gene.-al Assemhly-Thirty-se<"ond Session

158

Taking note of the rcport cf the Sccretary-General on
the management of thc Fund submitted to it at its thirtysecond session, 100
1. Notes with satisfaction thc dccisions t:iken by
the Consultative CommittC'c on the Voluntary Fund for
the Unitcd Nations Decadc for Women at its first two
sessions, hcld in March and Junc 1977; 101
2. E,presses the hove th~1t the projccts which thc
Consultativc Committee has already approved will be
implemented as soon as possible;
3. Urges the spccializl'd agencies and other United
Nations bodics concerned. including the United Nations
Deve!opment Programme. to assist thc regional commi~sions in formulating projects drawn up in connexion
with thc: United Nations Decadc for Women, with a
vicw to submitting thcm to the Consultativc Committee:
4. A/so urges the spccialized agencies and other
United Nations bodies concerned, including the Unitcd
Nations Development Programme, to co-operate closcly
with the Consultative Committee with a view to developing programmes which will contribute to the advancement of women;
5. Requests thc Secre 1ary-Gencral to continue to
submit annual reports on the managemcnt of the Fund
and:
(a)
To incl ude in such reports a summary of the
projects selccted by thc Consultativc Committee for
financing by thc Fund;
( b) To submit periodically to thc General Assembly
progress reports on the execution of such projccts.
105th plenary meeting
16 Decemher 1977

32/142.

Women's participation in the strengthening of international peace and security and in the strug~le a~ainst colonialism, racism, racial fliscrimination, foreign aggression and occupation and ali
forms of foreign domination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its rcsolutions 3519 (XXX), 3520 (XXX)
and 3521 (XXX) of 15 December 1975 and 31/136
of 16 December 1976,
T aking into account that sccure peace and social
progress, thc establishment of the ncw international cconomic order as well as the ful! enjoyment of human
rights and fundamental freedoms requirc the active participation of women, thcir equality and dcvclopmcnt,
Appreciating the contribution of women to the
strengthening of international peace and security and to
the struggle against colonialism, racism, racial discrimination, forcign aggression and occupation and ali
forms of foreign domination,
Emphasizing its grave concern that in sorne regions
of the world colonialism, apartheid, racial discrimination
and aggression continue to exist and territories are still
occupied, which represents a most serious infringement
of the principles of the Charter of thc United Nations
and of human rights of both women and men, and of
the peoples' right to sclf-dctermination,
100 A/32/174.
10 1 Jbid., sect.

H.

Reaf/irming thc objectives of the United Nations
Decade for Womcn. thc Declaration of Mcxico on thc
Equa::ty of Womcn and Thcir Contribution to Dcvelopment and Peacc, 197 5 1º2 and the World Plan of Action
for thc Implementation of the Objectives of the Internati,1nal \Vomcn ·s Y car, ,o::
1.
Takes note of the rcport of thc Secrctary-General
on thc implcmcntation of General Assembly rcsolution
3519 ( XXX) ;'º 4

2. Calls upun all Statcs to continue to make their
con'.ribution to creating favourablc conditions for thc
climination of discrimination against womcn and far
thcir ful! and cqual participatior; in thc social dcvelopment proccss and to cncouragc broad participation of
womcn in thc cffort to strcngthcn intcrnational pcace.
atend thc proccss of international détcntc, curb the
anm racc and takc measurcs for disarmament;
3. Seizcs tlie occasion of thc [nternational AntiApartheid Y car to be obscrvcd in 1978 to invite all
States fully to support women exposed to colonialism,
racism and apartheid in their just struggle against the
racist régimes in southcrn Africa;
4. Invites all Statcs to proclaim, in accordance with
their historical and national traditions and customs, any
dav of the ycar as United Nations D;1y far Women's
Rights and International Peace and to inform the Sccretary-General thereon;
5. Requests thc Commission on thc Status of
Womcn to consider, as a contribution to the preparation
of thc World Confcrencc of the United Nations Decadc
for Women, to be held in 1980, the elaboration of a
draft declaration on thc participation of women in thc
struggle far thc strengthcning of international peacc
and security and against colonialism, racism. racial discrimination, foreign aggression and occupation and ali
forms of foreign domination and to report thereon to
thc Economic and Social Council at its sixty-fourth session;
6. Invites thc Sccretary-General to submit to the
General Asscmblv at its thirty-fourth session a progrcss report on the implcmentation of resolution 3519
(XXX);
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fourth session, under thc ítem "United Nations
Decade for Women: Equality, Dcvelopment and Peace",
a subitem entitled "lmplcmentation of General Assembly resolution 3519 (XXX): rcport of thc SccrctaryGeneral".
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977

:{2/14:l.

Elimination of all forms of religiom1
in toleran<·~

T/1(' General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 1781 (XVII) of 7 Deccmbcr 1962 and 3069 (XXVIII) of 30 November 1973,
as well a., its rcsolution 3267 (XXIX) of 10 December
1rn4_ in which it rcquestcd the Commi~sion on Human
1 •2 Re¡)Orf

Wom,·11'.1

of rhe World Conferencc of the lntemationa/
( United Nations puhlication, Sales No.

}' ear

F.76.IV. I), chap. l.
10:i //,id., chap. 11. sect. A.
,o.t A/32/211.
