TWENTY-SIXTH

YEAR
th
MEETING: 29 DECEMBER 1971

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 622) . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda

. , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . +, , . . . .

I

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
(~1 Letter dated 24 November 1971 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/10396);
(bl Fourth report of the Committee established in pursuance of Security Council
resolution 253 (1968) (S/10229 and Add.1 and 2)
(~1 Interim report of the Committee established in pursuance of Security Council
resolution 253 (1968) (S/10408) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Point of order by the representative of Somalia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . a . . . . I .

12

S/PV. 1622

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Ojjjcial Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SIXTEEN

HUNDRED

AND TWENTY-SECOND

eld in New York on Wednesday,
President:

Mr. I. B. TAYLOR-KAMARA

(Sierra Leone).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Repub!ics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 622)
1. Adoption
2.

of the agenda.

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
(a) Letter dated 24 November 1971 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/10396);
(b) Fourth report of the Committee established in
pursuance
of
Security
Council
resolution
253 (I 968) (S/10229 and Add.1 and 2);
fc) Interim report of the Committee established in
pursuance
of Security
Council
resolution
253 (1968) (S/10408).
Adoption of the agenda

The agenda wasadopted.
Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
L&ter dated 2; November 1971 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/l 0396);
Fourth report of the Committee established in pursuance of Security Council resolution 253 (1968)
(S/10229 and Add.1 and 2);”
Interim report of the Committee established in pursuance of Security Council resolution 253 (1368)

(S/10408)

The
taken
2604th
Arabia,

PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
previously by the Council [1602nd, 1603rd and
meetin&,
I invite the representatives of Saudi
the United Republic of Tanzania, Kenya, Zambia

* Subsequently issued as Official Records of the Security Council,
Twenty-six fh Year, Special Supplement No. 2 and Corrigendum and
Special Supplement No. 2A.

29 December

MEETING
1971, at 10.30 a.m.

and Ghanato participate, without vote, in the discussionof
the presentitem.
2. In accordance with the usual practice of the Council
and in view of the limited number of seatsavailableat the
Council table, I invite the above-mentionedrepresentatives
to take the placesreservedfor .them in the Council chamber
on the understanding that they will be invited to the
Council table when it is their turn to addressthe Council.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. J. M. Baroody
(Saudi Arabia), Mr, S. A, Sulim (United Republic of T’nzania), Mr. K. S. B. Nyircnda (Zanzbia) und Mr. R. M.
Akwei {Ghanaj took the places reserved JLr thew in the
Council chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT: Before calling on the first speaker,I
wish to draw the attention of the Council to a note by the
President of the Security Council which appearsin document S/10470, dated23 December 1971.
4. Mr. FARAII (Somalia): As membersare aware, the
question of Rhodesiawasunder active considerationby the
Security Council in the days preceding the India-Pakistan
conflict, but the question was overshadowedby the crisis
on the Indian subcontinent. My delegationhas askedthe
Council to resumeconsiderationof the Rhodesianquestion
at the present time rather than in January, as some
members had suggested,because we understand from
reports in the pressthat the Commissionto carry out the
test of acceptability of the proposed changesin the
Rhodesian Constitution will be leaving shortly for Rhodesia. These reports have not been denied by the United
Kingdom delegation, and we must presumethat they are
true.
5. Obviously it is important that the Security Council,
which has a direct involvement in the Rhodesianquestion,
should make clear its view of recent developmentsin that
country before the United Kingdom Governmentbeginsto
implement the terms of settlement that have beenworked
out with the Smith rCgime[S/l 0405]. 1
6. My delegation, therefore, has taken the initiative in
drawing up a working paper which we hope can form a
basisfor a resolution expressingthe Council’sstand on a
problem which is one of its gravest concernsand responsibilities. There has now been time for a careful and
detailed examination of the agreement which has been
---

1 See Official Records of the Sect&y Coutzcil, Twenty-sixth
Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1971.

“(b) The repeal of all repressive and discriminatory
legislation, and in particular the Law and Order (Main.
tenance) Act and the Land Apportionment Act,

arrived at between the British Government and the Smith
regime. Close study has confirmed those grave doubts and
fears which my delegation expressed initially about the
nature of the agreement and its possible effect on the
struggle of the African people of Rhodesia for selfdetermination. My delegation had asked several questions
about the implications OF the agreement-questions which
bear on the relationship of the agreement to those
principles which the United Nations and the United
Kingdom Government itself have laid down as being
fundamental to any Rhodesian settlement-and we have
had no reply to those questions.

“(c) The removal of all restrictions on political activity
and the establishment of full democratic freedom and
equality of political rights,
“Recognizing, without prejudice to the primary role of
the administering Power, the special responsibilities of the
United Nations towards the people of Southern Rhodesia
in securing their inalienable rights,
“1. Decides that the teims of these proposals do not
fulfil the conditions necessary to ensure that all the
people of Southern Rhodesia would be able to exercise
freely and equally their right to self-determination;

7. We do not believe that there can be any satisfactory
replies for the simple reason that the agreement fulfils
neither the conditions for a just settlement, demanded by
the United Nations, nor those to which the British
Government had declared itself committed in the so-called
five principles. My delegation, therefore, believes that the
Security Council must express, in strong and unequivocal
terms, its view that the agreement is not merely an
unsatisfactory
compromise but is irrelevant to the just
aspirations of the African people of Southern Rhodesia.

“2. Rejects the ‘proposals for a settlement’ as they do
not recognize the inalienable rights of the majority of the
people of Southern Rhodesia;
“3. Considers that the principle of universal adult
suffrage for the people of Southern Rhodesia without
regard to colour
OK race must be the basis for any
constitutional and political aKra.tIgementS
for the Territo1y;

8. The working paper which my delegation has drawn up
has already been circulated to delegations, but I take this
opportunity to introduce the paper officially so that it may
go into the record. The working paper takes the form of an
informal draft resolution and reads as follows:

“4. Urges the United Kingdom, pursuant to para.
graph 3 above, not to accord any form of recognition to
an independent State of Southern Rhodesia which isnot
based on majority rule or on the will of the majority as
determined by universal adult suffrage;

“The Security Council,
‘Having considered the ‘proposals for a. settlement’
agreed upon by the Government of the United Kingdom
and the rebel regime in Southern Rhodesia on the
political and constitutional future of the Territory,

“5. CWS upon the United Kingdom to ensure that in
any exercise to ascertain the wishes of the people of
Southern Rhodesia as to their political future, IlIe
procedure to be followed will be by secret referendum on
the basis of one man, one vote, without regard to race or
colour OK to educational, property or income consid.
erations;

‘%raving noted that these proposals were not. negotiated
in consultation with the accredited political leaders of the
majority of the people of Southern Rhodesia,
“Taking

note

of

General

Assembly

resolution
“6. Further caZZsupon the United Kingdom to facili.
tate the participation of a United Nations team of
observers during the preparation for, and in the actual
conduct of, any exercise to ascertain the wishes of the
people of Southern Rhodesia as to their political future;

2877 (XXVI),
“Reaffirming Security Council resolution 288 (1970) of
17 November 1970, and in particular its paragraph 2 in
which the Council called upon ‘the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the administering
Power, in the discharge of its responsibility, to take
urgent: and effective measures to bring to an end the
illegal rebellion in Southern Rhodesia and enable the
people to exercise their right to self-determination, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and in
conformity
with the objectives of General Assembly
resolution 15 14 (XV) of 14 December 1960’,

“7. Decides to continue with the imposition of polit.
icd, diplomatic and economic sanctions on Southern
Rhodesia until the rebellious regime in that territory
is
brought to an end;
“8. Requests the Government of the United Kingdom
not to transfer under any circumstances to its colony of
Southern Rhodesia, as at present governed, any of the
powers OK attributes of sovereignty, but to promote the
country’s attainment of independence by a democrntic
system of Government in accordance with the aspirations
of the majority of the population.”

“A4irzdfuZ of the conditions necessary to permit the free
expression of the right to self-determination,
‘Recalling Security Council resolution 202 (1965) of
6 May 196s which endorsed the request of the General
Assembly, addressed to the United Kingdom, to obtain:

9. 1 ask members to consider first the second preambuhr
paragraph of the working paper, which notes that the
proposals were not negotiated in consultation with the

“(a) The release of all political prisoners, detainees and
restrictees,

2

accredited leaders of the majority of the people of
Southern Rhodesia. It is true that the British Foreign
Secretary held interviews with individual African leaders.
But where are the official reports of those interviews‘? The
British Government has refused to release the records of the
representations
made by the detained leaders of the main
African political parties, Mr. Sithole and Mr. Nkomo. We
know,
however, from the memorandum smuggled out by
Mr. Sithole
and the clandestine interview held by
Mr. Nkomo with a journalist from the London newspaper
me Obwver,
accounts of which have appeared in the press
in many countries, that both these leaders have rejected the
agreement, stand by their demand for immediate majority
rule and continue to insist that there should be no
independence before majority rule.

political parties are still proscribed. It is only the white
minority which is free to express its political will.
15. One of the questions I asked at the beginning of the
debate some weeks ago was, whether the police State
apparatus of Southern Rhodesia would continue to be
aimed against the free expression of the political will of the
African majority during the period of the test of acceptability, or whether the United Kingdom Government would
be responsible for establishing conditions for the free
expression of the will of the people. There is no evidence
that the test wiu be held within any framework or under
any conditions other than those provided by an avowedly
racist and oppressive regime.

10. Mr. Nkomo echoed the views of several other African
nationalist leaders in exile when he said that there could be
no
settlement of the Rhodesian problem when it involved
only discussions between two groups of white people, and
that since Africans were not invited to the conference table,
the settlement could not be anything else but a sell-out.

16. 77ze Times of London of 22 December quotes the
Agence France Presse on a report being privately circulated
in Rhodesia, which will be made available to the Pearce
Commission. The report describes official pressure on
African chiefs to accept the agreement and the intimidation
of Africans by policemen where the question of organizing
meetings to discuss the terms of the proposal is concerned.

11. My delegation submits that the validity of the agreement is immediately undermined by the fact that it is not
an agreement between the British Government and the
majority
of the people of Southern Rhodesia, but an
agreement between the British Government and the rebel
white minority r6gime.

17. My delegation is not suggesting that every newspaper
report can be taken as a firm source of proof, but the fact
remains that neither the climate nor the conditions which
might prevent such occurrences have been changed.
18. The last preambular paragraph of the working paper
recognizes the special responsibilities of the United Nations
towards the people of Southern Rhodesia in securing t%eir
inalienable rights. The United Nations has long accepted its
responsibilities towards Southern Rhodesia, as it has done
in the case of other colonial Territories. Those responsibilities stem from the Charter and are spelled out in greater
detail in three resolutions of the General Assembly:
resolution 1514 (XV), on the granting of self-determination
to colonial countries and peoples; resolution 2734 (XXV),
on the strengthening of international security and the
Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations [resolu-

12. The third, fourth, fifth and sixth preambular paragraphs of the working paper all concern positions of
principle which the United Nations has taken with regard to
the situation in Southern Rhodesia. The General Assembly,
for example,
uncompromisingly
rejected the proposed
agreement
during the recently concluded twenty-sixth
Session, on the ground that there should be no independence before majority rule [resolution 2377 (XXVI)J.
Certainly,
the agreement is not in accord with Security
Council
resolution 288 (1970) of November 1970 which
gained the unanimous approval of this Council, including
the approval of the delegation of the United Kingdom. The
agreement
does not have the effect of bringing to an end
the illegal rebellion in Southern Rhodesia, as that resolution
called on the United Kingdom Government to do, and it
does not enable the people of Southern Rhodesia to
exercise
their right to self-determination, in accordance
with
the Charter and in conformity with the objectives of
General Assembly resolution 1.514 (XV).
13.

The United

tion 2625 (XXV)l.

19. The active involvement of the Security Council began,
of course, in 1965, when the administering Power, the
United Kingdom, itself called for international action to
help it put down the rebellion in Southern Rhodesia. The
involvement of the international community in the question entailed considerable economic sacrifice for some
countries. l3ut there was more at stake than helping an
administering Power to maintain order, Various principles
the United Nations is committt?d to upholding were at
stake; the fundamental human rights of five million people
were at stake.

Nations has also made specific commit-

men ts with regard to the establishment of conditions for
the free expression of the will of the people. As far back as
May
1965 this Council, in its resolution 202 (1965),

recognized
that the first step towards the re-establishment
of normal
political conditions would he the release of
political
prisoners and detainees, the repeal of all repressive
and
discriminatory
legislation and the removal of all
resfrictions
on political activity.

20. With those facts in mind we must ask ourselves
whether the terms of settlement have vindicated the
pogiition taken by the international community at the
request of the administering Power and whether they
protect and promote the rights of the majority of the
people of Southern Rhodesia. These questions lead us to
the operative part of the working paper.

These conditions have not been established. Popular
14.
leaders of the people are still detained for political reasons,
or have been removed from the political scene and sent to
prison
on
trumped-up charges, and the main African
3

21. Operative paragraphs 1 and 2 would reject these
propos:lls for their failure to recognirct the inalienablerights
of the majority of !he peopic of Southern Rhodesiaand
their failuie to :~llow all the people to exercisefreely and
fully their right to selt’detcrtnination. It is indeed difficult
to seehow this Council coldtl be expected to endorsean
agreement aiming at anything less than the full. free and
equal participation of a11lhc people of Southern Rhodesia
in the political, social and economic life of the Territory.
These are the inalienable rights which the leadersof the
African majority have claimed, and the lJnited Nations is
pledgedto support that claim.
22. Operative paragraph 3 brings us to the heart of the
matter because it sets forth the basisfor the practical
expression of the principles relevant to the Rhodesian
situation, That basis is universal adult suffrage for the
people of Southern Rhodesiawithout regard to colour and
race. “One man. one vote’: is a principle we accept as a
norm for ourselves.Are we prepared to deny that principle
to others?
23. During the last thirty years more than forty countries
which were formerly dependencies of colonial Powers
seated at this table, including the United Kingdom, have
beenbrought to independenceon the basisof majority rule,
on the basisof “one man, one vote”. One may well ask,
“Why the difference in Rho&sia? ” The answer is, of
course, tha1.in Rhodesia there i:: a ra(..istlninvtity which
insists on maintaining its power and privileges, and the
administering Power has not chosen to exercise to the
fullest either its moral or its practic:ll authority. That is a
path the United Nations must not tbllow.
24. The United Kingdom has renegedevenon its moderate
goal of unimpeded progress towards majority rule. By no
stretch of the imagination can ,the agreementbe said to
provide such progre!:s. My delegation has already commented on the educational and economic hurdlesthat have
been set up on tltc obstacle course to majority rule. I
should like at this point to comment on a purely political
aspect of the proprlqed arrangement which illustrates its
fundamental dislions:sty It is contended that political
parity brtweofl bla& and white will he reachedwhen there
are 50 !il:~:k ,~ntI $0 white Members of l’arliament in
Rhodesia. %I! i’!:.,: 5 not the case. When there are 50
African McLrlbers, only 26 of those will be popularly
elected Memhr~: a:ld !.hrt others will be appointed African
Members. Whenever the term “parity” is used, the fact is
conveniently ignored that almost ha1.r“he African Members
will be nomineeswho tlepcnd on the white minority regime
for tlicir position and must therefore be considered as
under settler control, The so-calledparity is more likely to
represent 26 African votes and 74 white or white-controlled
votes.

study of the complicated factors involved, Dr. Pal1ey
concluded that, assuming scrupulous honesty from
Mr. Smith and his successors-anassumptionthat only the
most nafve would make-the earliest possible date for
majority rule would be the year 2035, and a more likely
dateis 2055,83 years from now.
27. The United Nations cannot renegeon its undertaking,
an undertaking spelled out in various resolutionsof both
the General Assembly and the Security CounciI, to make
every effort to bring about majority rule in Soufhem
Rhodesia,so that all the people of the Territory may have
the opportanity to benefit from its resourcesand to p]a~
their part in determining its future.
28. Operative paragraph4 of the working paperrecognizes
and seeksto uphold the principle of “no independenec
wjthout nlajori ty rule:“. ‘rhis is a c,ardinalprinciple of t]le
political leaders of the Afric;rn majority in Southern
Rhodesia;it is a principle which hasthe unanimous support
of the Organization of African Unity; and it formed the
basisfor the General Assembly resolutionon Rhodesiaof
22 November, which was adopted by a vote of 102 it1
favour [resolution 2769 (XXVI)]. Why is this principleso
important to all who seriously seek a just solution to tile
Rhodesianproblem? It is important becausewithout t&s
principle there is a grave dangerof the entrenchmentof the
political, economic and social disabilitiesof the African
majority. In the view of my delegation,that dangerhas
been brought a step nearer by the proposedagreement
between the British Government and the Smith rkgime.To
grant independenceto Soutbcrn Rhodesiawhile it is still
under the control of the racist minority regimeand while
the African majority is still denied its rightful placein the
life of the country is to play into the handsof the rebels
and to betray the African majority. In a recentletter to Lie
Observa; the distinguished predecessorof the current
permanent representative of the United Kingdom, Lord
Caradon, whose
wide and varied experience of colonial
situationscannnt be questioned,deplored
‘II . . proposalsby which the Smith regime woutd wia
the permanent prize of independenceand freedomof
action by an expenditure of minimum concessions,
aad
by which the Africans, after many decadesstill in the
political wilderness,would, if they ever emergedfrom it,
be saddled for ever with a weighted, divisive and
undemocraticconstitution”.
29. In the view of my delegation, the United Nations
cannot approve of a settlement which would allow the rebel :
regime to remove itself completely from the authority of
the administering Power and legalize its existence,while
there is no safeguardfor the rights of the African majority
beyond the hope that the white minority will changeits
racismovernight. The only safeguardfor the rightsof the
African majority is for that majority to be able to exercise
immediately the political power which is its due. As matters
stand, the political rights of the African majority can be
postponed indefinitely and racial discriminationcan con,
tinue to operate-as it doesin the voting arrangements,
in
the Land Tenure Act, and in other facets of Rhodesian
lirt: ,-lvitit no more effective checks than the recommenda.
tions of ;+commissionwhich the Smith rigime is at liberty

25. But the most fundamenta1defect of the proposal,and
perhaps its most dishonest aspect, lies in its deliberate
postponement of majority ruIe for an indeterminateperiod.
26. The time-scaleof the proposal has been analysedby
Dr. Claire Palley, a professor of politics at QueensUniversity, Belfast, and the analysiswaspubIishedin detail in The
Stlndav Times of 28 November 1971. After an exhaustive
4

c
to reject, and the workings of the court which legalized the
illegal unilateral declaration of independence.

public opinion and, above all, the interests of the majority
in Southern Rhodesia.

30. Operative paragraph 5 calls for the proper determination of the wishes of the majority of the people of
Southern Rhodesia-a
determination which would be in
conformity
with the principles and goals of the Charter and
with resolution 15 14 (XV). Such a determination can be
acltieved only by a referendum carried out on the basis of
the secret ballot and the principle of “one man, one vote”,
It cannot be achieved by the proposed test of acceptability,
which will be carried out by a group of expatriates in any
way that they think fit, and which, as I have already
pointed out, will not be carried out under conditions of
free political expression for both the black and the white
sections of the population. In any case, the proposals whose
acceptability is to be tested fall far short of what justice
requires, of what the African people of’ Southern Rhodesia
reqllire and of what the United Nations requires in the light
of the Charter and of those resolutions that spell out its
principles in detail.

33. This l&t consideration brings me to operative paragraph 7 of the working paper-a most important paragraph
because it states the alternative to the course of action
proposed by the British Government, namely, the continuation of political, diplomatic and economic sanctions until
the rebellious regime is brought to an end.
34. In an earlier statement on the Rhodesian question
/160&h meeting] my delegation called on the United
Kingdom Government to continue to act in concert with
the world community and on the basis of the objectives
established by this Organization; to continue to apply the
force of moral, political and economic pressure agaiIlst the
rebel regime; and to remain committed to the proposition
that the only sure guarantee of justice for the African
people of Southern Rhodesia lies in their being able to
control their destiny through the full exercise of their
political and human rights. My delegation repcats that call
and hopes that other Member States will join with us in our
appeal.

3 1. Operative paragraph 6 is the practical expression of
the preambular paragraph of the working paper, which
ernphasizes the responsibilities and the obligations of the
tl&ed
Nations towards the Territory and people of
Southern Rhodesia. My delegation does not believe that the
Urlited Kingdom can, with propriety, call on the United
Nations for assistance on the Rhodesian question at one
time and ignore the involvement of the United Nations in
this problem when it chooses to do so. Certainly the
presence
and the co-operation of the United Nations
ensured, in many colonial situations, that just and impartial
exercises to ascertain the wishes of former colonial peoples
were carried out, and it seems important to my delegation
tllat the United Nations should establish at this time both
its interest and its duty to participate in any such exercise.

35. Finally, my delegation w&d
note that the yuestion
of the repeal or continuation of sanctions is one that
depends not on the outcome of the arrangements agreed
upon between the British Government and the rebel regime
but on the decision of the Security Council, arrived at aftcl’
due consideration of the best interests of all the people of
Southern Rhodesia.
36. It is in these words and in this spirit that my
delegation trusts that the working paper, which it has had
the privilege of introducing and explaining, will be conddered by all delegations and that as a result of consultations
to be carried on during the remainder of this day it will be
possible for a draft resolution to be officially submitted
tomorrow morning so that the Council can act upon it
before the close of this year and before the Commission
leaves London for Southern Rhodesia.

32. I: had been claimed by the Government of the United
Kingdom
that the proposals we are now discussing are the
best that could be obtained under the circumstances and
are a reflection of the realities of the situation. The realities
which
the Somali Government recognizes were clearly
described
in its policy st.atement on Southern Rhodesia
adopted earlier this month. The Government of the Somali
Democratic
Republic has rejected the so.called settlement
because it does not entail any fundamental retreat from the
provisions
of the racist 1969 Constitution of the rebel
regime; because the cardinal principle of “no independence
before
majority rule” has been ignored; because in the
absence of a referendum for ascertaining the aspirations of
the people of Zimbabwe, the so-called acceptability test
would
be meaningless; because the implementation of the
terms of settlement, bad as they are, is left to the goodwill
of the Smith rBgime, which has already demonstrated its
disregard for human rights and international public opinion;
because the terms of the settlement were concluded behind
the backs of the African population and their legitimate
representatives;
and finally, because the British Government,
in accommodating the rebel rigirne, is seeking a
face-saving
means of lifting sanctions and conferring legal
independence
on the minority regime, in defiance of the
IJnj ted Nations, the Orgsnization of African Unity, world

37. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (intcrpretatio~z
fi’om Spanish): The delegation of Argentina has followed
with the greatest interest the consideration of item 2 (n) of
our agenda for today, which is directly related to a serious
problem that the United Nations has faced for some time.
38. The question of Southern Rhodesia has been the
subject of prolonged and intense debates in this Council
and in the General Assembly which have been reflected in
resolutions intended to find a way for a just outcome for
the people of Zimbabwe, within the framework of the
statute of our 0rg:mization. This very Council decided to
establish a Committee to supervise the implementation of
the sanctions imposed on the illegal regime of Ian Smith,
being confident that that procedure would lead to a correct
solution.
39. Argentina has at all times supported action by the
Organization in this field. We have endeavoured to COoperate within the margin of our possibilities in this joint
endeavour. Our endeavour ever since we have had a seat on
the Council has been marked by the desire to obtain
5

P

44. That is the approach of one of the parties to this
agreement.But at the sametime we must wonder what
motives might have influenced the illegal rdgime of Ian
Smith to accept such a solution, bearing in mind its
obstinate attitude of so many years. It is fitting for us to
ask ourselveswhether Salisbury,in giving its assent,hasnot
started from the premisethat the agreementcanin no way,
for an extremely long period of time, harm its own
well-known and reprehensiblepoints of view, We should
also wonder whether the interest of the illegal regimedoes
not consistin giving itself a veneer of respectability before
the concert of nations, while in practice it remains
entrenchedin its well-known position. Further-and hereI
would refer to action already taken by this Council-we
must, finally, wonder whether perhapsthe sanctionshave
somehowstarted to bear fruit.

unanimous and unbroken support of the guidelines adopted
on the basis of the San Francisco Charter. But, together
with that duty of the Council and of the United Nations,
there is another primary obligation which has been reiterated in the General Assembly and that is, the responsibility
of the United Kingdom over Southern Rhodesia. That
responsibility
was particularly emphasized in Security
Council resolution 288 (1970) which, in its fourth preambular paragraph, states:
‘Renjfirnzing the primary responsibility of the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland to enable the people of Southern
Rhodesia to achieve self-determination and independence,
and in particular their responsibility of bringing the illegal
declaration of independence to an end.”
40. We therefore acknowledged and welcomed the attitude of the United Kingdom in informing this Council
about the talks held in Salisbury. We believe that the
burden of that difficult responsibility has been an important motive in inducing that Government to seek a
negotiated solution which would allow it to settle the
difficult and reprehensiblesituation created by the illegal
rdgimeof Ian Smith.

45. Reports on the subject are fragmentary and conflicting. Some consider they have real negative effect;
others, on the contrary, feel they not only have not caused
the regimeany damage,but have acted asspursto new local
industries. If the sanctionsare really a sourceof difficulty
to the illegal Salisbury regime, it is our duty to persistin
standingfirm on that courseuntil terms arereachedw&lb
are absolutely fair to the overwhelmingAfrican majority in
SouthernRhodesia.

41. We believe that action should be assessed
in the light
of the thinking expressed by Sir Coin Crowe in his
statement on 25 November last. The representativeof the
United Kingdom saidat .&at time:
“We are therefore for the present and perhapsfor the
next few months confronted only with a hypothesis. If
the evidence-which will be fully, freely and fairly
collected-is to the effect that the Rhodesianpeopleasa
whole do not accept these proposals,then they will have
been made in vain. If it is found that they do accept
them, then we shall be able to press ahead with the
appropriate fegislation and with making them work. It is
only at that stage and when the British Government is
fully satisfied that the Rhodesian Government has enacted the necessary legislation and taken the necessary
stepsto give effect to the proposalsthat the final section
of the proposals,which envisagesthe conferring of legal
independenceupon Rhodesiaand the lifting of sanctions,
Wil
come into effect.” [1602FZdmeeting,para. 54.J
42. Thus it is clear that the United Kingdom has taken the
decision not to impose a settlement on the population of
Southern Rhodesia.For that wish to be duly fulfilled, we
believe that when the time comes, special consideration
should be given to the machinery which has been called
“the test of acceptability”, and to which the representative
of the United Kingdom referred in his statement.

46. In regard to some parts of the agreement, my
delegation wishes at this stagein the debate to place on
record two fundamental objections. The systemof voting
and rapresentation, so carefully elaboratedin this instrument, is, as we understand it, a reason for justified
criticisms. We believe in the equality of man, whatever his
creed, race or economic or socialcondition. That equality
must be reflected with pristine clarity in any systemwhich
aspiresto an integral and equal representation.All must
have the sameright to vote.
47. Secondly, the clausesof the agreementdescribedto us
by Sir Colin Crowe make us loseour senseof time. Decades
would have to elapsebefore the allegoricalship mentioned
by the United Kingdom representative reached a safe
harbour.
48. Having said that, we would also wishto add that we
can well understand the obstaclesencountered by the
British Government and the good intentions which have
inspiredit.
49. I shouldlike to end by pointing out that for Argentina
a country’s independence is strengthenedwhen, among
other factors, the entire population enjoys the samerights.
We hope that time will come in the near future for the
people of Zimbabwe and for all the inhabftantsof Southern
Rhodesia,in a peaceful fashion. In this connexion it is
fitting to recall the contents of the fifth principle formulated by the Government of the United Kingdom [see
S/.ZO40.5/ in relation to a possiblesolution of the Rhodesianproblem, when it declaresthat any basisproposed
for independenceof the Territory must be acceptableto
the people of Rhodesiaas a whole. In brief, independence
must be our final objective, but in seekingit we mustnever
forget the conditions of equality which its real achievement
implies.

43. But what is more, in that sLame
statementfrom which I
have already quoted, Sir Colin Crowe assuredus that until
the assentof the people of Zimbabwe is obtained, freely
and with proof,
“ . . . the situation will remain exactly asit is now. No
legislation will be required or will be undertaken by my
Government and all existing measureswill remain in
force.” [Ibid., paru. S.S.]
6

50. MY delegation has listened most carefully to the
statement just made by the representative of Somalia,
Ambassador Farah. We shall, with the same interest and
attention, study the working document he has submitted,
and in due course shall state Our views on it.
5 1. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
lfiQl?slRtion from Russian): Mr. President, the USSR delegation would like to draw the attention of the members of
the SecllritY Council to document S/10470 of 23 December. We are referring to your note concerning the impleIllentatiOn of the Security Council decision to invite two
outstanding
Southern
Rhodesian
political
leaders,
Mr. Nkomo and Mr. Sithole, to the meetings of the Council.
52. At the beginning of this month, on 2 December
11604th lneeting], the Security Council adopted a correct
and sensible decision to invite the leaders of the ZAPU and
ZANU parties, Mr. Nkomo and Mr. Sithole, to its meetings
So that the Council mould hear them and obtain from them
information
concerning the true state of affairs in Southern
Wodesia
and their appraisal of the Home-Smith agreements.
53. At the last Council meeting on the question of
Southern Rhodesia /I 609th meeting], the USSR delegation
raised the issue of the need for speedier compliance with
that Council decision and requested information on what
Irnd been done by the administering Power, the United
Kingdom, to implement that Council decision,
54. AS shown by the note by the President of the Security
~OUIIC~~, the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom did not reply to the President of the Council until
ttlree weeks after the Council had adopted the decision. In
iris official letter on the question, his official statement was,
in essence, that the United Kingdom Government would
11ot take any steps whatsoever to ensure compliance with
tllat decision of the Security Council,

should be informed where these two leaders are-one in
detention and the other in prison.
57. In debates in the Third Committee of the General
Assembly and in other Committees the representatives of
the United Kingdom and of a number of other countries
make a great fuss about respect for human rights, but here
we have a flagrant violation of elementary human rights, a
continuation of a policy of colonialist terror and violence.
The Council is entitled to turn its attention to this question
Once again, since in reply to the Council’s decision the
United Kingdom Government, in its letter, or more
Precisely in the letter of the United Kingdom representative, testifies to its own powerlessness. It states in its
official reply that it is not in a position to require the
Southern Rhodesian authorities to allow the African leaders
in question to come to New York. What is this? Is it
political powerlessness on the part of the Government of a
country which has always hitherto borne full responsibility
for the situation and events in Southern Rhodesia, or is it a
premeditated attempt by the British Tory Government to
agree to the illegal actions of the Southern Rhodesian
racists, a reluctance to oppose those actions and, in essence,
an attempt to cover up and justify the lawless acts
committed by the racists? If that is the case, the Security
Council must take note of the colonialist and racist
solidarity which exists between British ruling circles and the
Southern Rhodesian racists who have illegally seized power
in Southern Rhodesia and are pursuing a bloody terrorist
colonial policy with regard to the 5 million people of
Zimbabwe and the Southern Rhodesian political leaders
who are defending the interests of the people of Zimbabwe.

55. To justify that refusal, an exceedingly strange argurrlent
is used in the letter. It is, in fact, not even an
argument
but a p’urely formal answer and sounds like a
mockery
of the Security Council decision. The letter states
tIlat Mr, Nkomo is in detention and Mr. Sithole is serving a
E>rison sentence in Southern Rhodesia. But that is not an
argument;
it is simply a statement of the well-known
scandalous
facts concerning the lawlessness and racist and
terrorist
arbitrariness
with regard to those two political
leaders of the Zimbabwe people.

58. At the international political level, the issue is precisely this: either the United Kingdom Government is
making common cause with the Southern Rhodesian racists
and is at one with them on this question, in which case, its
actions are understandable and their political colouration is
fuIly obvious. If this is so, then it is naked, undisguised
colonialism and imperialism. Or the United Kingdom
Government is able and ready to take even one small
realistic step in the interests of the people of Zimbabwe,
who are being oppressed by the racists, in which case it is
obliged to make it possible for the two Southern Rhodesian
political leaders to come to New York to take part in the
Council’s debate on the question of Southern Rhodesia.
The Council is entitled to put the question precisely in
those terms to the United Kingdom Government and to
insist, in this connexion, on the adoption of measures and
on a definite answer by the United Kingdom representative
in the Council.

56.
However,
the Security Council did not ask the
Government
of the United Kingdom where Messrs. Nkomo
rind SithOle are at present-in prison or free. The Council
requested
the United Kingdom Government to take the
rlecessary
steps to ensure compliance with its decision so
thnt Mr. NkomO and Mr. Sithole would be able to Come to
New York, t0 the Headquarters of the United Nations, and
s~ tliat the Security Council would be able to hear those
two
well-known
political leaders of Southern Rhodesia at
its meetings. In this case, it was the Council’s decision
wllicll
was the essence of the request to the United
Kingdom
Government; it was not a request that the Council

59. In connexion with the consideration of the question
of Southern Rhodesia and in the interests of a fuller and
more comprehensive examination of the question, the
Security Council can also not ignore the following circumstance. It was proposed to the United Kingdom representative in a very clear fashion that he should submit to the
Security Council the documents which the United Kingdom
Foreign Secretary, Sir Alec Douglas-Home, had received
from the leaders of the African parties and political groups
in Southern Rhodesia and, in particular, the documents
which. he had received for Mr. Nkomo and Mr. Sithole, as
the two best-known and most prominent political leaders of

the Zimbabwe people. However, at a meeting of the
Council the representative of the United Kingdom stated
that his Government could not, submit those documents to
the Council in view of their confidential nature [see 1605th
meeting, para. 1161. That i.; ;i:l unsatisfactory explanation.
Such an argument on the part of the United Kingdom
representative is more than strange. It seems that the
Security Council can only be given such documents and
information as suit the United Kingdom and the leader of
the southern African racists, Mr. Smith, that is to say,
information which has passed through British censorship.
As members of the Council well remember, the United
Kingdom decided in very grea,t haste, one might say in
burning haste, to submit to the Council information on the
Home-Smith agreement and the text of that agreement. As
to the views of the representatives of the Zimbabwe people
on the matter, those views are confidential and secret and
the Security Council is not entitled to know them. How can
the Security Council, confronted with such restrictive
conditions, seriously discuss the situation in Southern
Rhodesia and the substance of the Home-Smith agreement? Because of all this we have reason to believe that the
interests of the United Kingdom and the Smith racist
regime in Southern Rhodesia are one and the same, that
they coincide. Smith is keeping .those who are fighting to
liberate the Zimbabwe people in detention and in prison
while the United Kingdom Government, as the a?ministering Power, is not only not taking any steps to enable
those leaders of the Zimbabwe people to express to the
Security Council their point of view, their assessment of .the
situation in Southern Rhodesia and their assessment of the
substance of the Home-Smith deal, but, what is more, it is
refusing to submit to the Security Council even the written
memoranda from those leaders. Can the Security Council
accept such a situation? If the Council is serious in its
approach to the discussion of this question, it cannot
reconcile itself .to such a situation. This is firstly a kind of
conspiracy of silence on the part of the colonialists and
racists who are withholding from the Security Council
documents which might throw light on the substance of the
Home-Smith agreement; secondly, it is a kind of protection
of the policy of terror which is being pursued by the
Southern Rhodesian racists against those fighting for the
freedom of the Zimbabwe people.
60. The Security Council must ensure that these political
leaders of the Zimbabwe people have an opportunity to
speak here, in the Security Council. It must also ensure that
the documents which were submitted by those two political
leaders to the United Kingdom Foreign Secretary, Home,
come to light and are submitted to the Security Council,
too. Only in such a way can the Security Council have a full
and comprehensive picture of the events taking place in
Southern Rhod.esia and also a-good idea of the substance of
the Home-Smith agreement. Otherwise, the Council will be
considering this question only in the light of the one-sided
British information, agreed upon with the leader of the
southern African racists, Ian Smith.

of Mr. Nkomo and Mr. Sithole to Security
ings.

Councit

meet-

62. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic):
In less than
three days our term on the ,%XUrity
Council
Wil
COlTle
to
an end and our seat as a non-permanent member of the
Security Council-more
truly as an invited guest to this
horseshoe table-will
be vacated and we shall cease witnessing its sad festivities.
63. In such hours, when men under the weight of titnc
look at human problems such as the problem we are
considering, they do so in prospect and retrospect.
Thus,
looking at the problem of Southern Rhodesia as the year
comes to an end and the memories of the twenty-sixlth
session of the General Assembly are still living with us, we
cannot but underline the fact that the problem with which
we are dealing within the context of the twenty-sixth
session of the General Assembly is not and has not been an
isolated one. Specifically I am referring to the agreemen;
that was concluded between the United Kingdom Govern.
ment and the rebellious rigime of Ian Smith. I say so
because, if we look back at the twenty-sixth
session of the
General Assembly, we shall notice that, besides that fact,
there have been other similar grave facts of which, 1 ant
sure, all the members of this Collncil are aware. Besides the
agreement with Ian Smith, there was the Ming of the
embargo on the import of chrome from Southern Rhodesia
by the United States Government. There was the occupation of three Arab islands in the Arabian peninsttla bb
force. Finally, while the Middle East was debated in thi
General Assembly the United States Government gave to its
Slst State, Israel, over $500 million and a further number
of Skyhawk offensive aircraft, in order to perpetuate the
Israeli occupation of Arab lands.
64. There were other great tragedies to which I do 1101
want to refer but of which I am sure all the members are
fully aware. In a word--and here I am speaking within tn~
limited experience and departing for a little while frorl+ the
routine statements to which we are used--the twenty-sisth
session of the General Assembly has been charactcrized bv
the defiance of right and of the principles of the Charter 6
an unprecedented manner while the General Assembly was
meeting. Is that accidental, I ask? Certainly not; but sure;\
the question remains there for future historians, polit&l
analysts and students of political science to answer.
65. The working paper submitted to us during this
meeting by the representative of Somalia, who so far has
distinguished his career and himself by a very gcnuinc arrd
d.edicated stand for the rights of people and the right of
self-determination,
states a position which every fairminded delegationcannot fail to recognize, that is, that the
so-called proposals for settlement do not realiy settle
anything. They relegate the inalienablerights of the people
of Zimbabwe to a remote, uncertain, unknown future.
They consolidatethe usurpation of power by the minority,
thereby assertingagain the rule of force.over the rute of
law. They subject the practices of racial discrimination and
suppressionof the political and economic rights of the
majority to study and consideration instead of elirninatittg
them outright. They introduce fictitious guararltces enabling the minority r&imc to acquire international rccog-

61. In conclusion, the Soviet delegation considers it
necessary to stress that the Security Council must demand
that the United Kingdom respect the decisions of the
Council and comply with them with regard to the invitation
8

nition without committing itself in any way to respect the
will of the overwhelming majority. The administering
Power discharges its responsibility in the worst conceivable
manner and drops the whole case as if the lives, the rights
and the future of 4 million people were not at stake. In our
view, General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) has adequately set the conditions and the modalities for the
transfer of power to the legitimate representatives of the
coloni~al people. That is why my delegation fully supports
and will look most carefully into the working paper that
has been presented tn IJS ly the representative of Somalia,
Mr. Farah.

many speeches made during the twenty-sixth session of the
General Assembly in the Third Committee, in the Sixth
Committee, in the Fourth Committee, in the Special
Political Committee and in the First Committee? There
remain nothing but words, and those principles which were
worked out during the quarter of a century of the life of
this world Organization are buried under the heaps of
speechesand bundles of resolutions.
69. Unfortunately, we speak from bitter and sad experience. History-I should like to tell my African brothers-is
not made by adopting resolutions regretting or condemning
&is or that. History is made-as has been proved to us-by a
people’s legitimate use of force to obtain and enjoy its
inalienable rights. Thus, throughout history, rights have
always been taken and ilever given. These are some
thoughts perhaps for the cynic to doubt, for the statesman
to ponder and for the thinker, in the silence of his
meditation, to confess the truth of.

66. While on this subject, Mr. President, I cannot but
express the very great concern of my delegation at the
contents of your note to the Security Council [S/10470/.
In your own words,
the Security Council decided that
Mr. Nkomn and Mr. Sithole should “be invited to appear
before the Council to state their views of the proposals on
Southern Rhodesia”. It is a welKnown fact that both
Mr. Nkomo and Mr. Sifhole are well-recognized leaders of a
well-known liberation movement concerned with a problem
of which the General Assembly, the Security Council, the
committee
on Dccolonizationz and other bodies of the
United Nations have been seized for over a decade now.
The answer given to us by the representative of the United
Kingdom states in its conclusion:

70. Mr. SEVILLA SACASA (Nicaragua) (interpretation
from Spanish):We all know that in Africa a territory exists
where a people live who are anxious and waiting to discover
what their future will be. Security Council resolution
288 (1970), adopted on I7 November 1970, is quite
specific with respect to what is desired and sought in the
light of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and the purposes of General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960.

“In these circumstances my Government regrets that, as
I said during our consultations before you announced
that there were no objections to the issuance of the
invitation, it is not in a position to require the Rhodesian
authorities to allow either Mr. Nkomo or the Reverend
Sithole to come to New York.“[Ibid.]

71. The people of Southern Rhodesia have the right to
express themselves with complete freedom in accordance
with the sacred principle of self-determination, which we
mtist observe. We hope that the honourable Government of
the United Kingdom will continue to analyse every facet of
this question and, with the nobility of character and ability
which are characteristic of it, will contribute to a solution
which will meet the principles of the Charter and the will of
the people of Southern Rhodesia. Let us not lose hope.

It is indeed very strange that the IJnited Kingdom CovernInent can conclude an agreement with Ian Smith and his
r+=bellious rggime-an agreement which has the force to last
for 20 or 30 years, or God knows how many years to come,
before the people can obtain their rights-while declaring at
the same time its inability to require two leaders of the
liberation
movement to come to address the Council in
accordance with a decision taken by the Council. Thus we
witness
once more that it is the rule of force, not the rule
of law, that prevails. The will of the Security Council is
defeated by one of its permanent members entrusted with
the speciaI task of world peace-and human rights and their
itnplementation
go hand in hand with world peace.

72. The calendar of our activities shows us that today is
29 December. A few hours before the expiration of my
term of office as the representative of Nicaragua on the
Security Council, I am duty-bound to state that I shall leave
carrying with me the most gratifying memories of each and
every representative. It has been a signal honour for me to
have participated for two years in the work of this
respected forum for peace and international security. I shall
always esteem as a highly valued treasure the experience I
have acquired working with the members of the Council.

6 7. As the curtain falls on a departing year, tragedies such
as the one with which we are dealing are perpetuated. We
Jlave nothing to do except to vote on a draft resolution
emanating
from a working paper-a fitting epitaph indeed
for another Palestine, another South Africa, another Southern Rhodesia, ail the legacy of the same Power, the United
Kingdom.
68. And what about the sacred and inalienable rights of
self-determination
and the rule of the majority, and all the
principles
enshrined in the Charter and alluded tb in the

73. During July 1970 and then last October it was my
privilege to preside over the Security Council. I repeat to
members my gratitude for the friendly assistance which all
generously offered me. It wasmy fate to have had to deal
with important and delicate matters, and I am certain that I
acted conscientiously and with a sense of responsibility in
keeping with the confidence which the General Assembly
placed in my country when it elected us a non-permanent
member of the Security Council.

2 Special Committee on the Situation with regardto the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independenceto
Colonial
Countries and Peoples.

74. I shall not forget the distinction which was offered me
when I became a member and Chairman of the Special
Mission which went to Senegal last July, a duty which we
9

performed in the honoured company of illustrious ambassadors with whom I shared the sacred duties entrusted to
us. Our report was useful to the Council in its immediate
adoption of the resolution of which we are aware on the
case which motivated our trip to Africa and.our activities in
Senegal.
75. I recall that in my first statement in the Council
almost two years ago I said:
“If power without justice is tyranny, while justice
without power is a mockery, in the wise words of Pascal,
let us make every effort to combine power with justice,
so that power will always be just and justice will never
cease to be powerful.” /1527th meeting, para. 94.1
76. In bidding the Council farewell, I reiterate these ideas,
confident as I am in the destiny of our Organization.
Strength and justice, justice and strength-this
is the key to
our success. I shall see the members of the Council again
when I visit this august chamber from time to time with the
intention of attentively following your debates. From the
observer seats, I shall be with the Council in thought, and
wish the members continued success in their endeavours.

obligation to restore constitutional government in Southern
Rhodesia and to ensure that the African majority can enjoy
all political and economic rights. We have consistently
supported the principle of majority rule in Southern
Rhodesia on the basis of universal suffrage. However, we do
not subscribe to the view that the United Kingdom should
use force as the means to bring down the Smith regime and
establish majority rule. We have stated on a number of
occasions that, all peaceful means should be fully explored
for the settlement of the problem.
84. In the light of those considerations, although we take
due note of the efforts made by the Government of the
United Kingdom to achieve a settlement, we are obliged to
make a few comments on the “Proposals for a Settlement”
[see S/10405/ which were worked out at Salisbury in the
negotiation between Sir Alec Douglas-Home and Mr. Ian
Smith.
85. In our view, the proposals for a settlement do not
seem to guarantee majority rule in the near future. Even the
process of achieving parity of representation in the House
of Assembly seems to be unduly long and complicated. I
shall not elaborate this point further because so much has
already been said about it in the Council.

77. I congratulate the representative of Sierra Leone on
his intense work as President. ‘This must be a source of well
earned satisfaction to him, and of course to his noble
country and his esteemed Government.

86. We are also not very clear about how to guarantee the
faithful implementation of the agreement through all its
stages, once it passed the test of acceptability. On the
surface at least, it would appear that the only guarantee is
the good faith of the authotities now headed by Mr. Smith
or a similar successor regime. We might assume that
Mr, Smith and any successor will make every effort to
implement the agreement. But, speaking frankIy, I wouId
feel much more assured if I were told that throughout the
whole process of implementation, from the beginning to
the end objective of majority rule, the United Kingdom
would continuously and positively participate in an appropriate way in the process of implementation.

78. I reiterate my tribute to U Thant, our beloved apostle
of peace, who for many reasons deserves the undying
gratitude of the world. He knows how much we esteem
him.
79. In advance, I should like to congratulate Ambassador
Farah, the representative of Somalia, because he will
become President of the Council on 1 January 1972. I am
certain of the success which our friend Ambassador Farah
will achieve, with his recognized experience in international
affairs.

87. I should like to mention another element which is
essential for the effective implementation of these proposals once they are accepted-essential because the best
hope for achieving majority rule in the foreseeable future
depends on it. I am referring to the development programme agreed upon by Sir Alec and Mr. Smith, the
purpose of which is “to increase significantly educational
and job opportunities for Africans”. In the view of my
delegation, it would be absolutely necessary to establish
effective supervision over the implementation of each
project so as to ensure the eff:ctive use of the funds made
available for the purpose of providing better economic
opportunities for Africans. This would have the effect of
accelerating the pace of attaining the economic qualiflcations necessary for Africans to be registered on the so-called
African higher roll. It would be most advisable that the
Government of the United Kingdom directly associate
itself, in an appropriate way, in the carrying out of the
development programme.

80. As members well know, Panama will replace Nicaragua
as a non-permanent member-the
Republic of Panama, a
nation which we all so dearly love, where, as though by a
miracle, the oceans are joined, and where north and south
meet as members of a family on the continent of hope.
81. It has been said, and it is true, that parting is sweet
sorrow-but
this occasion is made somewhat less sorrowful
for me since I carry with me the very happiest memories of
all your personalities and the friendship you have so
generously proferred me. Distinguished Ambassadors, I
wish you a new year filled with the greatest personal
successes, for yourselves and for your distinguished families, and for the nations which you so worthily represent.
X2. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Nicaragua for the nice things he said about my country and
about me.

88. There is some merit in the argument that although the
situation in Southern Rhodesia has continued to deteriorate, this new set of proposals, if implemented in full, might
contribute to the improvement of the status of Africans

83. Mr. NAKAGAWA
(Japan): In the opinion of my
delegation, the Government of the United Kingdom, as the
administering Power, has the primary responsibility and
10

and heJp to halt, if not actu,ally reverse, the deteriorating
trend.
89. It has been rightly pointed out that the key issue is the
test of acceptability, because, whatever merit or demerit
these proposals may have, it is up to the majority of the
Rhodesian people itself to decide whether it would prefer
the change in the present situation foreseen in the
Proposals. It is vitally important, therefore, that the
method employed be such as to persuade the Rhodesian
People, as well as the international community, that the
test is conducted in a just and fair manner and that the
genuine will of the African population is ascertained. In this
connexion very pertinent points were raised by the representative of Somalia in his statement to the Council on
2 December this year (I 604th meeting].
90. In order to ensure that the test is conducted in a just
and fair manner, that all views are expressed freely and that
the population
is fully informed of the details of the
propos&
my delegation would like to lend its strong
support to the suggestion that arrangements be made for
the participation of United Nations observers in the process
of carrying out the test of acceptability.
9 1. The PRESIDENT: I invite the representative of Saudi
Arabia to take a place at the Council table and to make a
statement.
92. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Mr. President, you
may recall that I inscribed my name on the list of speakers
on this intractable problem. I have followed the debates
and
listened very carefully to my colleagues who are
non-permanent
members of the Council, as also to the
permanent
members, beside those who, like me, wish to
address themselvesto the item.
93. I have felt discouraged throughout, but have not given
UP hope that the United Kingdom may be able to do
something
in the future if it stilI exercises a semblance of
power over Southern Rhodesia. We find that the United
Kingdom
is trying to normalize its relationship with
Southern
Rhodesia on the basis of proposals which were
explained
by our British colleague, Sir Colin Crowe. These
proposals envisage limited and indeed very slow political
development.
It would take from two to three decades to
accomplish
that development. The consequence would be
that the white minority would still govern the black bulk of
the population.

would remain paramount and permanent. On the other
hand, it is quite understandable that should the whites
relinquish their grip on the Government the blacks would
by their sheer number gain complete control.
96. I do not believe that the fear of the whites of
Southern Rhodesia can be dissipated now or in the
foreseeable future, and any political formula that would
not. leave them in the ascendancy would be rejected. As
long as Western Europe supports the United Kingdom and,
both directly and indirectly, the Government of Southern
Rhodesia, there is no hope for the partial-let alone the
complete-political
emancipation of the blacks.
97. As I mentioned in my last intervention on this item
[160&h meeting], economic sanctidns will not work out. I
am not going to adduce the reasons I have already given,
which are contained in the Council’s records. Subduing the
present white regime in Soutlzern Rhodesia is impossible as
long as our African brothers, on the one hand, and the
major Powers-I repeat, the major Powers-on the other, are
in no position to use force.
98. Protracted negotiations for the just settlement of the
question have so far failed. The whites of Southern
Rhodesia are not prepared to allow themselves to be
submerged by the blacks, nor do the blacks feel free so long
as they do not enjoy the amenities of representative
government in their native land. As I see it, the only
possible solution for the time being seems to be for the
United Kingdom to come up with fair, if not adequately
just, proposals as a basis for new negotiations with the Ian
Smith regime a
99. The working paper presented by my colleague and
friend Ambassador Abby Farah of Somalia constitutes a
rejection of the British proposal, but at the same time it
contains some constructive suggestions for future negotiations. Criticism in the Council of so-called British imperialist circles without any effective action is of no avail. I
should like to address that particular comment to my good
friend Ambassador Malik of the Soviet Union. What do we
gain from calling certain people “imperialist circles”? What
can you do about it? You do not want a confrontation
with the West, let us face it. Do we just give our African
brothers a lollipop, sugar candy?
100. Furthermore, under the present circumstances I do
not believe that the white regime in Southern Rhodesia
would allow black leaders to come to New York to testify
before the Council. Let us face these facts. Assuming that
some leaders surreptitiously found their way to New York
and appeared before you gentlemen and in unmistakable
terms decried Ian Smith’s regime, do you believe it would
be safe for them to return to Southern Rhodesia? Or will
some representatives of the Council perhaps encourage
them to form the nucleus of a government in exile
-somewhere in Africa or on some other continent, perhaps
here in New York City? Such governments in exile have in
my humble experience proven academic in the past-unless,
of course, resort to force changed the internal situation in
the country from which they had fled, as happened in the
Second World War.

94. I recently read some statistics according to w.hich the
black population of Southern Rhodesia is increasing at the
rate of approximately a quarter million annually. The white
population
amounts to only 250,000 at present. Before the
end of the century the black population may conceivably
number 8 to 10 million, if not more, while the whites of
Southern
Rhodesia can hardly attain a half million in the
same period.
95.
Let us face the facts. Between 5 and 8 per cent of the
population-the
whites-would still dominate 8 to 10 milIion blacks in less than three decades. The United Kingdom
wishes to gain time so as to adjust itself to the demands of
Mr. Ian Smith and his successors,whose political power

11

101. I find it useful .to recall that I made a suggestion, in
my last intervention, which should merit some consideration on the part of the Government of the United
Kingdom. The blacks are sagregated from the whites in
Southern Rhodesia. I would like to ask a question of my
good friend Sir Colin Crowe in this connexion. Pending the
negotiation of a final and just solution that will ensure fully
democratic and representative government in the whole of
Southern Rhodesia, would he consider broaching this
question with his own Government: Would the British
Government be willing to try to convince the Ian Smith
government that the blacks should gain autonomy by
political arrangements that are characteristic of cantonments or full-fledged municipalities?
102. The United Kingdom is still considered the administering Power. Is it the administering Power or is it not? If it
is still the administering Power, it should assert itself.
How? It is not for me to :?lggest. After all, they have Iong
experience in colonial affairs. It is true that, as Sir Colin
Crewe has told us, Southern Rhodesia is a peculiar case.
But for every peculiar case there should be a special
solution. Otherwise, Mr. President and members of the
Council, you are wasting your time-and we cannot afford
to waste more time in such fruitless debates, especially
since we are on the threshold of 1972, which should mark
the turning of a new leaf in the history of the United
Nations.
103. What is the alternative? Do you want to give the
Africans a sort of opium-which
they will not want to take
any more-by telling them that we will bring petitioners
from abroad and establish a government in exile? The only
ones who can exercise power are the major Powers in the
Council. Some of them may not be in a position to do so;
but how is it that some can wage war ten thousand miles
from their own soil when their interests are at stake? Why
do not some of the Powers look upon this case not in the
light of special national interests, but in the light of the
purposes and principles of the Charter? You gentlemen,
especially the five permanent members of the Council, you
are the ones who can tip the scale either to the side of
justice or to the side of expediency.

pains to explain to all of us, and it appears to be the
majority view that there should be an adjournment to
tomorrow afternoon, so as to allow adequate time to study
it. I incline to agree to an adjournment to tomorrow
afternoon, in the hope that the permanent members, after
having full consultations, will be able to concur in whatever
draft may emerge, as I hope many non-permanent members
will also do.
Point of order by the representative of Somalia
105. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative
Somalia on a point of order.

of

106. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): Before you adjourn our
meeting, Mr. President, I wish to speak on an entirely
different subject, relating to the request made by the
Organization of African Unity tiat the Security Council
should perhaps consider holding a series of meetings in
Africa in 1972. The General Assembly, by a resolution
adopted on 20 December 1971 by a vote of 113 in favour
and only 2 against [resolution 2863(XXVI)],
invited the
Security Council to consider the request of the Organization of African Unity concerning the holding of such
meetings in an African capital. I was wondering whether the
time might not be opportune, Mr. President, for you to
begin consultations with delegations here, in the hope that
we could perhaps reach some agreement as to how we
should proceed on the matter. 1 understand that this matter
has not yet been officially transmitted to the Security
Council by the relevant Department of the Secretariat
which deals with the transmission of General Assembly
resolutions; but because of the time factor, I think it is
important that we take up this matter, and I hope it will be
possible to conclude it in fact during your term as
President.
107. The PRESIDENT: As far as 1 know, the resolution
the representative of Somalia has referred to has not yet
officially reached me. I shall take steps as suggested by the
representative of Somalia. In this connexion, may I add
that I have received an application from the delegation of
Guinea which I have already passed on to the Secretariat so
that copies may be made and circulated to members.3

104. The PRESIDENT: There are no further names on the
list of speakers. Members may wish to accept the suggestion
of the representative of Somalia for an adjournment until
tomorrow morning. He has submitted to the Council a
working paper which he has taken considerable time and

Tlze meeting rose at 1 pm.

3 Subsequently

12

circulated

as document

S/10477.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du mondc entier. Informez-vous
aup&
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
B : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Gem&e.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
e&in
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas,
Seccidn de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

NACIONES

UNIDAS

en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dir&se

in other

currencies)

y ca~as distria: Naciones

82285-October

1974-2,050
