S/2020/1274

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 December 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 22 December 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Ms. Deborah Lyons, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan; Ambassador Dian Triansyah
Djani, Permanent Representative of Indonesia, in his capacity as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011); and
Ms. Shkula Zadran, Afghan Youth Representative to the United Nations, as well as
the statements delivered by the representatives of Belgium, China, the Dominican
Republic, Estonia, France, Germany, Indonesia, the Niger, the Russian Federation,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa, Tunisia, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Viet Nam,
in connection with the video-teleconference on “The situation in Afghanistan”,
convened on Thursday, 17 December 2020. A statement was also delivered by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these
briefings and statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Jerry Matthews Matjila
President of the Security Council

20-17880 (E) 080121 270121

*2017880*

S/2020/1274

Annex I
Statement by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan, Ms. Deborah Lyons
I am addressing the Security Council as we close on one of the most momentous
years that Afghans have endured.
Since my most recent briefing (see S/2020/891, annex I), the Islamic Republic
of Afghanistan and the Taliban have made incremental but genuine progress in their
peace talks. On 2 December, the two parties announced that they had agreed to
the rules and procedures for negotiations. The two sides then formed a working
committee to discuss the agenda and both parties presented to each other an initial
list of topics for discussion. Those developments are an early but positive sign that
both sides are willing and able to compromise when needed.
Earlier this week, following 93 days of uninterrupted talks, the parties agreed
to take a 20-day recess. We hope that will allow both sides to regroup, consult
internally and externally and resume negotiating with a renewed commitment. The
parties have committed indeed to return to the negotiating table on 5 January, after
that short three-week break.
Along with members of our humanitarian, development and human rights
teams, I visited Doha twice recently to meet with both Afghan parties, and, of course,
members of the diplomatic community. I should note that on each trip to Doha I have
met with the women negotiators to seek their views on how we can help. And the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) also retains a team on
the ground in Doha, working alongside the parties and members of the international
community to support the process.
I want to thank the State of Qatar for hosting the talks, as well as the United
States and members of the host country support group — Germany, Indonesia,
Norway and Uzbekistan — for their diplomatic efforts. I look forward to further
constructive engagement by the larger international community in the various
existing and developing formats to further enlarge the support for the peace process.
Any sustainable peace will need to be owned by Afghanistan’s very diverse
society. That is possible only if the process is inclusive from the outset, with
meaningful participation by all constituencies, including women, young people,
minorities, victims of conflict and religious leaders.
The recent formation of the High Council for National Reconciliation will
allow the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan to establish a broad base for consolidating
its negotiating positions. The Taliban, too, must expand and broaden its consultations
with Afghan constituencies.
One of the key constituencies for both negotiating parties must be Afghanistan’s
young people. Two thirds of Afghan citizens are below the age of 25. That is also
the most educated generation of young people in Afghanistan’s history. Young
Afghans have clear views on the future of their country, and we must do all we can
to amplify their voices. And so I am delighted that Shkula Zadran, Afghanistan’s
Youth Representative, will join us here today. I look forward to hearing her thoughts
once again.
I am proud to say that, through our youth-focused local peace initiatives,
which are conducted throughout Afghanistan, UNAMA has provided a platform
for the young people of Afghanistan to have their say on peace. Most recently, in
the rural province of Faryab, young participants issued their own declaration, with
strong recommendations specifying an immediate ceasefire; setting out the role of
2/39

20-17880

S/2020/1274

Islam under Afghanistan’s Constitution; identifying the all-important Sustainable
Development Goals; and emphasizing the need for transitional justice. Those are the
young people of Afghanistan. Their voices deserve to be heard.
As we all know, cooperation throughout the region, Central and South Asia,
will be essential to an enduring peace. Increased trade and connectivity will build
the foundation for peace and regional prosperity. It is therefore important to support
regional efforts, and I particularly want to take note today of the regional efforts
on counter-narcotics and transnational organized crime — two serious threats to
the countries in the region — and I want to highlight that those topics were part of
a major discussion that I participated in with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime regional Steering Committee meeting, which is made up of Central
Asia, Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan. Addressing those issues and the incredibly
destructive impact on Afghanistan and the people of the region will be essential to
promoting peace and stability in Afghanistan and in the region.
During my recent visits to Iran and Pakistan and my participation in events
hosted by the Government of Turkmenistan and the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia, I am happy to say that I noted an
increasing commitment among regional players to making peace in Afghanistan a
reality, as well as the critical recognition that regional stability does indeed require
an enduring peace in Afghanistan.
Regrettably, the unrelenting violence remains a serious obstacle to peace and
a threat to the region. I will admit that we are still compiling this year’s data, but I
would like to mention a few provisional statistics on the impact of the violence.
In October and November, improvised explosive devices caused over 60 per
cent more civilian casualties than in the same period last year. In the third quarter
of 2020, child casualties rose 25 per cent over the previous three months, while
attacks against schools in the same period increased fourfold. In the first 11 months
of 2020, targeted killings by anti-Government elements rose by nearly 40 per cent
as compared with the same period in 2019. It is no surprise, then, that the Global
Peace Index 2020 ranked Afghanistan as the least peaceful country in the world for
the second year in a row.
Such a ranking illustrates the psychological impact of the violence: as
one Afghan official told me recently, “the sense and perception of violence and
insecurity is higher now than ever”. Let me say that again: the sense and perception
of violence and insecurity is higher now than ever. Since the start of November
alone, two separate rocket attacks in Kabul, the attack on Kabul University, the
increased conflict in Helmand and Kandahar and a brutal bombing in Bamyan — to
name but a few incidents — have strained the public’s already fragile confidence and
exacerbated the fears around the emergence of new terrorist threats. I ask all countries
to continue to pressure all parties to the conflict to bring about a sustained reduction
in violence, and I expect that will be a top priority when the negotiations resume.
The ongoing security transition, coupled with the emerging reality of
international troop withdrawals, have obviously added to the anxieties felt by the
Afghan population. I anticipate that in the coming months that larger security
transition will become a central topic in the dialogue among Afghan officials,
countries of the region and the larger international community.
And yet at the 2020 Afghanistan Conference in Geneva the international
community came together to reaffirm its financial support for Afghanistan.
The conference exceeded expectations, and I congratulate our co-hosts, the
Governments of Afghanistan and Finland, for making it a success. The generous

20-178803/39

S/2020/1274

pledges — remarkable in today’s fiscal environment — will enable Afghanistan to
pursue its core development priorities and deliver vital services to its people.
But it is not just about the money. It was also about a very important dialogue.
UNAMA convened three high-level meetings: one on regional cooperation; another
on the peace-security-development-humanitarian nexus — that complex Rubik’s
cube that we will have to understand as we move forward to face the challenges of
the coming year; and, of course, a high-level meeting in which Afghan private-sector
actors participated to discuss how they can move towards self-reliance in the new
peace environment. Those meetings brought a diverse range of voices to Geneva to
address the challenges of governance and economic growth.
But above all, the conference sent a clear signal to the people of Afghanistan:
the international community still stands with them. Adopted by no less than
66 countries, the conference communiqué reaffirmed support for “a unified,
sovereign, peaceful and democratic Afghanistan”; it was signed by 66 countries.
And then, three days later, that message was echoed at the session of the Council
of Foreign Ministers of the Organization for Islamic Cooperation in the Niger,
where member States committed to “helping Afghanistan achieve a lasting peace,
sustainable development, rehabilitation and reconstruction.” They also once again
called for a ceasefire.
It is important to note, however, that donors have made clear that their generous
financial assistance comes with conditions. A short year from now, we will all gather
again — the Government and the donors — at a Senior Officials Meeting to assess
the progress made against those pledges. Sustaining the current level of funding will
require tangible improvements on peace, governance, the rule of law, certainly anticorruption, and human rights, especially women’s rights.
There is no time to lose, and it is not business as usual. And so we have
begun to work with the Afghan Government and development partners to galvanize
the reform priorities. Together we can ensure — and will ensure — that donors’
assistance serves its intended purpose: building strong and accountable institutions
and delivering services to the Afghan people.
And yet, unfortunately, Afghanistan remains one of the most dangerous places
in the world for journalists — and I want to take note of that today. Six have lost their
lives this year alone — six journalists — with scant accountability for perpetrators.
Eleven human rights defenders have also lost their lives, and many more have been
injured or continue to be threatened.
Such attacks are completely unjustifiable. They risk chilling the public
discourse just when dialogue is most needed. So I call upon the Government to
take effective measures to protect the media and to investigate and prosecute violent
crimes against journalists. The Taliban, too, must refrain from attacking civilian
targets. The Taliban must recognize the critical role that the media and civil society
fulfil in a modern-day Afghanistan, as a vital member of the global community.
Like much of the world, Afghanistan is now facing a new wave of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Already the effects of the pandemic have been
devastating, and we are moving into a winter second phase that is likely to be much
more damaging than the spring first wave. Hunger and malnutrition have spiked, and
livelihoods have been eroded, with women and children particularly affected.
And so, in coordination with the Government and civil society, the larger
United Nations family has scaled up to ensure that work is getting done to respond
to the pandemic. Just this week, the President and I launched, and will be heading
up, an emergency SWAT team to oversee the process on a daily basis. I encourage
4/39

20-17880

S/2020/1274

Member States to fund humanitarian activities generously. We must ensure that
Afghanistan’s most vulnerable people are not left further behind in the pandemic.
As the year draws to a close, we must acknowledge that 2020 has brought
a profound shift for this country — with the United States-Taliban agreement, the
United States-Afghan Government joint declaration, three months of intra-Afghan
negotiations, the renewal of pledges from international donors and a revitalized
regional cooperation effort — all under a new Government in Kabul.
By all accounts, this was a big year. But a bigger year lies ahead — a full
security transition, peace negotiations, which must and will advance, the health and
socioeconomic challenges resulting from COVID-19, the ongoing commitment of the
international donors and the expected results of even more regional cooperation —
all of that with whatever political and societal changes accompany it.
Clearly Afghanistan will continue to move forward in this new year, but
equally it will continue to need the dedicated support of the Council.
I look forward to our discussion.

20-178805/39

S/2020/1274

Annex II
Statement by the Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), Dian Triansyah Djani
I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the work of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011), which I am pleased to do in accordance with paragraph 56 of
resolution 2255 (2015).
I am also thankful to Special Representative of the Secretary-General Deborah
Lyons and the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for
their support for the work of the 1988 Sanctions Committee and their continual
assistance to the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team.
As this will be my last briefing to the Council as the Chair of the Committee,
please also allow me to also thank my 1988 Committee colleagues, the Monitoring
Team and the Secretariat for their excellent cooperation as well as their invaluable
support over the past two years.
As the Council is aware, the 1988 Committee’s main goal is to deter the Taliban
from continuing to support Al-Qaida and its affiliates and to deter Taliban attacks
against the Government of Afghanistan through the use of its sanction measures.
Concurrently, the 1988 sanctions regime is intended to support the peace and
reconciliation process, including by enabling listed persons to engage in peace and
reconciliation negotiations.
The ongoing Afghanistan peace negotiations in Doha are encouraging, and
it is our hope that the work of the 1988 Committee can support the creation of an
environment conducive to a lasting and sustainable peace in Afghanistan.
That said, let me once again refer to resolution 2513 (2020), in which the Council
expresses its readiness to consider the start of the review of the status of designations
of individuals, groups, undertakings and entities on the 1988 list in order to support
the peace process, and at the same time urges all States to conduct without any delay
national reviews, mindful that Taliban action, or the lack thereof, to further reduce
violence, make sustained efforts to advance intra-Afghan negotiations and otherwise
cease to engage in or support activities that threaten the peace, stability and security
of Afghanistan will affect the review.
In its latest report (see S/2020/415), of May 2020, the Monitoring Team noted
that relations between the Taliban, especially the Haqqani Network, and Al-Qaida
remain close. It was further stressed that the challenge would be to secure the
counter-terrorism gains to which the Taliban have committed, which would require
them to deny groups, including Al-Qaida, the use of Afghan territory as a source of
international threats. The report also stated that the Taliban’s ongoing profiting from
narcotics would continue to present a challenge, as the scale of the problem remained
huge and had been further complicated by a boom in methamphetamine production
and trafficking.
The report also noted that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan
(ISIL-K) had suffered severe setbacks in 2019 and early 2020, being nearly
eradicated from its main Afghan base in Nangarhar province in November 2019, and
then incurring further losses in its new refuge in neighbouring Kunar in early 2020.
The report acknowledged that Taliban forces played a significant part in inflicting
those defeats, as did the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces and their
international allies. While such reporting by the Monitoring Team is encouraging,
attacks throughout the year in Afghanistan’s provinces, as well as the most recent
6/39

20-17880

S/2020/1274

heinous attacks reportedly perpetrated by ISIL-K against Kabul University and
the Green Zone, are stark reminders that ISIL-K remains a threat to the peace and
stability of Afghanistan and beyond.
On top of such vicious terrorist attacks, the people of Afghanistan must also
still endure an active and deadly military campaign by the Taliban, as highlighted by
the recent fighting in Helmand province.
The overall effectiveness of the 1988 sanctions measures relies heavily on
close coordination with the Government of Afghanistan and Member States of the
region. In early 2020, the Monitoring Team travelled to Afghanistan and the region
to meet with its interlocutors on the ground to discuss the implementation of 1988
sanction measures, as well as to conduct threat assessments. Similarly, and in view
of the coronavirus disease travel restrictions, the Monitoring Team virtually met
with the National Security Advisor of Afghanistan, Mr. Hamdullah Mohib, this
past November to discuss matters pertinent to the 1988 Committee mandate. The
Committee looks forward to a continuous fruitful and cooperative relationship with
the Government of Afghanistan.
Please allow me once again to reiterate that the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) and its Monitoring Team seek to
support the peace process in Afghanistan. Similarly, the Committee looks forward
to continued close engagement with UNAMA and other relevant stakeholders in
2021 to ensure the full implementation of the 1988 sanctions regime along with
supporting the ongoing Afghanistan peace negotiations.

20-178807/39

S/2020/1274

Annex III
Statement by the Afghan Youth Representative to the United Nations,
Shkula Zadran
I was born during the civil war in Kabul. My family left Afghanistan, and I
became a child refugee in Pakistan. I still remember the fear and agony I endured
there and the awkward feeling of not belonging. I still remember the day when my
family decided to come back to Afghanistan and the joy and hope in my parents’ eyes.
In 2001, no one would think that a young girl would represent Afghan youth
on an international platform. But today, after almost two decades, that child refugee
is honoured to be the Afghan Youth Representative to the United Nations. For
that precious opportunity, I am grateful to the Afghans for Progressive Thinking
organization and the German Embassy in Kabul.
While it is very difficult to represent a generation born and raised in violence
and conflict, I am delighted to speak on behalf of Afghan youth. I represent a
generation who have been the main victim of this proxy war. We are being killed,
and our dreams are being buried every day.
I speak on behalf of Rahed, Suhaila, Hedayat and their friends who were
brutally killed during the terror attack on Kabul University. I speak on behalf of
students killed in the Kawser and Mowod education centres. I have met their families;
their pain is beyond our imagination. I promised them that I will be their voice, and
I am fulfilling my promise.
I speak on behalf of Elyas Da’ee, Yama Siawash and Malali Maiwand, the
prominent young journalists who were killed by terrorists. I speak on behalf of human
rights activist Natasha Khalil and the 25-year old mother who was shot dead along
with her newborn baby girl in the maternity ward of the Médecins sans Frontières
hospital. I speak on behalf of the young people in the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces who have sacrificed their lives to fight terrorism and protect our
motherland and the rest of the world.
I speak on behalf of those gems who were supposed to become our future
leaders but were killed. Terrorists are afraid of Afghan young people, and that is
why they are targeting our educational institutions. They know that the educated
and informed generations will never allow terrorism and extremism to grow in their
country. As the Afghan Youth Representative, my message is obvious and clear to
the terrorists and their supporters: You tried to bury us, you did not know that we
were seeds.
The daily slaughter of young Afghans — and all Afghans — must end now.
That is why an absolute majority of Afghan young people support the end of the war
through peace negotiations.
I should warn, though, that peace should not only mean the end of violence.
Yes, we demand an immediate ceasefire, but for us peace means more than just
a ceasefire. Peace should not threaten further development and the gains we have
made over the past two decades, such as increasing access to education from several
hundred thousand children to several million; improving health-care systems;
building a vibrant civil society and creating leadership space for the brave women
of Afghanistan.
It is important to implement the provisions of resolution 2250 (2015) on
youth, peace and security. Young people should be part of the peace and securitybuilding process. Unfortunately, we have been excluded since the beginning of the
peace negotiations.
8/39

20-17880

S/2020/1274

Afghan young people want transparent peace negotiations, which should pave
the way for a dignified and permanent peace. We desire an Afghanistan in which
every Afghan lives with dignity and in peace and in which women are respected
and receive equal opportunities to be educated and to contribute to all sectors of
society. We want Afghan children to spend their childhood with joy and not live
with the sounds of bullets and bombs. We want Afghan minorities to be treated with
respect so that they can practice their culture and religious beliefs freely. We want a
corruption-free Afghanistan in which the rule of law is maintained.
We do not want a political settlement that will serve the interests of others.
We have already paid a huge price for the proxy wars. If this peace process goes
wrong, Afghans will be the victims again. Since the day the peace agreement was
signed between the Taliban and the United States, instead of a reduction in violence,
tension and conflict have increased. Civilians are being killed; young people are
being targeted. We are disappointed, and we cannot trust the peace negotiations
this way.
If the Taliban really want a peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan, why are
they destroying schools, bridges, roads and public infrastructure? If they really want
peace, why have they not stepped back even an inch on their demands and conditions,
while the Afghan Government has released more than 5,000 dangerous prisoners to
prove their goodwill for peace?
My message to the Taliban is that they must not destroy their motherland for
the sake of other’s interests. Their children will have a bright and dignified future
only in their own country, and not as refugees.
It is not just the Taliban who are responsible for a variety of war crimes.
The international forces, who have come to Afghanistan with a mandate and aim of
maintaining law and order and protecting human rights and democracy, have also
committed miserable war crimes. Instead of targeting the safe havens and training
centres of terrorists in Pakistan, they have bombarded our villages and homes and
have killed innocent civilians.
I hope that we all dare to accept our mistakes, apologize to the people of
Afghanistan and direct all our efforts to avoiding such inhumane crimes in future.
To bring peace and maintain stability and order in Afghanistan, peace
negotiations must be held in Afghanistan among the Afghans, and no foreigner
should be allowed to interfere. The Taliban must agree to a countrywide immediate
ceasefire to gain the trust of the Afghan people in the ongoing peace process.
Our achievements must not be compromised. Our demands and red lines
should be respected. Afghan young people do not want to go back to the dark era of
the 1990s.
All parties involved in Afghanistan’s war must apologize to the people of
Afghanistan for war crimes. To protect the rights of victims of war, individuals
involved in war crimes must be prosecuted.
The peace process must strengthen unity among Afghans and should not pave
the way for hatred and another civil war. The republic and democracy must not
be compromised.
The international community must keep supporting the brave Afghan security
forces in fighting international terrorists, drug dealers and mafias. The peace process
should result in an end to corruption, narcotics and unemployment in Afghanistan. It
must lead to the disarmament of all political parties and warlords inside Afghanistan.

20-178809/39

S/2020/1274

We have built our country by our blood, and throughout that struggle we have
learned and achieved a lot. We are eager to serve our motherland. That is the duty of
all Afghan young people.
I call upon all leaders across the world to trust the Afghan young people. We
are resilient and eager to live in peace and harmony. We are the patriotic generation
that they will never regret investing in and counting on.

10/39

20-17880

S/2020/1274

Annex IV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Belgium to
the United Nations, Karen Van Vlierberge
[Original: French]
First of all, I would like to thank the various speakers for their statements.
As participants in the Doha peace talks take a pause following the conclusion
of a code of conduct, we call on all parties to take stock of their actions, present and
future. Afghanistan is at a crossroads, and we sincerely hope that those talks will
bring peace to the Afghan people. In that process, the gains of the past two decades
must be preserved and even strengthened, especially with regard to human rights and
the strengthening of the position of women. The protection of children must also be
at the heart of the negotiations, including confidence-building measures such as the
release of detained children and rehabilitation programmes for children associated
with armed groups. We urge all parties to ensure the meaningful participation of
women in the negotiations. We must listen to the voices of young people, such as
Ms. Zadran.
Violence must be reduced. We therefore call on all parties, in particular the
Taliban, to take immediate steps towards a permanent and comprehensive ceasefire,
which is all the more necessary in view of the current pandemic.
In that regard, I reiterate our position on sanctions against the Taliban: the
delisting of members from the regime under resolution 1988 (2011) is not automatic
but depends on the conditions set out in resolution 2513 (2020), including progress in
intra-Afghan negotiations and a reduction in violence. The brutality of the Taliban’s
attacks is in stark contrast to their stated commitment to peace and their participation
in peace talks.
We condemn the high level of violence against civilians, in particular children.
In the third quarter of 2020, the United Nations counted among the victims 773
children — 773 in three months. We also specifically condemn the recent attacks
against human rights defenders and journalists and call for the perpetrators to be
swiftly brought to justice. In that regard, I stress the importance of combating
impunity and the need for transitional justice in Afghanistan. We welcome the work
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan on victim-centred justice.
As this is our last statement on Afghanistan within the framework of our
current mandate in the Security Council, I would like to assure the people and the
Government of Afghanistan of Belgium’s firm commitment as they take the path
towards peace and prosperity. At the United Nations, in the European Union (EU)
and at the bilateral level, they can count on our support. Over the past five years,
we have contributed more than $60 million to the Afghan national army trust fund
and, this year, $8.4 million have been earmarked for the acquisition of vaccines
and medical equipment for the Afghan army. As the EU made clear at the Geneva
Conference last month, our future support will depend on progress in the areas of
transparency, good governance, anti-corruption and gender equality.
Lastly, I would like to thank the Permanent Missions of Germany and Indonesia,
in particular their experts Friedrich Schröder and Kartika Handaruningrum, for
their exemplary work as co-penholders over the past two years. We wish the best to
their successors, Norway and Estonia.

20-1788011/39

S/2020/1274

Annex V
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Geng Shuang
[Original: Chinese]
I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons and Ambassador
Djani for their briefings. I commend the work carried out under their leadership by
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011). I also listened
carefully to the statement of the Afghan Youth Representative. And I welcome the
Permanent Representatives of Afghanistan and Iran at today’s meeting.
The peace and reconciliation process in Afghanistan has entered a period that
is critical to its future. China welcomes the first intra-Afghan talks, launched in
Doha on 12 September, and congratulates the two parties on reaching an agreement
a few days ago on the rules and procedures for the negotiations. The next stage
of negotiations will include substantive discussions with a high level of difficulty.
Both sides need to demonstrate more political wisdom and determination, and the
international community needs to pay more attention and increase its input.
History has repeatedly shown that the Afghan issue can be resolved only
through political means, and that the use of force will only plunge the country
deeper into war. We hope that the two sides will consolidate the positive momentum,
maintain a constructive attitude and persevere in the talks, while striving to achieve
results in support of peace. We also hope that they will find an effective political
solution to the Afghan issue at an early date.
China believes that Afghan’s future arrangements should be broadly
representative and inclusive so that all Afghan parties, ethnic groups and religious
sects can participate equally and share State power. The international community
should fully respect the will of the Afghan people and ensure that the negotiation
process is Afghan-led and Afghan-owned. No external force should impose its will
on others or seek personal gain.
The Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) has played
an important role in promoting peace and stability in Afghanistan. China supports
the Committee’s continued performance of its duties, as authorized by the Security
Council, to help the peace and reconciliation process in Afghanistan. China supports
the renewal of the mandate of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team pursuant to resolutions 1526 (2004) and 2253 (2015), concerning ISIL (Da’esh),
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities.
Currently, the level of violence in Afghanistan remains relentless. According
to the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/1182), the number of violent incidents
in October this year was the highest since 2007. The international community should
continue to support the Afghan security forces in strengthening capacity-building,
combating terrorism, protecting civilians and improving the security situation. China
calls on all parties in Afghanistan to respond positively to the Secretary-General’s
call for a global ceasefire and immediately stop the hostilities and violence. Given
the current security situation, the withdrawal of foreign troops from Afghanistan
should be orderly and responsible in order to avoid leaving a security vacuum to the
detriment of the national interests of Afghanistan and the countries of the region.
Just now in her briefing, the Afghan Youth Representative condemned the
various criminal acts committed by foreign troops in Afghanistan, which reflected
the aspirations of the Afghan people and public opinion. All such crimes should
12/39

20-17880

S/2020/1274

be thoroughly investigated. All perpetrators should be brought to justice. The
international community should ensure justice for the Afghan people.
Development is the key to resolving all issues. Achieving sustainable peace
in Afghanistan will not be possible without economic and social development.
At the recent Geneva Conference on Afghanistan, President Ghani emphasized
the importance of regional cooperation and connectivity to the development of
Afghanistan. The international community should help the country to implement the
Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework for 2021-2025 and resolve
a number of difficult issues, such as poverty, refugees and drugs. We should support
Afghanistan in participating in regional cooperation and connectivity in order to
help the country exploit its geographical advantage, eradicate poverty and achieve
stability and prosperity as soon as possible.
China has always actively supported Afghanistan’s economic and social
development and helped the country to strengthen its connectivity and economic and
trade cooperation with countries of the region under the Belt and Road Initiative. On
9 December, China, Afghanistan and the five Central Asian countries held a videoteleconference at the level of deputy foreign ministers on trade and connectivity
to build a new platform for regional cooperation, which will help to promote
regional economic recovery and maintain regional stability and prosperity. China
appreciates UNAMA’s initiative to establish a working group with the participation
of the Embassies of six neighbouring countries in Afghanistan so as to promote
regional cooperation and connectivity. That is in line with China’s thinking. We look
forward to concrete results from the working group and are ready to work with all
parties concerned to contribute to Afghanistan’s socioeconomic development and
the improvement of people’s livelihoods.
Just now the Afghan Youth Representative talked about the situation and
aspirations of young people in Afghanistan. China attaches great importance to
the unique position of young people in Afghanistan, expresses its sympathy for
their suffering and calls for them to play a greater role in the country’s peace and
reconciliation process and in its economic and social development. China has long
supported the development of Afghan young people, helping them to tackle health,
education, employment and other issues. In recent years, with the assistance of
China, a number of projects were successively launched, such as the Afghanistan
Technical Vocational Institute and Kabul University’s integrated teaching complex.
Since 2017, nearly 200 Afghan children with congenital heart disease have received
treatment in China and been provided with a full set of post-operative rehabilitation
examinations, which received wide acclaim in Afghan society. Since the outbreak of
the coronavirus disease, China has provided Afghanistan with several shipments of
anti-pandemic supplies and dispatched a medical expert team. We will continue to
provide more help to enable the Afghan people, including young people, to finally
overcome the virus.
China will continue to support, and act as a mediator and facilitator of, the
Afghan peace and reconciliation process. We are willing to provide a platform for
intra-Afghan dialogue and continue to work closely with all parties through the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization-Afghanistan Contact Group and the ChinaAfghanistan-Pakistan trilateral dialogue. We will continue to support UNAMA’s
important role in the country and work with the international community to
make greater contributions to Afghanistan’s peace, reconciliation, development
and prosperity.

20-1788013/39

S/2020/1274

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Dominican Republic to
the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
I would like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons,
Ambassador Djani, in his capacity as Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011), and Ms. Shkula Zadran for their insights on the situation
in Afghanistan. Now that the people of Afghanistan have suffered two decades of
conflict, there is a consensus that the time for peace has come. Afghanistan has
taken significant steps in that regard, and we would like to reiterate our support for
the intra-Afghan peace talks. Dialogue remains the best way to end this conflict.
The way forward is clearly to enhance partnerships within Afghanistan,
strengthen institutions and build trust among the population. An inclusive Afghanled process, involving all sectors of society, will achieve a sustainable solution that
includes guarantees for the protection and promotion of the human rights of all
Afghans. Afghan women, including young women and those living in rural areas, must
therefore be fully, equally and meaningfully engaged in all stages and dimensions of
the peace process, while we reiterate that their rights are non-negotiable.
We also agree with the concerns and calls expressed by Ms. Zadran. Young
Afghans, including young women, feel excluded from the ongoing intra-Afghan
peace talks despite the fact that 63 per cent of the population is under 25 years old.
They not only represent the majority of the population but are a key element in a
peaceful Afghanistan. Young peacebuilders and activists can no longer be ignored.
However, at the same time, civilians, particularly women, young people and children,
are paying the highest price in the conflict.
As we witness the deadliest attack in more than a decade in Bamiyan, one of
the places that had remained relatively safe in Afghanistan, it strikes at the heart of
Afghan hopes, which are already slipping away. The Dominican Republic strongly
condemns that and other recent attacks on civilians. They are unacceptable. The
perpetrators must be held accountable.
We call on all parties to put an immediate end to such suffering and to
establish a humanitarian ceasefire. The parties must respect their obligations under
international humanitarian law and in the context of human rights, such as facilitating
safe and unhindered access for humanitarian assistance to civilians in dire need.
The drafting of the Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework
for 2021-2025 is a significant step forward by the Government of Afghanistan to
address State-building and peacebuilding. The 2020 Afghanistan Conference, held
a few weeks ago, demonstrated the international community’s political support
for the country when pledges reached $3 billion for Afghanistan’s development by
2021, including the implementation of the Framework, and a total of $12 billion over
four years.
Against that background, let me emphasize that child protection deserves
greater attention. We call on the Government of Afghanistan to fully implement its
2011 action plan and 2014 road map to end and prevent the recruitment and use of
children, strengthen the legal and operational framework for child protection and
adopt a standardized benchmark for the reintegration of children.
We also urge the Taliban to respect the commitments made under the
29 February agreement, in particular by severing ties with international terrorist

14/39

20-17880

S/2020/1274

organizations, including Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, and
to prevent the country from again becoming a haven for international terrorism.
The economic and humanitarian situation in Afghanistan is currently at a
critical juncture. Some 18.4 million people will need humanitarian assistance by
2021. That astonishing number is directly related to the high levels of ongoing
conflict, severe drought and other natural disasters and the additional tension caused
by the impact of the coronavirus disease. In that regard, Afghanistan continues to
face alarming levels of food insecurity. According to the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2020/1182), 16.9 million people are at crisis and emergency levels — one
of the highest figures in the world.
Cooperation and coordination among the Government of Afghanistan, the
United Nations, in particular the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
and civil society are essential in order to improve that grave humanitarian situation.
We remain optimistic that the funding gap in the 2020 humanitarian response plan
can be addressed.
It is our duty, as part of the international community, to fulfil the hopes of the
new chapter that awaits the Afghan people. This is a time for collective efforts and
increased commitment.

20-1788015/39

S/2020/1274

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I would like to begin by thanking Special Representative Lyons and Ambassador
Dian Triansyah Djani, as well as the Afghan Youth Representative to the United
Nations, Ms. Shkula Zadran, for their comprehensive and insightful briefings.
We commend the actions of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), particularly in promoting the role of women on the peace
and security agenda, supporting transitional justice and the inclusion of civil society
and protecting human rights under the challenging conditions in the country.
Estonia strongly supports such efforts, and we are always open to explore ways in
which the United Nations and the Security Council can further assist UNAMA in
its endeavours.
Speaking of challenging conditions, the security situation in Afghanistan
remains deeply concerning. Armed clashes have increased by 38 per cent this year,
and the conflict continues to take a heavy toll on the civilian population. There is
absolutely no excuse for the deliberate attacks on health-care personnel, journalists
and educational facilities. It is essential that such crimes be investigated and that the
perpetrators be held accountable.
We deplore the attacks on children in the strongest terms. UNAMA should
have the necessary capacity to monitor and report on violations and abuses against
children and should assist efforts to strengthen the protection of children. We
share the Secretary-General’s view that it is critically important for all parties to
the conflict to recognize and address the harm caused, while incorporating victimcentred justice into the peace process.
Another challenge is the humanitarian situation, with the number of people
in need of humanitarian assistance having doubled to a record 18.4 million. Such
circumstances are unprecedented. It is vital to support UNAMA’s efforts to
improve the accessibility of humanitarian aid for people in dire need. At the donors’
conference held on 23 and 24 November, the international community, including
Estonia, renewed its commitment to accompanying Afghanistan on its path towards
peace, security, stability, democracy, prosperity and self-reliance.
A global ceasefire has repeatedly been called for by the entire international
community, the Secretary-General and the Council. Today we once again reiterate
our call for an immediate, permanent and comprehensive ceasefire to save the
Afghan people from more meaningless suffering and create a conducive environment
for sustainable peace in the country, as well as stability in the region. All parties,
particularly the Taliban, must fulfil their commitments and work towards ending
violence to save civilian lives.
This year is momentous for Afghanistan. There is a historic opportunity for
peace and stability for all Afghans after decades of immense human suffering. We
welcome the agreement between the parties on the code of conduct, which unlocked
the discussion of the agenda items of the peace negotiations. It is essential that the
parties resume the peace talks without delay on 5 January, after their mutually
agreed three-week break. Human rights, particularly those of women and children,
are inalienable and should be the highest priority on the agenda of the negotiations.
The gains achieved over the past 19 years and guaranteed by the Afghan Constitution
should be preserved and further strengthened during the course of the talks.
I would like to recall the sanctions regime on the Taliban and the mandate of the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team supporting the Security Council
16/39

20-17880

S/2020/1274

Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011). Estonia is convinced that
the review of the measures and the sanctions lists should remain conditions-based
and be strict in its consideration of whether substantial progress has been made by
the Taliban to reduce violence.
We are glad that the President of Afghanistan recently issued a decree
establishing a high council for women, intended to support women’s empowerment
and the implementation of the Government’s commitments regarding women’s rights.
We strongly support the participation of various political and social constituencies
in the peace negotiations, especially the meaningful participation of women, youth
and minorities. Protecting and promoting their rights throughout the peace process
is imperative.
I have a question for the Afghan Youth Representative, Ms. Zadran. Two thirds
of the population of Afghanistan is aged 24 years or under, and they are taking on the
considerable task of rebuilding their country. In what ways are the youth represented
in the peace negotiations, and are their voices being heard?
A sustainable political settlement is the only viable solution. We call on all
sides to act swiftly, advance the peace process and fulfil their commitments to end
violence and establish peace. We remain hopeful that the Government of Afghanistan
and the Taliban can build on the current momentum.
Finally, we would like to thank Germany and Indonesia for their diligent and
professional work as Council co-penholders on the Afghanistan file. Together with
Norway, we hope to be their worthy successors.

20-1788017/39

S/2020/1274

Annex VIII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations, Nathalie Broadhurst Estival
[Original: English and French]
First of all, I would like to thank today’s speakers for their briefings and their
work to promote peace in Afghanistan, starting, of course, with Deborah Lyons at
the head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. I commend her
and thank her for her efforts. I would also like to pay tribute to the remarkable work
and unfailing commitment of Indonesia as Chair of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, and the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), and as co-penholders alongside Germany. They
have done a truly outstanding job. Finally, I thank Ms. Shkula Zadran, whose
powerful testimony, courage and determination are a sign of hope on Afghanistan’s
long road to peace.
I would like to share three points today.
First of all, I wish to emphasize the need for intra-Afghan peace negotiations
to finally get off to a substantive start. The agreement reached on 2 December on the
code of conduct for those peace talks is an encouraging first step. I note, however,
that it took three months to reach that agreement and that much work remains. In that
regard, I note that, in line with the women and peace and security agenda, the full
and complete participation of women is absolutely essential to achieving a lasting
peace. The consolidation of democratic gains is, of course, a sine qua non for peace.
Secondly, I would like to recall that the fight against terrorism must remain
a priority for the international community. France condemns in the strongest terms
the recent terrorist attacks, including the assassinations of journalists and media
representatives mentioned in the briefings. Such attacks threaten the freedom of
expression and the very foundations of Afghan society, and they hamper peace
efforts. The current level of violence remains unacceptably high. The conflict in
Afghanistan continues to claim the lives of too many civilians, particularly among
women and children. The Secretary-General’s call for an immediate ceasefire, in
accordance with resolution 2532 (2020), is essential. In addition, as mentioned, the
fight against drugs on all fronts — from prevention to the eradication of production —
is also critical if we are to ensure lasting peace in Afghanistan.
Thirdly, there can be no progress towards peace unless all parties to the
conflict fully commit to talks. In that regard, the extent of the Taliban’s commitment
remains to be demonstrated. As we consider the renewal of the mandate of the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team attached to the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), I would like first of all
to commend the work of the experts and recall the relevance of the 1988 Sanctions
Committee. Pursuant to resolution 2513 (2020), the sanctions list can be revised only
if the Taliban extends serious and credible pledges to reduce violence, commit to
negotiations and renounce all activities that threaten the peace, stability and security
of Afghanistan.
As we demonstrated yet again at the 2020 Afghanistan Conference, held in
Geneva, we are firmly committed to peace. Proof of that is the European Union’s
commitment, last month, to provide €1.2 billion over four years in both emergency
aid and long-term assistance to support the country’s modernization and sustainable
democratic development, including the fight against corruption and in favour
18/39

20-17880

S/2020/1274

of institution-building, as well as to help improve the daily lives of Afghans,
particularly by reducing poverty. But that support is not blind; it is conditioned on
the preservation of the democratic gains of the past 20 years.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that peace is not to be achieved at
all costs. The fight against impunity for criminals is absolutely essential. The
protection of civilians, including humanitarian and medical personnel, must be an
absolute priority, and all parties must respect their obligations in accordance with
international humanitarian law.

20-1788019/39

S/2020/1274

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Germany to the
United Nations, Christoph Heusgen
First of all, let me start by thanking Ms. Deborah Lyons, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for her briefing.
I can only echo that 2020 showed a profound shift in developments in
Afghanistan. In the past few weeks, we again saw a year of hope, but also of despair.
We see the peace process gaining traction in Doha, but also witness violence
reaching its highest levels. According to the Global Peace Index, Afghanistan is the
least peaceful country in the world. It is very worrisome that attacks are targeting
infrastructure, particularly schools. It is a nightmare that human rights defenders
and journalists are killed. A couple of days ago, the Deputy Governor of Kabul was
killed. This is just too much. The violence has to stop. We should be united in the
Security Council and call for an end to the violence.
On the peace process, I can only echo what Ms. Lyons said. Doha really is
a wonderful achievement. I would like to congratulate our Afghan, American and
Qatari friends and the many partners who made this possible. The agreement reached
on the rules of procedure is important. These are early positive signs, but they give
us hope for future talks. We are not there yet. Both sides should now use the next
20 days wisely and consult with their leadership and constituencies on the proposals
on the table and the way forward.
The negotiation team of the Afghan Government decided that it would
talk to the youth. To hear that young people have thus far been excluded from the
peace process is very worrisome. We have always said that, from our perspective,
it is absolutely necessary that women be represented on both sides. We hope for
renewed commitment to the path towards a political settlement and a peaceful future
for Afghanistan.
We need a full and lasting ceasefire. The strategy of the Taliban to negotiate,
on the one hand, and to continue violence, on the other, is extremely cynical. If
the Taliban really want peace for the country, why do they continue to destroy
infrastructure and schools? Why do they destroy their motherland if they want to be
part of the Government? This has to stop.
Germany will continue to support the peace process in close cooperation with
our partners, including our co-penholder, Indonesia, as well as Norway, Uzbekistan,
Qatar and the United States.
On the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), I
welcome that Ms. Lyons has chosen to play an active role by maintaining a small team
in Doha to support the negotiations. It is very important that the negotiating parties
hear from her what the international community expects and what the Afghan people
expect. I hope we can launch a forum of key regional and international partners to
further strengthen efforts to support the negotiations.
The United Nations and UNAMA need to continue to play an important
role in Afghanistan in protecting human rights, safeguarding women and children,
promoting sustainable development and protecting the rights of minority groups
using a victim-centred approach. What is really concerning is drug trafficking,
which we need to continue to combat. These continue to be important tasks for the
United Nations and for the international community at large.
On international assistance, Geneva was a success. It sent a strong signal of
continued international support. In total, countries pledged more than $3.3 billion.
20/39

20-17880

S/2020/1274

I am very happy to confirm that Germany alone pledged more than $500 million
in international assistance and stabilization funds. Germany continues to be the
second-largest donor to Afghanistan.
Assistance is attached to conditions that the Afghan Government itself greatly
values. The current and future Afghan Governments must apply the same standards
with regard to ensuring human rights, protecting women and minority groups,
maintaining the constitutional achievements of the past 19 years and fighting
against corruption.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has been a huge challenge, and we know
that we also need to support Afghanistan in that respect. Afghanistan needs more
continued reliable international assistance to address all its humanitarian needs.
Only 50 per cent of the pledges towards the humanitarian response plan have been
fulfilled. I know that there are competing needs, but we can do better than that.
On the sanctions regime, we do not yet see sufficient reasons for lifting
sanctions on the Taliban or downplaying their direct link to terrorism.
I thank the Afghan Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the non-governmental
organization Afghans for Progressive Thinking and my colleagues in the Kabul
Embassy for identifying Ms. Shkula Zadran as our youth representative. Her
wonderful briefing made the deficiencies very clear. We, the Security Council, have
listened to her, but everybody should listen to her, including the Afghan Government
and the Afghan public. If peace is to be achieved, the Taliban have to understand the
issues that she raised — the need to protect the youth and to preserve what has been
achieved over the past few years in Afghanistan with regard to the role of women’s
participation in economic and political life that for peace in the country. Those gains
must be not only preserved but enhanced.
We need firm commitment to the human rights constitutionally guaranteed to
all in Afghanistan. We will continue to support civil society organizations and nongovernmental organizations. They are the backbone of a democratic Afghanistan.
Accountability is also key. Whoever commits a war crime must be prosecuted. There
can be no reconciliation or peaceful future for the country if impunity prevails.
I would like to thank Indonesia for its efforts over the past two years in its
capacity as co-penholder. It was very hard work, but it was wonderful to work with
Indonesia. I wish our successors good luck. I am sure Estonia and Norway will do
an excellent job.
Germany will continue to support the Afghanistan dossier at the United
Nations. We are very proud to be the facilitator of the General Assembly resolution
75/90, adopted last week, which expressed the solidarity of the wider United Nations
membership with Afghanistan. The United Nations stands behind the peace process.
We are very happy that we received 130 votes in favour of the resolution — many
from the countries of the region, such as Iran. We even garnered the support of some
co-sponsors from the region, like Kazakhstan, Tajikistan and Mongolia. Despite the
130 votes in favour, we regret that four countries did not vote in line with us. We
would have loved to have them on board. It is unfortunate that two of those countries
are actually permanent members of the Council.

20-1788021/39

S/2020/1274

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
I thank Ms. Deborah Lyons, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan, and Ms. Shkula Zadran for their important and inspiring briefings,
which speak volumes. We extend our condolences to all the victims of terrorist
attacks. I would also like to welcome Ambassador Adela Raz and Ambassador Majid
Takht Ravanchi to this important meeting.
Echoing our German colleague, I convey Indonesia’s appreciation to all
Security Council members for their cooperation and support for us as co-penholders
of the Afghanistan dossier at the Security Council.
The international community is behind Afghanistan. Our support for
a peaceful, prosperous and self-reliant Afghanistan will be there as it moves
forward. That consensus of international support is reflected, inter alia, through the
Afghanistan Partnership Framework, adopted at the 2020 Afghanistan Conference,
held in Geneva. This is the time for Afghanistan. Indonesia is honoured to be part of
this historic moment as Afghans make efforts to realize the promise of peace held by
peace negotiations. In that context, allow me to underline three points.
First, violence must stop, and civilians must be protected. The current level
of violence and the high civilian casualties are unacceptable. Threats, including by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), persist. We are concerned that those
threats could escalate if they are not tackled effectively.
The recent attacks, claimed by ISIL, on education facilities and journalists,
are a direct attack on the future generation and on the freedom of expression. We
condemn those terrorist attacks. All parties must protect civilians and civilian
infrastructure. Abiding by international humanitarian law is not an option, but
an obligation. Ensuring the safety civilians will also build the trust of the Afghan
people. The progress of peace negotiations needs to translate into progress on the
ground. The Taliban must also cease its attacks against innocent people.
Secondly, an inclusive peace process and the quest for peace must continue.
All parties should pursue a permanent and comprehensive ceasefire as part of efforts
to ensure an inclusive political process. We underline the need for diversity and the
participation of all segments of Afghan society in the peace process and nationbuilding. That is what is meant by the mantra of an Afghan-led and -owned process.
The role played by youth as the future generation of Afghanistan and by women is
indispensable. The participation of these groups is the recipe for sustainable peace.
Indonesia welcomes the progress made by the negotiating parties in reaching
an agreement on the rules of procedure. It is an important milestone, as these rules
will guide the negotiation. This agreement is also a testament to the fact that, where
there is a will, compromise is possible. We commend both parties for their efforts.
All parties should continue to engage in constructive dialogue with a view to
safeguarding the interests of the Afghan citizenry as a whole, namely, reconciliation,
peace and development. We commend the contribution of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) in helping to foster peace
and support the peace process through travel exemptions. To that end, we support the
extension of the mandate of its Monitoring Team.
Thirdly, regional and international support should be maintained. Sustainable
development, stability and peace in Afghanistan are in the best interests of every
country in the region and beyond. Sustainable peace and an Afghanistan that is well
22/39

20-17880

S/2020/1274

connected to its region will yield greater regional trade and security, which will be
beneficial for everyone.
Increased cooperation in combating terrorism, drugs and other organized
crime is a key to bringing stability to the country. We commend regional and
international partners for spurring efforts in favour of Afghanistan. Such efforts
should continue, as the country will need support for reconstruction.
The role of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
is also very important. We commend UNAMA’s many useful programmes in the
areas of the peace process, reconciliation, the protection of civilians, human rights,
anti-corruption, electoral reform and the boosting of trade and economic activities.
As a co-penholder with Germany on the resolution on renewing UNAMA’s
mandate (resolution 2543 (2020)), there is nothing more joyous than to see UNAMA’s
tangible contributions on the ground making a difference for common Afghans. This
is where we feel that the Security Council is most successful and where people’s
confidence in multilateralism is reinforced.
Indonesia’s support for Afghanistan will be unremitting. Whether in Afghan
peace negotiations as a host-country support group, in bilateral assistance, in training
or in supporting women’s participation, our support will continue to be steadfast. I
can attest to the fact that our Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mrs. Retno Marsudi, has
a special place in her heart for the well-being and progress of Afghan women and
girls. This is also Indonesia’s priority.
As this is Indonesia’s last meeting on UNAMA in the Council, let me put
on record that our co-penholdership on the Afghanistan file has been an enriching
experience for us in our term as a member of the Council. We also thank Mr.
Christoph Heusgen and our German colleagues, particularly Mr. Friedrich Schröder,
for their close collaboration. I would personally like to thank my Deputy Political
Coordinator, Kartika Handaruningrum, for taking care of this important file and for
the impressive job she has done.
Finally, we have done our utmost to help the people of Afghanistan. They may
rest assured that, even though we will not be in the Council next year, Indonesia will
continue to be a friend of the Afghan people. Indonesia will remain fully committed
to the country. The hearts of the Indonesian people are with them. To quote an old
Afghan proverb: “after every cloudburst, there is sunshine; from one heart to another,
there is always a way for peace, if one wishes for it”. May God be with us all as we
seek to find peace in Afghanistan.

20-1788023/39

S/2020/1274

Annex XI
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Niger to
the United Nations, Aougui Niandou
[Original: French]
Let me begin by thanking our briefers, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Lyons, Ambassador Djani and Ms. Zadran, for their very edifying
briefings. I would also like to take this opportunity to reiterate our condemnation
of the continued attacks on civilian targets in Afghanistan, extend our condolences
to the victims, their families and the Afghan people and wish a speedy recovery to
the injured.
The numerous calls and commitments by the warring parties to reduce
violence have not been followed up on the ground. We would like to encourage
all stakeholders to recommit themselves to the voice of non-violence, which is a
necessary condition for the success of the ongoing intra-Afghan talks. With regard
to these talks, we hope that tangible progress will be made as soon as possible, and
we look forward to the second round, which represents a crucial step for the future
of Afghanistan.
However, ending the war in Afghanistan will require much more than
just talks. Indeed, to ensure a full transition to peace, it is necessary to establish
a solid basis for a comprehensive peace process. To that end, it is essential that
all stakeholders, including the various sectors of civil society — women, youth,
minorities and journalists — be included. The Niger is in favour of such inclusion,
as the engagement of all parties — and their being given a meaningful place at
the negotiating table — is key to the success of the discussions, and therefore to
sustainable peace and development.
We must help the Afghan Government not only to promote and strengthen
women’s rights and those of all components of the population but also to consolidate
the progress made over the last two decades, as mentioned in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2020/1182). Supporting Afghanistan also means helping its
Government to reform and professionalize its defence and security forces, implement
mechanisms for good governance and establish a national consensus on future
relations among the different groups, as suggested by the experts.
Finally, as we all know, building lasting peace always involves tackling the root
causes of conflict. In that regard, we would like to stress the role that a healthy and
inclusive economy plays, but also the importance of the international community’s
commitment to the Afghan people, particularly in mitigating the dramatic effects of
the coronavirus disease and in continuing its indispensable support for the country.

24/39

20-17880

S/2020/1274

Annex XII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Anna Evstigneeva
[Original: Russian]
We thank the Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), Ms. Deborah Lyons, for her briefing. We also thank the Permanent
Representative of Indonesia and Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) for his briefing on the work of that subsidiary
body of the Council. We also listened carefully to the briefing by the representative
of Afghan civil society.
Russia has unswervingly supported UNAMA’s activities. We believe
the Mission plays an important role in coordinating international humanitarian
assistance to the country, and we note the selfless work of United Nations personnel
in Afghanistan, particularly against the backdrop of the coronavirus pandemic.
We have closely studied the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the
country (S/2020/1182) and would like to share the following observations.
The centre of attention is the peace process in Afghanistan. At the previous
meeting of the Security Council on this matter in September (see S/PV.8759), we noted
that there had been certain positive developments towards national reconciliation,
among which was the intra-Afghan negotiations launched on 12 September in
Doha, which received broad support from the international community, including
Afghanistan’s partners from across the region and the world.
Russia welcomed that event after the long months of discussion that had
happened since the signing of the agreement between the Americans and the Taliban
on 29 February. Let us not forget what preceded this development, which was a
crucial moment in the history of this country: both parties ultimately agreed to
make concessions and free prisoners. Over the previous three months they reached
agreements on the rules of procedure for the negotiation process.
However, there is still a long way to go for there to be real progress. At this
stage, we see that intra-Afghan dialogue has been delayed for three weeks — until
5 January 2021. We hope that the pause taken by the parties does not mean the
process is going to grind to a halt. It is our firm conviction that all efforts now
must be aimed at launching substantive negotiations, which the parties have not
yet started.
Against this backdrop, we remain concerned over the security situation in
Afghanistan. We are struck by the unprecedented level of violence in the country.
The report of the Secretary-General shares views on the increasing number of victims
among the civilian population, in particular women and children, is increasing.
These assessments are indeed horrifying.
On a regular basis, the country is shaken by terrorist attacks that unfortunately
have become an everyday occurrence for the Afghan people. This is evidence
once again of the presence in the country of terrorist elements of various kinds.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant stands behind many of the large-scale
attacks. We see that its Afghan wing has not only not ceased to work but rather,
on the contrary, it continues to maintain and even increase its potential to roll out
terrorist activity across neighbouring Central Asia. This is not to mention that in
the country, as previously, there are still cells of foreign terrorist fighters, many of
whom have received military experience in Syria and Iraq. Among the most recent

20-1788025/39

S/2020/1274

sad confirmations of that were the attack on Kabul University and missile strikes on
the capital.
We also cannot be optimistic about the situation with the drug threat. There
have been certain measures taken by Kabul, but we have not seen any particular
progress in the fight against drugs. For the second year in a row, we are dealing with
a situation where the publication of the latest report by the United Nations Office
on Drug and Crime (UNODC) has been delayed. We had hoped to hear objective
assessments today of the problem from the representative of UNODC. However, as
Council members know, his participation was blocked by a number of delegations.
This gives rise to a question: is it possible that certain countries simply do not want
to see the real and sad situation in relation to drugs in Afghanistan? We believe
that attempts to silence or downplay the presence of drug and terrorist threats in
Afghanistan are unacceptable.
We are convinced that there is a need for collective efforts on the part of
international and regional players to achieve peace and stability in Afghanistan
and help facilitate the country’s recovery as rapidly as possible. The Afghan people
need our solidarity at this turning point. As a friend and neighbour of Afghanistan,
Russia continues to work with all Afghan parties for an inclusive process of national
reconciliation and to move successfully towards the signing of an intra-Afghan peace
agreement. This will also be helped by our steps taken through the troika — Russia,
China and the United States — plus Pakistan.
Maintaining regional consensus on the peace settlement in Afghanistan
remains a priority. It is of course not a secret for anybody that partners from the
region are the ones best able to play a role in helping the Afghans achieve their
primary goal of putting an end to the years-long conflict and opening a new peaceful
chapter in the country’s history. Our common steps should be directed towards
bringing Afghanistan into a stable, flourishing period as a State free from terrorism
and drugs. This is also the reason for the comprehensive efforts of partners from the
region within the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization, as well as the Moscow format for consultations.
Further progress towards intra-Afghan dialogue is directly connected to
the future of the sanctions regime established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011).
Extending the mandate of the Monitoring Team on the sanctions on the Taliban would
allow it to continue its work and provide the Sanctions Committee with the necessary
assistance. We would like to take this opportunity to thank Ambassador Djani and
the entire Indonesian team for the capable stewardship of the 1988 Committee and
for creating a favourable working atmosphere in that subsidiary body over the past
two years.
Nevertheless, we believe that resolving the issue of the sanctions review is
something that must be discussed separately. It is clear that it requires a step-by-step
approach and an objective view of the current situation in strict and full compliance
with resolution 2513 (2020). We should recall that the result of our efforts should be
peace in Afghanistan.

26/39

20-17880

S/2020/1274

Annex XIII
Statement by the Political Coordinator of the Permanent Mission
of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the United Nations,
Isis Gonsalves
I thank the briefers for their insightful remarks. Permit me also to extend our
gratitude to the Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011), Ambassador Djani, for his leadership of the Committee. I
am also pleased to see the Afghan youth representative to the United Nations at this
virtual table.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reiterates its strong support for an Afghanled and Afghan-owned peace process aimed at finding a lasting political resolution to
nearly 20 years of conflict. The start of the negotiations on 12 September represents
an opportunity to find sustainable peace in Afghanistan. In that regard, we appeal to
the Government and the Taliban negotiating teams to remain committed to a just and
inclusive political settlement that caters to the needs and interests of all Afghans,
including women, youth and victims and survivors of the war. All stakeholders
must be involved in the trust and reconciliation process to create an environment
conducive to ending decades of conflict. We look forward to the resumption of the
intra-Afghan talks in January following the 20-day recess.
My delegation remains deeply concerned about the continuing high level
of violence, particularly in the south. Our primary goal should continue to be the
prevention of violence and the condemnation of terrorist attacks. The recent attack
that claimed the lives of 13 police officers offers a stark reminder of the human costs
of war. For the civilian population, which continues to bear the brunt of the conflict,
an end to the hostilities will provide much-needed hope. Consequently, we reiterate
the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire and the immediate reduction of
violence. It is critical that the Afghan Government and the Taliban enhance their
cooperation and negotiation efforts, with a view to promoting sustainable and
durable peace in Afghanistan.
The economic, environmental and humanitarian situation in Afghanistan
necessitates urgent action and sustained attention from the international community.
It is vital that climate-fragility risks be considered in the creation and implementation
of policies, including those aimed at creating peace and stability in Afghanistan. The
ongoing violence, natural disasters, heightened levels of food insecurity, and the
coronavirus disease pandemic threaten the lives of millions of people.
We welcome the outcomes of the 2020 Afghanistan Conference, and we
encourage all international donors to honour their commitments to supporting
Afghanistan’s peace, prosperity and self-reliance. Improved development
cooperation, enhanced trade and investment and expanded economic opportunities
for all Afghans are critical for lasting peace.
In conclusion, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reaffirms our commitment to
the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Afghanistan, and we commend the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for its continued support to the
Government and people of Afghanistan.

20-1788027/39

S/2020/1274

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations, Jerry Matjila
I thank Special Representative Deborah Lyons, Ms. Shkula Zadran and my
colleague Ambassador Djani of Indonesia for their briefings. I would also like in
particular to welcome and thank Ms. Shkula Zadran, Afghan Youth Representative
to the United Nations, for her presentation.
I will focus my remarks on the following three areas: the peace situation, the
security situation and the humanitarian situation.
With regard to the peace process, let me begin by welcoming the launch
of the Afghan peace negotiations in September and the ongoing discussions. The
agreement reached by the parties on rules of procedures for the negotiations is a
welcome and important step in the right direction. South Africa urges all the parties
to continue to build on that momentum and engage constructively towards a just,
durable and inclusive peace. More important, South Africa urges that the peace
process be Afghan-led and -owned and include all Afghans.
The progress and gains made in the rights of women and girls needs to
be preserved. As Ms. Zadran demonstrated to us today, the women and youth of
Afghanistan have a meaningful role to play and a real and existential stake in the
future of Afghanistan — both in terms of its peace process and in mapping its
reconstruction and development trajectory.
On the security situation, regretfully, the soaring rates of violence and related
high civilian casualties jeopardize Afghanistan’s prospects for peace and are of
great concern to South Africa. The Secretary-General has stated that “the armed
conflict in Afghanistan remains the deadliest conflict in the world for children”. It
is important, therefore, that all parties cease their hostilities. The men, women and
children of Afghanistan deserve peace and a life of fulfilment.
Sustainable peace requires active dialogue and negotiation, which, in turn,
require a peaceful environment in order to thrive. For Afghan peace talks to be
effective, all parties must cease their violence and hostilities in order to create an
environment conducive to meaningful progress. In that regard, South Africa calls on
all parties to the conflict to comply with their obligations under international human
rights law and international humanitarian law. In addition, all those responsible for
grave violations in Afghanistan — particularly against children, women and the most
vulnerable — should be brought to justice and held accountable, including through
timely, systematic, impartial and independent investigations and, as appropriate,
prosecution and conviction.
On the humanitarian situation, a day or two ago we were informed of the
worsening humanitarian situation in Afghanistan by the Acting Assistant-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator. It
goes without saying that the coronavirus disease pandemic, climate change and
the protracted conflict, which has lasted over a decade, have all contributed to this
dire situation. Mindful of the magnitude and complexity of the necessary measures,
South Africa commends the United Nations and its humanitarian partners for their
dedicated efforts to attend to all who require assistance.
In conclusion, and noting that this will be South Africa’s last meeting on the
situation in Afghanistan as an elected Council member, let me take this opportunity
to extend my appreciation and gratitude to Special Representative Lyons and
the personnel of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for their
dedication and commitment to the execution of its mandate. The Mission’s work to
28/39

20-17880

S/2020/1274

facilitate dialogue with various stakeholders, including civil society groups, and its
efforts to support conflict resolution and peacebuilding remain critical in uniting all
Afghans towards a peaceful and sustainable resolution of the Afghan conflict.
I thank the Permanent Representative of Indonesia and his team for their
tireless efforts to contribute to creating a conducive environment for peace in
Afghanistan, and I convey our best wishes to the incoming Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011).
I also thank Ms. Zadran for her role in Afghanistan and reassure her that
South Africa has faith in the youth and believes in their ability to contribute to
peaceful negotiations and building a fair, equitable and inclusive society. We are
convinced that a better future for Afghans is on the horizon.

20-1788029/39

S/2020/1274

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the
United Nations, Tarek Ladeb
At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Deborah Lyons, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. Dian Triansyah Djani, Permanent
Representative of Indonesia and Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), and Ms. Shkula Zadran, Afghanistan’s Youth
Representative to the United Nations, for their briefings.
Tunisia reiterates its full support for the peace process in Afghanistan and
its solidarity with the Government and the people of Afghanistan. We welcome
the start of the negotiations between the Government and the Taliban in Doha, on
12 September, as well as the agreement reached by the two parties, on 2 December, on
rules of procedure for the negotiations. We hope that the discussions on substantive
matters can begin soon.
We would also like to renew our appreciation for the continuing support of all
Afghanistan’s neighbours and the international community, as a whole, in favour of
the Afghan peace process. That support is crucial for achieving long-term peace and
stability in Afghanistan and the region.
We remain deeply concerned about the continuing high level of violence and
the security situation in Afghanistan. While we sincerely hope that the current peace
process will rapidly bring security, stability and prosperity to the Afghan people,
we fear that the recent attacks attributed to the Taliban, which resulted in numerous
casualties among Afghan forces — including 13 police officers just yesterday — and
the civilian population could seriously complicate the negotiations. We reaffirm that
there can be no military solution to the conflict in Afghanistan, and again stress the
need for an immediate cessation of hostilities, in line with the Secretary-General’s
call for a global ceasefire and resolutions 2532 (2020) and 2543 (2020).
At a time when priority should continue to be given to responding to the
coronavirus disease pandemic, the very high number of civilian victims in
Afghanistan, especially among women and children, continues to be a source of great
concern. We stress the need for all parties to take the necessary measures to prevent
civilian casualties. We underline the importance of investigating all allegations of
violations in Afghanistan of international humanitarian law and international human
rights law, and of holding perpetrators accountable.
We are particularly troubled by the targeting of civil society and media
organizations, which has killed many, including, most recently, the journalist and
women and children’s rights defender Malalai Maiwand, who was murdered earlier
this month.
Such despicable attacks further raise the concerns expressed by many in and
outside Afghanistan — that peace might come at the cost of freedoms and rights.
More efforts should therefore be made to combat all terrorist groups still active in
Afghanistan by targeting their operational and financial capabilities. In that regard,
we share the view that the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces should
continue to be fully supported and that more efforts should be made to fight drug
trafficking, which continues to fuel the illicit economy and finance terrorist groups.
We also stress the need for the Government of Afghanistan, the countries of
the region and the international community to continue their cooperation to counter
all unlawful acts of violence and terrorist attacks. For its part, the Taliban should
30/39

20-17880

S/2020/1274

put an end to its attacks, honour its counter-terrorism commitments and negotiate in
good faith with the Government of Afghanistan.
Today we would like to underline again the importance of an inclusive
Afghan-led and -owned peace process, with the meaningful participation of women
and youth, in order to achieve sustainable peace. Accordingly, we believe that any
future political agreement should include clear guarantees to protect and promote
the fundamental rights and freedoms of all in Afghanistan, with a particular focus
on women’s rights.
We also believe that the peace process should be accompanied by an ambitious
international effort to assist Afghanistan at the economic and social levels. In that
connection, we welcome the adoption of the Afghanistan Partnership Framework
at the 2020 Afghanistan Conference, held in Geneva on 23 and 24 November.
The conference confirmed the commitment of international partners to continue
supporting Afghanistan.
Lastly, we wish to acknowledge the important accomplishments of UNAMA.
We believe it will have an even bigger role to play in the coming period. In that
regard, we welcome the unanimous adoption, on 15 September, of resolution 2543
(2020), which extended the Mission’s mandate until 17 September 2021.

20-1788031/39

S/2020/1274

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations,
Barbara Woodward
I would like to start by thanking Special Representative Lyons and Ambassador
Djani, in his capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), for their briefings. I would also like to extend a
warm welcome to Ms. Zadran and to thank her for her powerful statement and clear
call for a peaceful future for the youth of Afghanistan.
On 12 September, the Afghan people took a significant step on the road to
peace, with the start of the Afghanistan peace negotiations in Doha. We welcome
the commitment the two negotiating teams have shown so far, culminating in their
agreement, on 2 December, on the rules and procedures for the talks. It is vital that
the negotiations resume swiftly on 5 January.
I would like to emphasize three points today.
First, we must be prepared for a long and challenging process ahead. When
the talks resume on 5 January, the parties will start negotiating on substance for the
first time. In many cases, the distance between the two sides’ positions may seem
unbridgeable. There will be setbacks before there are breakthroughs. That is normal
and probably necessary. A successful outcome will require a long, challenging
process of building trust, finding common ground and compromising. International
partners will also need to show commitment and patience in the process. The United
Kingdom, for its part, stands ready to offer support.
Secondly, even if a final settlement takes time, Afghans should start to see the
tangible benefits now. Yet, as we have heard many times today, appalling levels of
violence continue to blight the lives of Afghans. And let us be clear — the Taliban
is responsible for the majority of that violence, which not only results in loss of life
but also undermines confidence in the negotiations. The Taliban claim to want a part
in Afghanistan’s future and the international community, and demand relief from
United Nations sanctions. That requires substantive progress in peace negotiations,
an end to violence and a complete and permanent break from terrorism, including
from Al-Qaida.
Thirdly, the outcome of the Afghanistan peace negotiations is for Afghans
themselves to decide. But the parties, and especially the Taliban, must recognize that
Afghanistan is not the place it was 20 years ago.
To be sustainable, a peaceful settlement will need to be inclusive and preserve
the rights and freedoms of all Afghans, including women and minorities. To
maintain international support, the new Afghanistan will need to adhere to its treaty
obligations, including those concerning human rights. And to reach a settlement that
achieves those ends, the process will need to be inclusive and broad.
For my part, I look forward to supporting women’s participation in the process
in my new role co-chairing the Group of Friends of Women in Afghanistan alongside
Ambassador Raz.
In Geneva last month, the international community reaffirmed its support
to Afghanistan. The United Kingdom pledged up to $207 million in development
assistance for 2021. The Afghan Government, for its part, renewed its commitments,
as set out in the new Afghanistan Partnership Framework. Together, the commitments
made last month can help strengthen Afghan institutions and the Government’s
ability to support its citizens — tasks that are vital even as peace talks unfold.
32/39

20-17880

S/2020/1274

Today Afghanistan stands a step closer to being at peace with itself and its
neighbours, being free from conflict and terrorism, and being able to protect the
rights and freedoms of all Afghans. We should redouble our collective efforts to
make that a reality.

20-1788033/39

S/2020/1274

Annex XVII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Kelly Craft
It is always such a treat to be able to see Special Representative Lyons. I thank
her for her briefing and her leadership role in guiding the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan in support of peace, human rights and development in
Afghanistan. I would also like to thank Ambassador Djani for chairing the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) over the past two
years. I also thank all the Council members for all their hard work. Finally, I would
like to thank Ms. Zadran for bringing the Council into the digital age as she uses
social media to engage with young Afghans so that they can participate in building
a future for themselves in Afghanistan.
Sadly, in continuation of what we heard during our previous meeting on this
item (see S/PV.8759), the people of Afghanistan continue to face terrible violence.
The rocket attack on 21 November, which killed eight people and wounded over
30 near Kabul’s Green Zone, is one of the latest crimes committed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Shams. The last few months have also seen barbaric attacks on
educational institutions. It is time for the Government of Afghanistan, the Taliban
and all Afghans to band together against this group.
We also strongly condemn targeted and unlawful attacks on media
representatives, religious leaders, human rights defenders, students and civilians.
It is an outrage that women leaders, such as reporter and activist Malalai Maiwand,
who was gunned down last week, and Mayor Zarifa Ghafari, who survived multiple
assassination attempts and then lost her father to assassins, are being targeted.
Afghan Government officials also continue to be prime targets, with the
senseless assassination on Tuesday of the Deputy Governor of Kabul and the deputy
head of the Ghor provincial council.
That violence must stop. This concerning pattern of violence gives the utmost
urgency to the need for a comprehensive ceasefire as a critical step towards peace
for the Afghan people. An immediate reduction in violence will also help the peace
process advance and is what the people of Afghanistan yearn for.
The recent finalization of rules and procedures was a significant step forward
and demonstrates that the two sides are capable of tackling difficult topics. The first
meeting of the leadership committee of the High Council for National Reconciliation
was a second significant and positive development in recent weeks.
We cannot afford to lose momentum, however, while the parties consult on
a proposed agenda. We urge the parties to resume talks on 5 January as agreed,
to deny spoilers any opportunity to slow the process and to accelerate their peace
efforts and end the country’s long war.
Earlier this year, the Council adopted resolution 2513 (2020), endorsing the
United States-Taliban agreement, which outlines the prospective timeline for United
States forces’ withdrawal from Afghanistan. United States reductions in posture
remain conditions-based per the agreement and will continue to be implemented
after consultation with the United States Congress and in coordination with our
NATO allies and partners.
Meanwhile, United States efforts to stabilize Afghanistan continue through
our support to Afghan security forces and our delivery of critical aid to the Afghan
people. As a sign of our commitment, the United States pledged $300 million in
civilian assistance for 2021 during the 2020 donors’ conference, with another
34/39

20-17880

S/2020/1274

$300 million available depending on progress in the peace process. That pledge
comes with continuing calls for progress on economic reforms, anti-corruption
efforts and human rights.
We welcome the discussion at the conference of the voluntary return and
sustainable reintegration of refugees. We call on Afghanistan to follow through on
its plans to support returning refugees, including by allocating land and providing
identity documents. Over the last year, the Trump Administration has provided
nearly $277 million in humanitarian assistance for internally displaced persons and
returnees in Afghanistan, and for Afghan refugees in the region.
Meanwhile, Afghanistan’s humanitarian needs are still growing at an
alarming pace, with a record 18.4 million people in the country likely to require
humanitarian assistance in 2021 — nearly double the number a year earlier. Nearly
half of Afghanistan’s children under 5 face acute malnutrition.
This discussion is an important opportunity to keep the international
community focused on what lies ahead and on the need to increase funding for lifesaving humanitarian aid in Afghanistan as the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees continues to provide crucial assistance to displaced and
returning Afghans.
The United States has also provided more than $33 million for the coronavirus
disease response in Afghanistan. The pandemic has only exacerbated the challenges
facing vulnerable groups.
We also remain deeply concerned by the continued exploitation of children
in Afghanistan, including through the practice of sexual abuse known as bacha bazi
and the recruitment and use of child soldiers. Impunity is a major challenge to ending
those harmful practices. The United States is committed to supporting the Afghan
Government and civil society in their efforts to hold perpetrators accountable and
protect and support victims.
All Afghans, including those negotiating peace, must recognize and respect
the universal human rights of people belonging to disadvantaged and marginalized
groups in their country, whether they be women, children or members of ethnic and
religious minority groups.
A sincere commitment to inclusion is the foundation for future peace and
stability. In that regard, there is a need for continuing efforts by the United Nations
and other international partners to strengthen Afghan civil society in order to create
a foundation for successful peace talks and democratic institutions so Afghanistan
can move forward.
I thank Ambassador Djani once again for having brought this forward.

20-1788035/39

S/2020/1274

Annex XVIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
I would like to thank Ms. Deborah Lyons, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General; Ambassador Dian Triansyah Djani, Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011); and Ms. Shkula Zadran
for their statements.
Viet Nam commends their efforts and reiterates its support for the work of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in this challenging
time of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. I also warmly welcome
Ambassador Adela Raz, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, and Ambassador
Majid Ravanchi, Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran, to
this meeting.
The year 2020 marks the beginning of the historic intra-Afghan peace
negotiations, which open a pathway for the pursuit of long-term peace and stability
in the country. I would like to reaffirm Viet Nam’s support for the Afghanled and Afghan-owned inclusive peace process and the full implementation of
resolution 2513 (2020).
We are pleased that the Afghan parties agreed on 2 December to a code of
conduct that will act as guidance for negotiations on specific issues. We commend
the consistent efforts of the Government of Afghanistan in promoting the peace
process, including its commitment to ensuring the participation of women and youth
in that process.
While significant progress has been made, sustainable peace and development
are still far from being guaranteed. We are concerned about the recent increase in the
level of violence and of civilian casualties, including among women and children.
We strongly condemn the ongoing attacks on civilians and civilian objects. It is
tragic to hear about the loss of the lives of young students, health-care workers and
journalists in the past few weeks.
Furthermore, the Government and the people of Afghanistan continue to
face tremendous challenges in the socioeconomic sphere. In the light of recent
developments, I wish to make the following three points.
First, we call on the Afghan parties to find a common understanding in order
to achieve a permanent ceasefire, thereby putting an end to the ongoing violence.
The intra-Afghan peace negotiations require a stable and conducive environment
in order to succeed and achieve a lasting political solution. The continued support
of the United Nations, UNAMA, the countries of the region and other international
partners will be crucial to maintaining the momentum of the peace talks. We also
welcome and encourage further efforts to facilitate the meaningful participation of
women and youth in the peace process and the reconstruction of the country. The
bright younger generation of Afghanistan, such as Ms. Zadran, represents the hope
and future of the nation.
Secondly, we once again urge all parties to fully respect international
humanitarian law, immediately stop targeting civilians and civilian objects and
allow unhindered access to humanitarian services in the context of the COVID-19
pandemic. Strengthened efforts are also needed to combat the increasing presence
of terrorist groups in the country. We also commend the efforts of UNAMA and the
United Nations Mine Action Service in addressing the humanitarian challenges in
Afghanistan in past months.
36/39

20-17880

S/2020/1274

Thirdly, long-term peace and stability also require robust development
and sustainable livelihoods for the people. In that regard, the Government and
international partners should continue to work together in promoting economic
development and the reconstruction of Afghanistan, as well as in addressing pressing
issues such as food insecurity, the COVID-19 pandemic, climate change, crime and
drug trafficking.
We are concerned that 11.15 million people, more than one third of the
country’s population, are facing high levels of food insecurity. That number could
rise to 13.15 million during the winter period of December 2020 to March 2021.
We welcome the successful outcome of the 2020 Afghanistan Conference held in
Geneva last month, at which international partners pledged more than $12 billion in
aid for the country in the next four years. We call on the international community to
continue to strengthen its humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan in that regard to
ensure its projected needs.
Before concluding, I would like to express our appreciation to Indonesia and
Germany, the co-penholders on Afghanistan, for their tireless efforts during the past
two years. I also congratulate Ambassador Djani on his successful chairmanship of
the 1988 Committee.

20-1788037/39

S/2020/1274

Annex XIX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran to the United Nations, Majid Takht Ravanchi
Iran and Afghanistan enjoy common religious, cultural, linguistic and
historical backgrounds, and our stability, sociocultural development and economic
growth are intertwined and mutually reinforcing. As our President stated very
recently, we consider Afghanistan’s stability as our own stability.
Afghanistan’s decades-long insecurity and instability can end only through a
comprehensive and inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process involving
all Afghan factions, including the Taliban, supported by neighbouring, regional and
international partners.
The peace process must preserve and promote past achievements, particularly
the present Constitution, the right of the people to self-determination through
elections and the right of ethnic and religious minorities and women, as well as the
commitment to combating terrorism.
However, as peace and violence cannot go hand in hand, to reciprocate the
goodwill of Afghanistan’s Government in the peace talks, the Taliban must halt its
attacks against Afghan defence and security forces.
We support the peace talks and believe that their successful conclusion
requires flexibility and patience by all sides, placing the interests of the people of
Afghanistan above all other interests.
As we stated to Special Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons during
her recent visit to Tehran, Iran continues to call for a further engagement of the
United Nations in the peace process and stands ready, in coordination with the
United Nations, to further contribute to that process.
Afghanistan’s security situation remains a source of concern owing particularly
to the terrorist acts perpetrated, including by Da’esh, whose presence poses a serious
threat to the security of Afghanistan and of the region.
As a manifestation of external interference, the presence of foreign forces
is another source of Afghanistan’s instability. However, as many countries have
stressed, their withdrawal must be orderly and responsible and must not lead to
a security vacuum in Afghanistan. Accordingly, prior and simultaneous to the
withdrawal of foreign forces, Afghanistan’s military and security forces must be
supported and strengthened.
Likewise, effective assistance must be extended to Afghanistan in combating
the illicit production of, and trafficking in, narcotic drugs as a source of financing
terrorism and other crimes.
A durable peace in Afghanistan cannot be established without promoting its
economic conditions, which requires strong regional and international support.
For our part, in addition to hosting more than 3 million Afghans despite facing
the savage United States economic war, we have promoted economic cooperation
with Afghanistan. Linking that landlocked country to the high seas and other
countries through Iran’s Chabahar port is a prominent example of close partnership
between the two countries.
Just last week, we inaugurated the Khaf-Herat railway, which connects
Afghanistan’s railway to Europe through Iran. The Presidents of both countries called
the inauguration of that project a historical event, further strengthening bilateral and
38/39

20-17880

S/2020/1274

regional economic cooperation, thus enhancing the foundations of durable peace and
stability in Afghanistan.
The Islamic Republic of Iran is committed to contributing to a more secure
and prosperous Afghanistan through further enhancing relations between two
fraternal nations.

20-1788039/39
