28

General Assembly-Twelfth Session

1205 (XII). Report of the Trusteeship Council
covering the period from 15 August 1956
to 12 July 1957
The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the Trusteeship Council covering- the period from 15 August 1956 to 12
July 1957, 23

1. Takes note of the report of the Trusteeship
Council;
2. Recommends that the Trusteeship Council, in its
future deliberations, take into account the comments
and suggestions made in the course of the discussion of
the report at the twelfth session of the General Assembly.
729th plenary meeting,
13 December 1957.

1206 (XII). Economic advancement of Somaliland under Italian administration

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 855 (IX) of 14 December
1954, in which it requested the Trusteeship Council,
on the basis of the conclusions of the United Nations
Visiting Mission to Trust Territories in East Africa,
1954, and the report of the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development, to endeavour to decide on practical measures for financing the economic
development plans for Somaliland under Italian administration,
Having examined with interest the report of the
Mission of the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development, 24 and the observations thereon of
the Administering Authority, the Government of Somalia and the United Nations Advisory Council for the
Trust Territory of Somaliland under Italian Administration,
Having taken note of the statement of the Administering Authority that the Territory would require, after
1960, external financial assistance, excluding technical
assistance, amounting to about $4 million to $5 million
.annually,
Having considered the various possibilities suggested
by the Trusteeship Council of furnishing technical and
financial assistance to Somaliland under Italian Administration after 1960, and noting the conclusion of the
Council, with which the Administering Authority is in
agreement, ~hat it is premature to make any specific
recommendation as to the amount of external assistance which might be required after 1960,
1. N ates from the report of the Trusteeship Counci123 that the Administering Authority, in consultation
with the Government of Somalia, will continue to assess
all requirements for a viable, independent Somalia,
explore all possible ways of meeting the requirements
indicated by these assessments and submit a report
thereon to the Council at its twenty-second session ;
2. Requests the Trusteeship Council to continue its
study of this question, in consultation with the Administering Authority and the Government of Somalia,
and, in particular, to explore further the possibilities
suggested by the Council and to report thereon for the
00

Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Session,
Supplement No. 4 (A/3595 and Corr.1).
"'Official 1Records of the Trusteeship Council, Twrntieth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 4, document T /1296.

consideration of the General Assembly at its thirteenth
session.
729th plenary meeting,
13 December 1957.

1207 (XII). Attainment of self-government or
independence by Trust Territories
The General Assembly,
Considering that, in accordance with the provisions
of Article 76 b of the Charter of the United Nations,
one of the basic objectives of the International Trusteeship System is the progressive development of the
inhabitants of Trust Territories towards self-government or independence,
Recalling that the General Assembly, in its resolution
558 (VI) of 18 January 1952, invited the Administering Authority of each Trust Territory, inter alia, to
estimate the period of time in which the Trust Territories concerned would attain self-government or independence,
Recalling also that the General Assembly, in its
resolution 1064 (XI) of 26 February 1957, recommended that the Administering Authorities concerned
take the necessary measures to ensure that the Trust
Territories of Tanganyika, the Cameroons under British administration, the Cameroons under French administration, Togoland under French administration and
Ruandi-Urundi achieve self-government or independence at an early date, and further invited the Administering Authorities concerned to estimate the period of
time required for the attainment of self-government or
independence by all Trust Territories, in conformity
with General Assembly resolution 558 (VI),
Having examined part III of the report of the
Trusteeship Council, 23
Noting with satisfaction that the Trusteeship Council
has recommended that the Administering Authorities
indicate such successive intermediate targets and dates
in the political, economic, social and educational development of the Trust Territories as will create the
pre-conditions for their attainment of self-government
or independence,
Noting ·with disappointment that the Administering
Authorities concerned have not yet submitted the
estimates of the periods of time required by the Trust
Territories for the attainment of the final objective of
trusteeship, namely, self-government or independence,
Conscious of the importance of estimating the time
required for the attainment by Trust Territories of selfgovernment or independence,
1. Reaffirms its resolutions 558 (VI) of 18 January
1952 and 1064 (XI) of 26 February 1957, and once
again invites the Administering Authorities to implement the terms of those resolutions;
2. Requests the Trusteeship Council to report to the
General Assembly, at its thirteenth session, on the
progress made in implementing the present resolution.
729th plenary meeting,
13 December 1957.

1208 (XII). Rural economic development of the
Trust Territories
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 438 (V) of 2 December 1950,
recommending that the Trusteeship Council consider
