UNITED NATIONS

TWENTY-SIXTH

YEAR
th
MEETING: 12 JULY 1971

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l569)

....... ...........,,..........

1

Statement by the President , . , . , , . . . . . , , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda

....,.. .,..,..,...........,,..,.,.....

1

Complaint by Senegal:
Letter dated 6 July 1971 from the Permanent Representative of Senegalto the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/1025 1) .

1

S/PV.1569

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Secutity Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SIXTY-NINTH

Held in New York on Monday,
President: Mr. J. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET

(France).

MEETING

12 July 1971, aE 3.30 p.m.
5. I was deeply touched by this participation in the loss
suffered by his wife and children as well as by the Belgian
diplomatic corps. I wasall the more moved by your noble
sentiments since my ill-fated colleague died in the arms of
the Ambassador of France,

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

6. I shall of course transmit to Ambassador Dupret’s
family and to the Belgian Government the expressions of
sympathy of the Security Council over this tragic event.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l569)

Adoption of the agenda

1. Adoption of the agenda.

The agenda wasadopted.

2. Complaint by Senegal:
Letter dated 6 July 1971 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal to the United Nations addressedto
the President of the Security Council (S/ 102.51).

Complaint by Senegal

Statement by the President

Letter dated 6 July 1971 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/lOiSl)

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation ffom French): In
keeping with a somewhat recent tradition, I shall refrain
from the usual praise or compliments to my predecessors.I
am sure, however, that they are well aware of the high
esteem in which I hold them.

7. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from, French): The
representative of Senegal, in his letter [S/10251], while
requesting a meeting of the Security Council also requested
that the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Senegal be invited
to participate in the Council’s discussion.

2. Before proceeding to the agenda, I should like to
express the unanimous feeling of the Council by welcoming
here the Secretary-General of our Organization. We know
the heavy responsibilities which our Secretary-General bears
every day. We have all expressed the ardent wish that his
health, which was impaired by his intense activities, be
promptly restored. Your return among us, Mr. SecretaryGeneral, is proof that our wisheshave indeed been fulfilled,
and we are pleased to express our great satisfaction to YOU.

8. In accordancewith the rules of procedure and the usual
practice of the Security Council, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Senegal to take a place at the Security Council
table to participate in the Council’s discussion without the
right to vote.

3. The members of the Council will also understand when
I express the deep feelings of my country-which they
undoubtedly share-over the recent events in Morocco. I
should like to express to His Majesty King Hassan II our
deep sympathies concerning the losses suffered by the
families of the victims. We wish to assurehim of our sincere
best wishes for the future and prosperity of the Moroccan
people. We also wish to express to the representative of
Belgium our deep sorrow and condolences over the tragic
IOSS of his country’s Ambassador to Morocco.

9. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I have
received from the representative of Guinea the following
letter:

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. K. Gaye
(Senegal) took a place at the Security Council table,

“On instructions from my Government, I have the
honour to request permission to participate, without
vote, in the discussion by the Security Council of the
complaint by the Republic of Senegal against Portugal.”
[S/l 0258.]
If I hear no objection, in accordancewith the practice of
the Council, I shall invite the representative of Guinea to
take a place at the Council table, without the right to vote.

4. Mr. LONGERSTAEY (Belgium) (interpretation ffom
French): Allow me, Mr. President, to express my deep
gratitude to you for the condolences you expressed with
respect to the tragic death of my colleague and friend,
Mr. Marcel Dupret, the Belgian Ambassador in Rabat.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. E.-H. A. Tour4
(Guinea) took a place at the Security Council table.
1

17. Since its accession to independence, Senegal, in its
age-old relations with Guinea (B&au), has endeavoured to
maintain an approach of peaceful coexistence-and with
Portugal-for Guinea (Bissau) and Senegal are separated
only
by a frontier which is an inheritance from the colonial
regime. The populations on both sides of this 350 kilometres-long frontier are in fact composed of the same
ethnic groups-basically they are the Peulhs, the Mandingues and the Balantes. And many of the nationals of
Guinea (Bissau) have constantly crossed that frontier to
come to work in Senegal-that is, when they did not decide
to settIe.

10. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Rench): The
Security Council will proceed to consider the complaint
submitted by Senegal in its letter dated 6 July 1971
[S/l 0251J.

11. In this connexion, I should like to draw the attention
of members of the Council to the letters dated 27 April
[S/10182] and 16 June 1971 (S/10227], addressed to the
Security Council by the Permanent Representative of
Senegal. These two letters are mentioned in document
s/10251.
12. I also wish to draw the attention of members of the
Council to the letter dated 10 July 1971, addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the Charge d’affaires
ad interim of the Permanent Mission of Portugal to the
United Nations /S/l 02551.

18. It is for these reasons that Senegal was in favour, ln
1960, of the establishment on our territory of a Portuguese
diplomatic mission under the control of a charge d’affaires.
And, in 1961, the Senegalese Government designated a
t
Consul General in Guinea (B&au).

13. The first speaker on my list is Mr. Amadou Karim
Gaye, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Senegal, upon whom I now call.

19. But acts as serious as these that have led to this
meeting of the Security Council show clearly how Portugal
intends to act towards the neighbouring African States that
border those territories which it still holds.

14. Mr, GAYE (Senegal) (interpretation from French):
Mr.President, I thank you, first, for calling upon me to
speak and,. secondly, for having been good enough to
convene this meeting of the Security Council in so short a
period of time, as to attest to the great interest that you
have in the maintenance of peace and security all over the
world, especially when that security and that peace are
threatened in a country which, to protect its sovereignty
and territorial integrity, possessesas an essential weapon
only its rights and the faith that it has placed in the United
Nations. And these are bolstered by the faith that we have
placed in the role which the Security Council is called upon
by the international community to perform in order to
ensure respect all over the world for law, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States when these are threatened.

20. It was in April 1963 that Senegal for the first time
addressed itself to the Security Council [1027th meeting].
The village of Bouniak, located in the department of
Ziguinchor, less than two kilometres from the Guinea
(Bissau) frontier, after having undergone overflights by four
Portuguese planes was gutted by Portuguese grenade attacks. The representative of Portugal here in the Security
Council was forced to bow to the facts that were
overwhelmingly set forth by the representative of Senegal.
And the Security Council, in its resolution 178 (1963) of
24 April 1963, took note “of the declared intention of the
Portuguese Government . . . to respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Senegal”. In the same resolution, the
Government of Portugal was invited, “in accordance with
its declared intentions, to take whatever action may be
necessary to prevent any violation of Senegal’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity”.

15. The acts of aggression that have been committed on
Senegalese soil by Portuguese troops-acts of aggression of
which once again my Government must complain to the
Security Council-go to swell a long list of violations of our
frontiers and of the territorial integrity of Senegal. Those
acts are closely linked with the repression that Portugal has
carried out for eight years against the nationalist movements forced into armed insurrection by the obstinacy of
Portugal to maintain in Guinea (Bissau) a colonial domination which today is rejected by all the freedom-loving
nations of the world.

21. But despite the assurancesgiven by the Government of
Portugal, not one year passed after April 1963, before
Senegal was the victim again of new acts of aggression,
committed by Portuguese troops on Senegalese soil. Not a
single year has since passed without the Government of
Senegal having to complain to the Security Council and to
world public opinion of the human losses caused by
Portuguese troops, the kidnappings, violations of the
frontier and the air space of Senegal, the bombing and
burning of villages, destruction of harvests and cattlerustling.

16. Now that, since the signing of the Charter of San
Francisco, millions of human beings have recovered the
right to assume control of their own destiny; now that
dependence and colonial
domination have been replaced in
countries where persons have been given back their dignity
as human beings by relations of co-operation openly based
on freedom of expression of their will and of mutual
respect of legitimate interests; even though this is a reality
wherever we look in the world, Portugal is today one of the
last of the European States to turn a deaf ear to the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, attached as it is to the laughable
delusion that African territories can be merged in the
Iberian Peninsula,

22. Two years after the adoption of the resolution of 24
April 1963, the Security Council, on Senegal’s request, held
a new meeting on 19 May 1965 [1212th meeting]
necessitated by the increasing gravity of the violations of
Senegalese national territory by Portuguese forces. Overflights of Senegalese villages were cited: in Tanafe, On
4 April 1964; in Djidadji-Balante, on 5 July 1965; in
N’Dofia, on 23 January 1965; and in San?-Kobe, on
8 March 1965.
2
jl

Senegalese territory, 30 persons wounded, 27 persons
kidnapped, 10 personskilled.

23. Portuguese soldiers invaded several villages: Thiamoule, on 18 April 1964; San?-Kobt?, on 14 June 1964;
Selik&rie, on 6 and 8 January 1965; N’Gobrie, on 15
February 1965; and Bambato, on 18 April 1965. Portuguese soldiers opened fire on the villagers. Spent cartridges
of tear-gas and bullets, as well as grenade explosions in the
villages marked the violent passageof the Portuguese.

33. The revelations made, in this same hall, by the
representative of Senegal to the United Nations, after the
bombing of the village of Samine on 2.5November 1969 by
the regular Portuguese army, left no doubt whatever in the
minds of any, of the entire responsibility of the Portuguese
authorities who had ordered these criminal acts.

24. Two soldiers of the regular Portuguese Army and an
agent of the Portuguese Intelligence Service, arrested by the
Senegalese authorities, attested, by their very physical
presence, to the violation by the Portuguese forces of the
integrity of our national territory.

34. The Security Council, “bearing in mind its resolutions
178 (1963) of 24 April 1963 and 204 (1965) of 19 May
1965,” on 9 December 1969 adopted a new resolution
[273 (196911 expressing its concern “about the serious
situation created by the shelling of the village of Samine in
the southern region of Senegal from the Begene base” in
Guinea (Bissau). The Security Council “strongly [condemned] the Portuguese authorities for the shelling of the
village of Samine, which (1) on 25 November 1969 caused
one death and seriously wounded eight persons . . . and
(2) on 7 December 1969 caused five deaths and seriously
wounded one woman” and “again [called] upon Portugal
to desist forthwith from violating the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Senegal.” Finally, the same resolution stated that “in the event of failure by Portugal to
comply with paragraph 2 of the present resolution, the
Security Council will meet to consider other measures.”

25. The Security Council, at its meeting of 19 May 1965,
limited itself to reaffirming its‘resolution 178 (1963) of 24
April 1963 and requesting “once again the Government of
Portugal to take all effective and necessary action to
prevent any violation of Senegal’s sovereignty and territorial integrity” [resolution 204 (19&Y)].
26. The Secretary-General, it is true, was requested to
continue to follow the development of the situation.
27. Four years after the adoption of this second resolution, the Security Council was convened once more, on
9 December 1969 /152Oth meeting], to reopen the record
of Portuguese crimes committed on Senegalese territory.
The meeting was called because of the frequency of the acts
of aggression and the wide destruction caused by Portuguese troops on Senegaleseterritory.

35. The Security Council has remained seized of this
question since 9 December 1969. Nevertheless, after the
brief period of calm which followed the meeting of
9 December 1969, and despite the resolutions of the
Security Council and despite the aims and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations which should govern the
behaviour of all States Members of the Organization,
Portuguese ‘troops and aircraft, very soon renewed their
attacks against the territory and populations of Senegal.

28. In 1966, once again Senegal had to denounce twelve
violations of its air space, the two shellings of its villages,
the kidnapping by Portuguese forces of 43 villagers, and the
theft of about 100 cattle, The material losses suffered were
200 huts and 11 granaries burned.

36. In the first six months of the year 1970 my
Government was obliged to denounce 23 violations of its
air space; 24 shells landing on Senegaleseterritory; 3 viilages destroyed; 320 huts burned; 119 granaries burnt
down, 18 personskidnapped; 36 persons wounded and four
killed.

29. In 1967 Senegalese air space wasviolated six times: 12
shells were fired on Senegaleseterritory; three villages were
destroyed; six persons kidnapped; seven persons killed; 10
persons wounded; 70 huts and 27 granaries burned.
30. In the course of the many Portuguese incursions on
Senegalese territory, the village of Djirak, in the Department of Oussouye, was the scene, on 23 September 1967,
of the summary execution of a peasant, who was decapitated in the public square: his severed head being taken
away by the Portuguese murderers.

37. In spite of the provocative and murderous character of
the acts of the Portuguese army and the increasing number
of violations of Senegaleseair space, my Government did
not at the time ask for a special meeting of the Security
Council. We limited ourselves to telling the international
community the truth about all the acts of which we had
been the victim and which are on the record.

31. In 1968, with the same cynicism, the Portuguese
troops continued their criminal acts of aggression and
destruction. The Senegaleseauthorities again denounced 14
violations of Senegalese air space, 19 incursions by Portuguese troops, in Senegal, 52 shells fired by the Portuguese
on Senegalese soil, 4 villages destroyed, 22 persons kidnapped,

38. In January 1970, at the renewal of the violence of
Portuguese attacks, the Senegalese Chief of State formally
addressedthe Secretary-General in order that a fact-finding
mission be sent to Senegal to establish once and for all in
the eyes of the world the truth about the daily damage
inflicted by Portuguese troops on Senegaleseterritory.

32. From January 1969 to December of the same year,
and even before the meeting of the Security Council on
9 December 1969, Senegal added to the list of deliberate
aota of aggression perpetrated on its territory by Portuguese
troops 27 violations of its air space, 240 shells fired on

39. It would be easy for the committee of experts, the
SenegaleseChief of State pointed out, to note that the only
foreign military base in Senegal was the result of a freely
negotiated agreement with France; that the Senegaleseunit
3

of the village. On 18 February at 8 p.m. a 1OS-millimetre
shell fired from the Portuguese base of Bigene fell in the
village of Fassada, department of Sedhiou. On the night of
18 to 19 February about 30 regulars of the Portuguese
army coming from the Bigene base infiltrated into the
Senegalese village of Mangou-Roungou and kidnapped two
of the inhabitants. On 28 February Portuguese troops
infiltrated into the village of Mangou-Roungou, stabbed an
inhabitant and stole his livestock. On the night of 31 March
to 1 April at three o’clock in the morning soldiers of the
regular Portuguese Army based at Guidaje and Farim
attacked and burned the village of Kandienoug in the
district of Tanafe. One of the inhabitants waskilled and 17
others were wounded, five of them seriously. On 6 April, at
noon, five shells fired from the Big&e base exploded in
Toubacouta, wounding a 35-year-old woman, On the night
of 11 to 12 April Portuguese mercenaries burned the
villages of Madigassama and Stikounaya. One hundred and
seventy-three huts were destroyed as well as all the crops
stored in the barns there; 200 head of cattle and sheepwere
carried off. On the night of 16 to 17 April towards
8.45 p.m. the Senegalese villages of Karoumbou and Tankanto were attacked and burned by Portuguese units, Total
losses were as follows: at Karoumbou there were three
dead, two seriously wounded and 72 huts destroyed, and at
Tankanto there were three seriously wounded, 75 huts
destroyed and 18 tons of crops burned.

nearest the frontier was 60 kilometres from the village of
Samine, and that our army in Casamance at the time was
composed only of infantry units. He went on to point out
that the Senegalese forces for the maintenance of order had
never crossed the frontier to Guinea (B&au): had never
violated the air space of that territory.
40. One might wonder what were the results of that
investigation, and of what value were the Portuguese
allegations?
41. The members of the group of experts who were in
Senegal from 16 to 22 June 1970 will no doubt give you an
answer on which I shall not passjudgement for the arrival
of the group of experts in Cas:nname on 20 June 1970 was
greeted two hours later with shelling from Portuguese
artillery on a Senegalese village situated near the frontier,
and I would add, in the presence of the group of experts.
42. Thus, the second half of the year 1970 was equally
bloody along the entire frontier south of Casamance. Our
air space was deliberately violated 113 times by helicopters,
Dornier fighter planes and Fiat G-91 bombers, especially in
the departments of Kolda, Sedhiou and Velingara. There
were 19 incursions on the territory of Senegal by Portuguese troops with artillery cover in those same departments.
43. Those departments were bombed seven times. The
village of SeWniB, in the department of Kolda, on the
night of 4 to 5 September 1970 was shelled 17 times from
the Cambajue base of the Portuguese. In the village of
Kolodinnto-Maounde there were shehings on 13 July 1970.
Two were killed, Mrs. Yacine Diallo, 40 years of age, and a
child, Yamadio Diallo, 8 years of age, and 2 were wounded,
Mrs. Ramata Diallo, 40 years of age, and young Aby Diallo,
6 years of age. The sinister balance sheet of these Portuguese attacks for the second semester of 1970 shows:
6 dead, 33 wounded, 12 of them gravely, 101 granaries
burned, 256 huts burned, and 391 stolen cattle.

46. In the face of the scope of these attacks, Senegalonce
again was compelled, on 22 April, to submit a new
complaint before the Security Council. Despite the warn.
ings contained in that complaint and despite the appeal
made to the permanent members of the Security Council,
Portuguese troops continued their aggressionsand depreda:
tions in Senegaleseterritory.
47. On 26 April, four days after the complaint waslodged,
the village of SBlik6nie was attacked by regular units of the
Portuguese Army. Six shells were fired, and two inhabitants
were wounded. On 8 May a Portuguese observation aircraft
overflew the village of Kolda. On 16 May two inhabitants
of the village were wounded by grenade explosions. On22
May the village of Singap was attacked by a group of
Portuguese bandits armed with guns. On 31 May the village
of Boutogoul, two kilometres to the south of Singap, was
attacked by Portuguese soldiers, and two farmers were
wounded. On 4 June a shell fell on the village of Mangob
Roungou department of Sedhiou. On 6 June 1971, the
village of Simbour was attacked by Portuguese soldiers
coming from Ingore and one girl waskilled. On the night Of
1 l-12 June an attack was launched against the village of
Souboute, district of Diattacounda, by Portuguese soldiers
and there were 3 wounded as a result, On the night of 13te
14 June Portuguese soldiers plundered the village ef
Manekounda. On 16 June a farmer was wounded after an
attack against the village of Sibana. On 21 June the vilbgs
of Niafor four kilometres northwest of Samine wasattacked by a band of Portuguese mercenaries armed with
submachine-guns and grenades killing one villager and
stealing 62 head of cattle. On the night of 28 to 29 June
the village of Kaniko was attacked at 9.3Op.m by
Portuguese units, who withdrew carrying off some of the
cattle. On the night of 2 to 3 July the village cf
Diabakounda west of Samine, was attacked by a band of

44. But it seems essential to me to dwell on the violence
and deliberate repetition of Portuguese aggressionssince the
beginning of 1971, first of all because they followed a
preparation of public opinion which reveals that these
Portuguese attacks were premeditated. They also show an
escalation in violence, violence which the Security Council,
which has the main responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, is entitled to know,
45. Thus, on 2.5 January 1971 four 105-millimetre shells
fired from the Portuguese base of San Dommgos exploded
in the village of M’Pack-Mankagne and wounded one child,
On the night of 30 to 31 January Portuguese troops
operating from the Ingore base raided the village of Faraba,
in the district of Diattacounda in the department of
Sedhiou, and killed two inhabitants with machetes, On
3 February three Portuguese jet aircraft overflew the
Senegalese village of Darsalam Peulh in the Tanafe district.
On the night of 5 to 6 February six shells fired from the
Portuguese base of Cambajue exploded in the Senegalese
village of Sare Souna, which is located ten kilometres from
the frontier. On 11 February the Portuguese base of
Cambajue opened mortar fire on the village of SBIik&ie,
department of Kolda. One shell fell squarely in the centre
4

Portuguese soldiers. One inhabitant was killed, and four
huts were burned. On 5 July the village of Fassada east of
Samine, wasattacked by Portuguese units. One woman who
was severely wounded subsequently died. On 5 July a band
of Portuguese mercenaries attacked the village of M’Pack, in
the department of Ziguinchor.

54. On 23 May the Chief of the Frontier Sector,
Mr. Abdou Diasse, who left Kolda that day at 2 p.m. in an
official vehicle, license plate 3889 S.O., accompanied by a
policeman, Mr. Daouda Ba, drove over a mine placed
between the village of Medina Alpha Sadou and the village
of Sare-Ndiaye. The vehicle was hurled seven metres from
the point of impact. Two occupants in critical condition
were taken to the hospital at Kolda in a military ambulance. The Sector Chief, Mr. Abdou Diasse, died that very
day at 8 p .m . from his wounds. The policeman was severely
wounded and is still in the hospital undergoing treatment.

48. However, the premeditated nature of the Portuguese
attacks appears even more clearly in the preparation of
public opinion through the circulation of false information
obviously instigated by the Portuguese authorities. Thus, an
article dated 25 May 1971 written by Mr. Bruce Loudon,
who is the Lisbon correspondent of the British newspaper
Tfze Daily Telegraph, reported the arrival in Senegal of
Cuban technical advisers who were-and I quote from the
newspaper-“to take charge of heavy weapons, communications and technical units” ready to invade Guinea (Bissau).
As if Senegal did not have enough to do to protect its own
frontiers! On 8 June 1971 an article appeared in the same
newspaper unperturbedly announcing an imminent attack
against Guinea (Bissau) coming from Senegal. On 14 June
the very same newspaper, speaking of the “‘long and hostile
Senegalese frontiers”, reported the arrival of thirty-two
Cubans in Senegal to “assist and direct new attacks against
Guinea (Bissau)“, Events have shown since then that Lisbon
was simply trying to prepare new justifications for its
repeated aggressions against Senegal.

55. On 5 June at 2.40 p.m. a military vehicle U-55
No. 240403/S8 of the 7th Light Infantry Company based
at Samine exploded when it hit a mine placed on the road
connecting Samine with the village of Toubacouta. As a
result five were wounded, two seriously; one suffered a
fractured skull and is still hospitalized. The wounded were
Jean-Pierre Malack, Serial No. 271 .OO,5 12; Path6 Niang,
Serial No. 126.90.125; Mandiaye
Babou,
Serial
No.770~01.162; Mory Talla, Serial No. 371.00.653, and
Momar Lissa Seek, Serial No. 370.01.494. All the wounded
were evacuated to the Ziguinchor Hospital in military
aircraft on the morning of 6 June 197 1.
56. On 11 June, toward 5 pm., an anti-tank mine was
discovered on the road from Faradianto, three kilometres
from Samine.

49. But there is more. This escalation of violence now
takes on a new form: the criminal laying of anti-tank and
anti-personnel mines on Senegalese territory by Portuguese
forces,

57. On 19 June towards 11.5 am. between the villages of
Sare-Ndiaye and Medina Alpha Sadou, the car of the
District Chief of Dioulacolon department of Kolda exploded on a mine. Four persons were travelling on that
vehicle, license plate 4901 S.I.D. The driver was wounded,
as was his assistant. The mechanic was killed instantaneously and the assistant mechanic was severely wounded.
The wounded were taken to the hospital at Zinguinchor;
the car wastotally destroyed.

50. On 4 May an explosive device was found above and
below the bridge between the villages of Salike and Sare
Sissao. These explosives were found after a patrol of
twenty-five Portuguese soldiers had been seen operating in
the sector,
51. On 9 May an anti-personnel mine was discovered in
the village of Bambato, Diattacounda district. An anti-tank
mine was also removed near the same village, on the right
side of the Ziguinchor-Tanafe road. The perpetrators of
these ambushes could only be soldiers from the Bigene base
in Guinea (Bissau) as footprints revealing the use of ranger
shoes were found near the mines and were traced all the
way to the frontier, on the road leading to the Bigdne base.

58. On 1 July, at about 8 am., two anti-tank mines were
‘removed from the OussouyeCap Skiring road. On the same
day, at 4 p.m., 200 metres from the village of SantiabaMandjak au anti-tank mine exploded when a public
transport vehicle belonging to Mr. Nolkante of Ziguinchor
drove over it. One waskilled; 13 werewounded. According
to information obtained from inhabitants of the village of
Santiaba-Mandjak, a Portuguese helicopter had landed on
an adjacent ricefield on Wednesday, 30 June at about
6 p.m. Four men equipped with picks and shovels alighted.
They boarded a Portuguese truck, which left along the
Oussouye road. The helicopter took off again only when
those men returned, at 11 p.m., towards the Portuguese
base of Valtira located six kilometres from the border at a
point directly opposite the village of Santiaba-Mandjak.

52. On 20 May an anti-personnel mine was found on a
much-travelled path in the Koumbacara Sector. To avoid all
danger to inhabitants, the police had to detonate that mine.
53, On 21 May a systematic demining operation was
undertaken in the villages of Sare Mansaly and Tidelly in
the Dabo district, department of Kolda. As a result of that
operation one anti-personnel mine was removed about 800
metres from Sare Mansaly, on the Tidelly road north of
8are Mansaly; an anti-personnel mine 850 metres north.
west of Sare Mansaly and two anti-tank mines 400 metres
from the vlilage of Tidelly were also removed. Footprints
found near the mines led to the village of Sare-Bakary in
Guinea (Bissau), where a Portuguese base is located. Those
mines were probably placed there on the night of 19 to 20
May.

59. On Friday, 2 July, the day after the explosion, a
Portuguese helicopter flew over the same area and photographed the debris of the destroyed vehicle. On the same
day at noon a unit of the Senegalese army discovered
another anti-tank mine near the crater left by the mine
explosion of the day before. The Section Chief then
arrested a man who wasobviously a look-out. Although he
came from the village of Effock, which is near the frontier
and has a pro-Portuguese reputation, he confirmed the
5

of a Portuguese-African community,
eludes nothing.

which a priori ep 1
?
1
67. These proposals, which were publicly made to Pop
tugal, were confirmed by the Senegalese Chief of State to
the Secretary-General and when giving him this notification
the Senegalese Chief of State stipulated that they had been
approved by the liberation movements and that Portugal
had not yet acted on them.
b
68. Under the Charter the Security Council has the i
responsibility “to maintain international peace and secu. I
rity”. It is UP to the Security Council therefore to prevent
any Member State of the Organization from resorting to the
use of force against the territorial integrity of any other
Member of the Organization. It is therefore up to the t
Security Council to take effective measures to this end ia j
order to prevent any, threat to the peace and to repressany ;
acts of aggression. It is for the Security Council to decide
which measures should be taken to implement its decisions.

evidence given by the inhabitants of the village of SantiabaMandjak .
60. Mines were therefore placed on Senegalese territory in
two different sectors in two periods of time. First, at the
end of April and in May mines were laid in the frontier
sectors of Kolda and Sedhiou. Thereafter, in June and July
1971 mines were placed in Basse-Casamancein the Oussouye Sector. The second phase of this mine laying is
particularly instructive. In view of the economic and tourist
activities of the Basse-Casamance,which is particularly
active and densely populated, we see that there was a
tactical reason of military interest in the placing of those
mines. The appearance of the first mines south of Oussouye
seems to have followed, chronologically speaking, the
resolutions adopted by the Organization of African Unity
at its last sessionwhich were designed to increase aid to the
African liberation movements. We also know that the Chief
of Staff of the Portuguese army travelled to Guinea (Bissau)
immediately those resolutions had been adopted.
61, So the question that arises now is how Portugal has
facilities so powerful that it is able to carry out a war of
aggression and colonial reconquest in Guinea (Bissau) and
elsewhereat the same time.

69. In its resolution of 9 December 1969 [273(1969/j,
the Security Council stipulated that:
“in the event of failure by Portugal to comply with
paragraph 2 of the present resolution, the Security
Council will meet to consider other measures.”

62. Rightly or wrongly, all the African States are convinced that that country, which is beyond doubt, one of
the most underdeveloped of all European countries, could
not alone, with just its own resources, carry the crushing
burden of repression it has carried for nearly 10 years now
and erected into a system both within its own frontiers as
well as in the African territories. All the African States,
rightly or wrongly, are deeply convinced that Portugal can
do so only because it belongs to the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) and has the support of the members
of that organization. At the last meeting of the Foreign
Ministers of NATO one minister did not hesitate to attack
Portugal’s colonial policy and express his fears that such
activities might one day discredit NATO in the eyes of the
Africans.

70. It is these measures which Senegal, after having
exhausted all the procedures provided for under the
Charter, asks the Security Council to take against Portugal.
71. One last word, if you will allow me. I should like to
stress-and I hope better than I did in my statement-that,
if we did not speak of the recent letter, in which Portugal
saw fit to reply, it wasbecause the mine-laying wasonly an
isolated element in a long list of aggressions, that have
taken place, that I wished to stress, and have taken place
since the last meeting of the Security Council. Another
matter is that all the countries with Ambassadors in Dakar
who are free to move about, and who have already visited
Casamance, know the situation on the southern frontier of
Senegal. This new element, and one that is not for publicity
or propaganda purposes, is the following: I left Dakar on
Saturday at 10 p.m. This morning I received a telegram
which was sent to me on the instructions of the President
of the Republic, by the Governor of Casamance, which
states: “We wish to inform you that the village of
Farad&&o in the Department of Sedhiou, region of
Diattacounda, was attacked on 10 July at 2 p.m. by
Portuguese assailants.”

63. However, despite all the aggressions against the territorial integrity and national independence of Senegal, the
Senegalese Chief of State, when visiting Casamance from 3
to 14 March 1969, publicly proposed to Portugal the broad
~mthne of a peace plan that would put an end to the
struggle in Guinea (Bissau) between the Portuguese nationalists and Portugal, the burden of which in part at least is
borne by Senegal.
64. The first stage of this peace would be a cease-fire,
followed by negotiations without any prior conditions.

72. It is possible for the press correspondents accredited
to Dakar and the press correspondents who are here andto
whom we-shall show this document, to verify whetherthis
is an act deliberately committed by Portugal, doubtless
showing the importance it attaches to decisions of the
Security Council, asit already did when the experts wentto
Casamance .

65. The second stage would begin, at the close of
negotiations, by a period of internal autonomy for Guinea
(Bissau) and the procedures, the limits and the time-limits
of which would be freely discussed between, on the one
hand, the representatives of the Portuguese Government,
and, on the other hand, the representatives of the political
movements of Guinea (Bissau).

73. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Aench): The
second speaker on my list is the representative of Guinea
who has the floor.

66. Finally, in the third and final stage, independence
would be granted, after negotiation, within the framework
6

74. Mr. TOURI!? (Guinea) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, first of all, I should like, through you, to
thank the members of the Security Council for having
allowed the delegation of the Republic of Guinea to
participate in this painful but important discussion without,
of course, the right to vote.

75. The question submitted to the Security Council is a
complaint by Senegal against Portugal for repeated vlolations of Senegalese national territory and flagrant aggression against the Senegalese population of Casamance by
mine-laying that has caused human losses and considerable
material damage.
76. I must avow immediately that it is not with a light
heart that the delegation of the Republic of Guinea appears
before the Security Council to express all the sorrow, all
the pain and all the revulsion that we feel at the countless
and nameless crimes that Portuguese colonialism has committed and continues to commit in Angola, in Mozambique
and in Guinea (Bissau), under the very nose of the
international community.
77. Need I recall that on 22, 23, 27 and 28 November
1970, the Government and the people of the Republic of
Guinea were the victims of the most heinous aggression that
an independent African State has ever known? And the
aggressor wasPortugal.
78. Need I also recall that the Portuguese colonial soldiery, in its war of aggression against the innocent African
populations, resorts to incendiary and napalm bombs and,
against the African forests, defoliants whose devastating
effects are known all over the world?
79. It is this massive destructive frenzy against men and
nature that is the hallmark of the Portuguese colonial
undertakings at the end of the twentieth century.
80. The complaint of the Government of Senegal is
contained in documents S/10227 of 17 June and S/10251
of 6 July-these
documents whose clarity, precision and
concision show clearly one of the new aspects of the
escalation by Portugal in its crimes against the African
populations
and warrant serious consideration by this
Council.
81. The Republic of Guinea knows by experience that
Portuguese colonialism is ensured blanket impunity thanks
to the traditional protection it enjoys from its defenders in
NATO. We also know that Portuguese colonialism, intoxi-

cated by that support and by the complicity of its allies,
heeds only one language-that of violence. It would
therefore be illusory to speak of overtures to Lisbon and
even less of any kind of community to be founded on
terror, on crime and on the exploitation of African peoples.
82. We are asking ourselvesthe following question: is the
Security Council, at the end of its endeavours here, once
more going to adopt a resolution platonically condemning
Portugal for its conduct, while on the morrow Portugal will
receive the material and moral support of its NATO allies,
thus placing the criminal in a position to permit him to
continue perpetrating his depredations?
83. We seize this opportunity solemnly to draw the
attention of the international community to the Machiavellian plans for a new aggressionthat Portugal and some of its
allies are at present hatching against the Republic of
Guinea.
84. The Head of State of Guinea, President Ahmed Sdkou
Toure, Supreme Leader of the RevoIution and Commander-in-Chief of the Guinean revolutionary and popular
armed forces, in a statement to the nation on 1 July 1971,
unveiled the new plans of aggression prepared by imperialism, using Portugal asits instrument of execution. Indeed,
mercenaries are recruited, financed and trained on Guinea
(Bissau) soil and in certain other countries for a new
invasion of Guinean national territory. World public opinion must be informed of this.
8.5. In the eyes of the delegation of the Republic of
Guinea the standing and permanent question submitted to
the United Nations, and now during the present discussion
to the Security Council, the organ primarily responsible for
the maintenance of international peace and security in the
world, is not to judge the act of aggression as such but
rather to know how the Council intends to redress and to
put an end to what has been recognized as a manifest and
flagrant violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of this African country neighbouring on the enclavesunder
Portuguese colonial domination.
86. We prefer to believe that the hope which we continue
to place in the Security Council will not be disappointed.
87. We thank you, Mr. President, and we reservethe right
to speak again during the course of the debate on this
question.
The meetingroseat 4.55 p.m.

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNfTED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publicalionr
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may
bookstore

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

SE PROCURER

be obtained
or write

Les publications
des Nations
Unier
rant
d4pasituirer
du monde
enlier.
Informez-vour
Nations
Unies, Section
des ventes,
New York

KAK IlOIlY’iCITb

W3AAHCIfl

from bookstores
and di,lributort
tar United
Notions,
Sales Section,

DES NATIONS

throughout
New York

UNIES

en vente
dons
les libroiries
et les ogencer
oupr&t
de votre libroiric
ou ndresrez-vou,s
h:
ou Gen&.ve.

OPfAHbl3A~HH

06bE#lHEHHblX

HAMLI6i

Il:~,w~in
Opra~~~i:tn~~nn06~~~n1rcir1il~1s
IIaipil
~10ih’uo
iq.uiTb
n ~mim~s
>iarasiiiiax
iII’CIlT~‘TIIflS
110 IIWX pnirOiiaS
XiipR.
IIanoAliTC
cnpanim
06 Ir:\~arllilix
n llaIUrll
liilliiliiiOY
YiU’iXlIiUC
i1.Tli UlliUllTC
110 Zl@?c)‘:
Oprnmwn~r~H
Ohe~miiciiiiidx
lIar(itilt
Cwiiw~
IrpOAtiliC
ll3~alln~,
IIbiO-nOIXi
lim %OllCBa.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

Las publicacioner
de los Naciones
Usidar
c&n
en todar
partes
del mwido.
Consulte
a su librero
Ventar,
Nuevo
York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S.

030

(or equivalent

en venta
o dirljosc

II

uo

UNIDAS
en librerias
a: Nocioner

in other

currencies)

y cases distribuidorar
Unidor,
Secci6n

de

82020~July

197%2,050
