S/PV.8323

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8323rd meeting

Thursday, 2 August 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Pierce . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Ipo
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Alotaibi
Ms. Samson
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Vaverka
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-24795 (E)
*1824795*

S/PV.8323

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: I should like to take this opportunity
to pay tribute, on behalf of the Security Council, to His
Excellency Mr. Olof Skoog, Permanent Representative
of Sweden to the United Nations, for his service as
President of the Council for the month of July. I think
it was an outstanding presidency by our Swedish
colleagues and I am sure I speak for all members of
the Council in expressing our deep appreciation to
Ambassador Skoog and all of the Swedish team for the
great diplomatic skill, imagination and flair with which
they conducted the Council’s business last month. I
thank them very much.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen, and Mr. John Ging, Director of the
Coordination and Response Division of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: We meet at an important time.
It has been two years — two years too long — since
the Yemeni people had the chance for a negotiated
end to this war. Today, therefore, as we meet we have
the chance to weigh the opportunities for peace and, I
hope, to begin the difficult and uncertain journey away
from war.
Earlier this week I had the privilege to meet with
a man who has lived the mission of peace and of
reconciliation. I am referring to His Highness the Amir
of Kuwait. I cannot easily remember someone who has
so successfully confronted the challenge of war and
then of peace, which he succeeded at, and who has so
2/20

02/08/2018

clearly shown us how to move from one to the other.
He speaks so movingly of the process by which his
country was rescued, including by the Coalition, and
then formed a constructive relationship with Iraq.
Recently, and despite all our efforts, the pace of the
war has increased. We meet at a time when the focus of
the war is the battle for Al-Hudaydah. What military
people tell me about Al-Hudaydah is that it has become
the centre of gravity of the war. The Red Sea now is also
a theatre of war. We have tried to find a way to avoid a
battle for the city and the port of Al-Hudaydah, and we
are still trying. But even though the requirements for
such an arrangement are not yet met, it is to be noted
that our efforts, with the Council’s unified support,
have managed to narrow the gap between the two sides
in ways that nobody expected.
What is clear to me now is that this issue — the
resolution to the specific crisis in Al-Hudaydah — has
a better chance of being resolved within the context of
a comprehensive political settlement. What does that
mean for us today? I think it means that it is time long
past for us, together, to call for an early resumption of
the political process, which has lasted two years since
the last round in Kuwait. My principal message and
request to the Council today is that we urge the parties
to resolve this conflict through negotiation rather than
through military means, which is a sentiment that
members of the Council have consistently expressed in
recent months.
After having consulted with the parties, I plan
therefore to invite them to Geneva on 6 September for
a first round of consultations. These consultations will
provide the opportunity for the parties, among other
things, to discuss the framework for negotiations and
to agree on relevant confidence-building measures and
specific plans for moving the process forward. I ask for
the Council’s support in this. In that connection, our
engagements with women’s groups, as well as southern
stakeholders, are crucial to the success of future
consultations. As is set out in resolution 2216 (2015), I
would aim for as inclusive a process as possible.
I did not come lightly to this decision. I have
based this on the advice given to me by Yemenis
from all quarters in the months since assuming my
responsibilities. I have engaged primarily with the
parties, but also with civil society. I am especially
grateful for my meetings with Yemeni women as I
continue to consult with them on elements of the peace
18-24795

02/08/2018

The situation in the Middle East

process. Their voices unsurprisingly and consistently
remind us that Yemeni families bear the brunt of this
conflict and want it to be done with.
I know from that engagement that a political
solution to this war, in line with the relevant resolutions
of the Council, the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative
and the national dialogue outcome, is available, as
I have said before to the Council. We know what can
work. We have heard it from all sides. We have talked
to all of them, and we have studied the experience of
past efforts to resolve this conflict. As the Amir was
reminding me the other day, 100 days in Kuwait is an
enormously valuable guide for us.
An end to this war cannot come too soon for the
people of Yemen. As our humanitarian colleagues are
quick to remind us — and I am sure John Ging will do
so — if we do not succeed together in putting an end to
it, there will be millions more Yemenis depending on
the assistance of our humanitarian agencies. I am very
conscious, as we all are, that each day costs lives that
we might have saved, and that people could have been
alive who are not today had we acted earlier.
I would like to speak for a moment about what
is happening in Yemen. On Al-Hudaydah, as already
mentioned, we have made progress, particularly with
regards to a United Nations role in the port, which
was agreed with me by the leadership of Ansar Allah
some weeks ago. This does not mean, however, that the
gap is closed. The gap is not closed. We will continue
our efforts to find a peaceful solution in that regard.
This progress is due to the serious cooperation I have
received from all sides as well as the Security Council’s
active support.
I continue to enjoy the close cooperation and
support of the Government of Yemen and its leadership,
which is always an important engaging primary
partner, as well as the leadership of the coalition. I
have also had a series of constructive and positive
meetings with the senior leadership of Ansar Allah.
These relationships are absolutely key to any potential
success we may expect in the endeavour of reaching
a political settlement. The nurturing of relationships
is the primary task of somebody in my position. Let
us therefore not throw away what we have achieved
on Al-Hudaydah. I am determined to build on it in our
consultations. As I have been reminded, let us not allow
progress or the absence of it on Al-Hudaydah deter us

S/PV. 8323

from our primary focus, which is on the search for a
political solution to this conflict.
I am concerned that Al-Hudaydah could be a
flashpoint. I take seriously any offer of de-escalation,
regardless of its magnitude, including the unilateral
offer from Ansar Allah to stop all attacks on shipping.
Many of us would not have wanted those attacks to have
happened at all. My concern is to avoid any action with
dire humanitarian consequences, in particular those
by my Office that may undermine the resumption of
the political process in September. I therefore call on
the parties, perhaps with the support of the Security
Council, to create an environment conducive — and I
use these words carefully — a conducive environment
to allow for this to happen.
On other matters, I am greatly encouraged by
the common desire of the parties to have the many
thousands of prisoners of war released. My Office has
been hard at work on this issue. On each occasion that
I have met with President Mansour Hadi Mansour, he
has particularly urged us to take a lead on this issue,
which I think is a tribute to his humanity. I know that
we all want to see forward movement in this area as
soon as possible.
I would like to conclude by summing up my
requests to the Security Council. First, I would ask
for support for my effort to begin consultations in
September in Geneva. Secondly, I would like support
for de-escalation in AlHudaydah — and to keep the
Red Sea out of the conflict. Thirdly, I ask for support
for those measures — I have mentioned one, the release
of prisoners, but there are many others — that bring
hope back to the people of Yemen. It is the people of
Yemen who will ensure that we have a good chance
of making the political negotiations work. Without
their involvement, interests, advocacy and support,
we will not make it. They need encouragement to
believe that this can happen. Fourthly, I would ask
Council members, as I know they will, to join me
in recognizing the extraordinary courage of the
international humanitarian organizations working in
the country. I have had the privilege in my frequent
visits to Yemen of witnessing first hand their courage,
diligence, reliability, independence and impartiality. It
is an exceptional privilege for all of us to be colleagues.
Finally, through you, Madam President, I would
like to thank the Security Council for the extraordinary
level of support that it has provided to my efforts. It

18-247953/20

S/PV.8323

The situation in the Middle East

makes an enormous difference to have a united and
eloquent Council asserting the principles of the United
Nations. The Council’s continued unity is, by any
standards, the key to the resolution of this conflict.
The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ging.
Mr. Ging: More than three years have elapsed
since the beginning of this conflict, and throughout this
time civilians in Yemen have been facing and bearing
the deplorable consequences of the conflict. We have
heard the statistics many times. More than 22 million
people — 75 per cent of the population, in fact — require
humanitarian assistance and protection. Three years of
conflict have left 2 million people displaced from their
homes; 8.4 million people do not know where their next
meal is coming from; and the worst cholera outbreak
in the world occurred in the country last year, with
1.1 million cases. The humanitarian situation is indeed
shocking both in scale and severity, and these figures
represent an urgent call to action.
In my briefing today I will focus on the
humanitarian situation in Al-Hudaydah, the expansion
of humanitarian operations across the country, obstacles
that humanitarian workers are facing and the impact of
the conflict on civilians.
Conflict in Al-Hudaydah governorate has escalated
significantly. Earlier today, we received reports that
attacks occurred around the entrance to one of the few
functioning public hospitals in Al-Hudaydah and an
adjacent fish market, causing civilian casualties. Since
1 June, violence has forced more than 340,000 people
from their homes across the governorate. Most are
taking shelter in host communities near their areas of
origin, while smaller numbers have arrived in Sana’a,
Aden and surrounding areas.
Sustained hostilities in Al-Hudaydah city,
interruptions to port operations or a siege of the city
would be catastrophic and must be avoided. There
is no contingency plan that can effectively protect
civilians from dire humanitarian consequences if
conflict in Al-Hudaydah escalates, as the capacity of
international organizations and their response will
quickly be overwhelmed. In addition, it is important to
recall that Al-Hudaydah was the epicentre of last year’s
devastating cholera outbreak, and cholera infections in
the city are currently rising. It is therefore essential to
bear this in mind when considering incidents like the
4/20

02/08/2018

one reported today, which affect public hospitals where
humanitarian partners are treating cholera patients.
Last week, air strikes hit water facilities in
Al-Hudaydah city and sanitation facilities south of the
city. Water and sanitation lines have also been damaged
in Al-Hudaydah as forces in the city dig trenches. As
we all know, damage to health, water and sanitation
infrastructure significantly increases the risks of the
spread of cholera.
Al-Hudaydah and nearby Saleef are the lifeline for
the majority of imports of the essential commodities of
food and fuel needed by millions of Yemenis every day
to survive. I am pleased to update the Security Council
that these ports remain open and operational. In fact,
commercial food imports in May rose to their highest
levels since November 2016 and fully met requirements.
However, food and fuel imports fell in June and again
in July. While keeping all ports open is critical, we
are equally concerned about maintaining adequate
quantities of affordable imports through these ports. To
do so, the conditions must be created whereby shipping
companies have enough commercial confidence to
continue supplying them.
As conflict has escalated in Al-Hudaydah,
humanitarian workers have stayed and delivered,
and we thank the Special Envoy for his recognition
of this fact. About 90 per cent of people displaced
by recent violence have in fact received emergency
relief packages. These packages contain food, hygiene
supplies and other items intended to preserve dignity.
Within this, humanitarian partners are also providing
additional assistance to the most vulnerable, including
food rations, cash, basic household items and shelter
supplies. Programmes also continue in Al-Hudaydah
to provide medicines, equipment and staff to health
facilities, maintain water and sanitation infrastructure,
and truck water to displaced people who cannot access
piped networks.
In addition to efforts in Al-Hudaydah, regular
humanitarian programmes have expanded significantly
across the country. They are working in difficult
and dangerous conditions. In June, the international
humanitarian effort provided emergency food assistance
to 7.5 million people — an increase of 200,000 people
since January. It also provided water, sanitation and
hygiene services that benefited 6.3 million people — a
60 per cent increase since January. Similar increases
have taken place in other sectors. As of mid-year,
18-24795

02/08/2018

The situation in the Middle East

about 60 per cent of the people whom we are targeting
with assistance had been reached, and humanitarian
partners continue to work tirelessly to expand their
programmes further.
Partnerships have played a very important role in this
expansion. This year, 169 front-line partners — United
Nations agencies and international non-governmental
organizations
and
Yemeni
non-governmental
organizations — are working together to reach millions
of people every month. Assistance is coordinated
through hubs in Aden, Al-Hudaydah, Ibb, Sa’ada and
Sana’a. A sixth hub will open soon in Mukalla.
Generous and flexible funding has also been key to
this scale up. The humanitarian response plan, which
has been recently sequenced to show first-line, secondline and full-response activities, has received more than
60 per cent of the required $3 billion. A large part of that
funding came early in the year through a $930 million
unearmarked contribution from the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. Additionally,
the United States, Kuwait, the United Kingdom and
Germany are among the most generous donors this year.
Notwithstanding the continuous scaling up of
humanitarian operations, serious obstacles persist.
Inside Yemen, humanitarian personnel face numerous
restrictions, particularly in areas controlled by
decision-makers in Sana’a. These include delays in
movements, detention of staff and supplies, attempts
to influence the selection of beneficiaries and
implementing partners, and other harassment. The
Yemen humanitarian country team is doing a tireless
and commendable job to engage decision-makers at all
levels to ensure that aid is safely delivered to the people
who need it across the country. However, more support
is needed to overcome those obstacles to humanitarian
access, including bureaucratic impediments.
The toll of this conflict on civilians and civilian
infrastructure is devastating. Incidents in which
civilians are killed or injured continue to be reported
with alarming regularity. I have already mentioned
several recent incidents, including today’s, that
damaged critical civilian infrastructure in Al-Hudaydah
and their consequences. In addition, in Sa’ada, a water
facility was hit for the third time in July, depriving over
10,000 people access to water. Last week, air strikes
in Al-Hudaydah hit sites very close to humanitarian
premises, causing structural damage. In a separate
incident, air strikes landed less than 500 metres from

S/PV. 8323

United Nations premises. All parties must respect
international humanitarian law, including the obligation
to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure, and to
take all feasible precautions to avoid and minimize
incidental harm. We also call on the parties not to use
civilian sites for military purposes and to allow civilians
to leave conflict-affected areas safely and voluntarily.
Finally, all parties must seize the current
opportunity for dialogue and work with the Special
Envoy to achieve a lasting political settlement and
sustainable peace. Humanitarian assistance — however
effective and large-scale — cannot mitigate the
destructive effect of conflict on every facet of daily
life. The Yemeni people have suffered too much for too
long. An end to this conflict is long overdue.
The President: I thank Mr. Ging for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): We
congratulate you, Madam President, on your country’s
accession to the presidency of the Security Council this
month. We also congratulate the Swedish delegation on
its work with such a busy schedule in July.
We are glad to see Mr. Griffiths in the Chamber
again. Yesterday, I said to him, and I really believe, that
the Council is fully united in its support for him. We
truly and strongly stand with him. Both parties need to
understand that there is no gap in the Security Council
when it comes to supporting him and to making sure
that both parties understand that they need to work with
him. We therefore absolutely welcome the invitation to
both sides to participate in Geneva. We look forward to
the outcome and to their positive response.
I think that we must look at the situation. We have
long been truly lucky because, if members look at what
is happening now, we were already upset and wanted
to condemn the Houthi attack on the Saudi oil tanker.
That was already considered an issue. The ballistic
missile strikes were already considered a problem. We
always said that if something did not let up, someone
would get hurt.
We have continued to say that the Panel of Experts
on Yemen have affirmed that Iran is supplying the
Houthis. They are just as much to blame as the Houthis.
However, today there was another attack. The idea
that a Saudi-led coalition carried out air strikes today
against a fish market and a hospital in Al-Hudaydah

18-247955/20

S/PV.8323

The situation in the Middle East

that may have caused dozens of casualties now brings
us to a new day in Yemen. We have reached a new sense
of urgency in Yemen that — if that is what is starting to
happen — civilians and infrastructure are at risk.
As the international community, we have to demand
that the two parties come together and understand the
seriousness of the situation. I think that, as we face
that, we will be very anxious to hear how the talks go.
However, I think that we as the Council and as members
need to remind both of them that civilian casualties,
civilian infrastructure and anything that relates to that
is a concern. The idea that strikes almost hit some of the
water tanks, given the cholera outbreak, and all such
things are starting to show a disregard for the people on
the ground at a time where they are already suffering
so much. We once again emphasize that Al-Hudaydah
port must stay open. There must be access so that
humanitarian aid can come in. However, we strongly
support the talks in Geneva. In fact, we think that they
cannot take place soon enough in view of what has been
happening in the past few days.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council and to wish you every success.
Through you, we would also like to thank the delegation
of Sweden for its outstanding presidency of the Council
last month.
Of course, we thank Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
and Mr. John Ging for their valuable and important
briefings on the political, security and humanitarian
developments in Yemen. In my statement, I will focus
on the political and security developments, in addition
to the humanitarian situation and the responsibility
shouldered by the Security Council.
With regard to the security and political
developments, we listened earlier to Mr. Griffiths
yalk about the outcome of his recent rounds of talks
and meetings following the efforts made to restore
order in the port city of Al-Hudaydah. His meetings
included those with the Yemeni parties, as well as a
number of visits to the countries of the region, the
most recent of which was to the State of Kuwait, in
addition to the initiative that he proposed to the Yemeni
parties to hold the next round of talks in Geneva. We
would like to emphasize our support for his efforts and
6/20

02/08/2018

those of the United Nations in resolving the conflict in
Yemen peacefully.
The State of Kuwait underscores that there is no
military solution to the crisis in Yemen. There is only
a political settlement, which is underpinned by the
three political terms of reference: the Gulf Cooperation
Council initiative and its implementation mechanism,
the outcome of the National Dialogue Conference, and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2216 (2015). Any peace plan that is not
supported by those pillars complicates and prolongs the
crisis, with repercussions for regional and international
security and stability.
On the security level, despite the coalition’s
announcement that it will halt its military operations
to restore the port city Al-Hudaydah and bring it under
the control of the legitimate Yemeni Government so as
to ensure the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
to Yemen a better opportunity to find a peaceful
solution, the Houthis have continued to deliberately
target civilian sites and inhabited areas in the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia, using ballistic missiles. To date, they
have launched a total of 163 missiles, in addition to
more than 66,000 explosive devices targeting civilian
properties and resulting in humanitarian and material
losses. The Houthi militias now employ new threats and
challenge the resolve of the international community
by targeting the security of international maritime
navigation in Bab Al-Mandab and the Red Sea — either
by planting maritime mines or by targeting commercial
ships and oil tankers, the most recent of which was the
targeting of two Saudi ships last week using anti-ship
missiles. We were on the brink of an environmental
catastrophe in the region as a result of the abuse by
the Houthis of Al-Hudaydah port as a launchpad for
such attacks.
The State of Kuwait reaffirms its condemnation in
the strongest terms of those ballistic missile attacks by
the Houthi militias on the territories of the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia and the neighbouring countries. They
also threaten the safety of international maritime
navigation in Bab Al-Mandab and the Red Sea. That
is a clear threat to international and regional peace and
security. In that regard, we support the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia and all measures undertaken to maintain
its security and stability. We commend the decision of
the Kingdom to issue 25,000 visas to Yemeni pilgrims
from all the Yemeni directorates and governorates,
without exception or discrimination.
18-24795

02/08/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Turning to the humanitarian situation, the donor
conference on the humanitarian situation in Yemen,
which was held in Geneva in April under the auspices
of the United Nations, Switzerland and Sweden and led
to approximately $2 billion in pledges, had a positive
impact, reflecting the interest of the international
community in preventing the humanitarian situation in
Yemen from deteriorating further, particularly in the
areas under the control of the Houthis. However, the
Houthis’ control over the city and port of Al-Hudaydah
and over the delivery of humanitarian assistance could
undermine the purposes of the donor conference and
only lead to further humanitarian suffering in Yemen.
In this regard, I am pleased to announce that the
pledges we made in April have been fully honoured.
We have handed over a total of $250 million to various
organizations, agencies and international funds in order
to alleviate the suffering of all the Yemeni people.
In relation to the responsibility shouldered by
the Security Council, it must maintain its united and
firm position with regard to the Yemeni situation.
The Council’s message to the Yemeni parties, in
particular the Houthis, must clearly emphasize the
following points.
First, it is unacceptable to continue ignoring the
relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2216 (2015), and to maintain such
intransigence by not committing to constructively
engaging in the political process, in addition to
favouring personal interests over the general interests
of the Yemeni people.
Secondly, we cannot accept the continuing ballistic
missile attacks on neighbouring countries or threats
to international maritime routes, which will have an
impact on regional and international peace and security.
Thirdly, using civilians as human shields,
exploiting civilian facilities as bases for launching
military operations and continuing to recruit children
all amount to war crimes, which are punishable under
international law.
Fourthly, it is important to cooperate with the
United Nations in order to ensure safe delivery and full
distribution of the humanitarian assistance throughout
Yemen, and to not subject its field staff to any harm.
Today, Thursday, 2 August, is the twenty-eighth
anniversary of the Iraqi occupation of the State of
Kuwait. The way the Security Council dealt with that

S/PV. 8323

situation was a historic landmark and demonstrated the
ability of the United Nations to maintain international
peace and security. The full implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions had a great
impact on lessening the duration of that crisis and the
time frame for the restoration of Kuwait’s legitimate
sovereignty over its territories. The Iraqi invasion of the
State of Kuwait sent a clear message to the international
community that if a State loses its sovereignty over
its territories that would have serious repercussions
and a catastrophic impact on international peace and
security. It would be remiss on our part not to reiterate
our utmost appreciation to the sisterly and friendly
States, in particular the international Coalition of
the 33 countries that supported our right, defended
international legitimacy and made substantial sacrifices
in order to liberate the State of Kuwait.
In this regard, we reiterate that it is important for the
efforts aimed at ending the Yemeni crisis to be based on
a political solution under the three terms of reference
that I cited earlier in order to ensure the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Yemen, as
well as non-interference in its internal affairs.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking Martin Griffiths, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, as well as
John Ging, Director of the Coordination and Response
Division, United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, for their informative briefings
and their commitment, as well as that of their teams.
They have our full support.
In response to their interventions, I would like to
return to two points: first, the situation in Al-Hudaydah,
which necessitates the protection of civilians and
the guarantee of safe, complete and unhindered
humanitarian access; and, secondly, the essential need
for a negotiated political solution — the only way out
of the crisis in Al-Hudaydah and, more broadly, the
conflict in Yemen.
First, the situation in Al-Hudaydah remains very
fragile and the recent upsurge of violence is worrying.
We are extremely concerned about today’s twopronged attack near the main Al-Hudaydah hospital,
which caused many casualties among civilians. We
once again reiterate the priority of France for the
protection of staff and medical facilities, as recalled in
the political declaration of 30 October 2017. We would

18-247957/20

S/PV.8323

The situation in the Middle East

like that the circumstances surrounding that attack be
fully clarified.
We again call on all parties to fully respect
international humanitarian law, in particular
the principles of distinction, proportionality and
precaution. That is essential in order to prevent the
civilian population, who is already suffering the
worst current humanitarian crisis, from becoming
the primary victim of the clashes. Many have fled
the fighting in Al-Hudaydah, with nearly 121,000
displaced persons, according to the figures of the
International Organization for Migration and of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
It is absolutely essential that the displaced be able to
safely cross the front lines and have unhindered access
to humanitarian assistance. All ports and airports,
including Al-Hudaydah and Saleef ports and Sana’a
airport, must be kept open and operational.
On Houthi territory, international and local
humanitarian partners must also have safe access to
those in need. We reaffirm our commitment to the
freedom of movement in the Bab Al-Mandab strait,
which must be ensured. In that regard, we condemn
the Houthi attacks that targeted two Saudi tankers
on 25 July. We have noted the announcement by the
Houthis of the temporary suspension of their military
activities in the Red Sea. That is a first step in the right
direction. The high level of violence in Al-Hudaydah
and elsewhere in the country threatens to undermine
over the long term the political momentum of the efforts
of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths.
Secondly, as the Security Council regularly
reiterates, there is no military solution in Yemen. The
political process remains the only possibility for the
country to emerge from a conflict that has lasted too
long. The United Nations mediation plays a central role
in reviving the peace negotiations. France renews its
full and complete support for the efforts of the Special
Envoy to relaunch the dialogue between the parties
with a view to an agreement on the management of
Al-Hudaydah port, the resumption of talks, a lasting
cessation of hostilities and the definition of the
parameters of a political resolution.
We therefore call once again on the parties, for their
part, to commit in good faith to a comprehensive and
inclusive political agreement, particularly in the runup to the Geneva conference, in which it is essential
that all parties participate. We also encourage Yemen’s
8/20

02/08/2018

regional partners to constructively support that process.
The objective of the Security Council must be to ensure
a cessation of hostilities and to maintain the pressure
on the parties in that regard in order to promote the
momentum launched by the Special Envoy.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We,
too, would like to begin by congratulating the United
Kingdom on having assumed the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of August. We wish you,
Madam President, every success and assure you of our
support. We would also once again like to congratulate
the Swedish delegation for the successful discharge of
the presidency during the month of July.
In addition, we welcome the convening of this
meeting, and we thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and
Mr. John Ging for their briefings. Peru applauds and
supports their tireless efforts, together with their
teams, to find a solution to the conflict in Yemen and
to protect the population under extremely difficult
circumstances. We believe that it is important for the
Council to discuss the issue transparently, reporting on
the ongoing efforts to prevent escalations and to put an
end to a conflict that has no military solution and that
has brought about the worst humanitarian crisis in the
world today.
Peru deplores the ongoing violence and suffering.
At this juncture, we are concerned about the risks to
Al-Hudaydah, the port of entry for the food, medical
supplies and fuel containers that Yemenis depend on.
We also deplore the fact that as the Panel of Experts
on Yemen mandated by resolution 2342 (2017) reports,
all the parties to the conflict continue to violate
international law and international humanitarian law, as
well as specific mandates of the Council on the conflict
in Yemen. The most recent violations are the coalition’s
bombings of civilian infrastructure in Al-Hudaydah,
including the health, water and sanitation services that
are crucial to coping with the new cholera outbreak.
Just today there were attacks on a market and near a
hospital. This must stop.
Peru firmly condemns the crimes committed by the
Houthi rebels, including the indiscriminate firing of
rockets at urban centres in Saudi Arabia, the planting of
anti-personnel mines and attacks on vessels in the Red
Sea. However, we must emphasize that any response
must comply with international law, and any claims to
a military solution must be ruled out, considering that
they entail the risk of aggravating an already disastrous
18-24795

02/08/2018

The situation in the Middle East

humanitarian situation. The reality is that there is no
humanitarian plan B if Al-Hudaydah port collapses, and
there is no guarantee that an offensive will not result in
that collapse. As Mr. Ging reminded us, many of the
people’s needs are still unmet despite the commendable
humanitarian efforts. We must be consistent in our
responsibility to protect them, including by preventing
further escalation. If not, we run the risk of pushing
the people’s support to the rebels and generally turning
to the violent extremism that leads to terrorism. We
emphasize that the ports and airports must remain
open and operational, in accordance with the Council’s
provisions. And humanitarian aid and the people’s
access to it cannot and should not be made conditional
on any military objectives.
We would like to highlight the efforts of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General to restore dialogue and
build trust between the parties, with a view to achieving
a ceasefire and facilitating a political solution. We
believe that his work should have the full and unanimous
support of the Council and the international community.
We welcome the announcement of the forthcoming
meeting in Geneva between representatives of the
Government of Yemen and the Houthis, which we hope
will enable us to make progress towards a political
solution. We emphasize the importance of ensuring
that the parties commit in good faith and without prior
conditions and that they act pragmatically, moderately
and quickly. We also emphasize how important it is that
countries with influence on the parties to the conflict
use their diplomatic efforts, and we welcome the work
being done in that regard.
Lastly, we would like to point out that the achieving
a sustainable peace will require broad consensus
on a shared vision for the future. In that regard, it is
important to ensure that the process is inclusive and
that all sectors of Yemen’s population are represented,
particularly women and young people.

S/PV. 8323

General, for his comprehensive report on the efforts to
bring the positions of the parties to the conflict in Yemen
closer and work for a resumption of the negotiation
process. We have great hopes for Mr. Griffiths’s ability
to help the parties realize the futility and unviability
of a military solution. We thank Mr. Ging, Director of
the Coordination and Response Division of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs for his briefing, which shows clearly that
Yemen and its people are enduring a massive
humanitarian disaster.
We fully support the Special Envoy’s initiative
to launch intra-Yemeni consultations in Geneva in
September. In our view it is desperately needed and
represents a unique chance to end this bloody war.
However, it will be important to ensure that as we get
closer to the negotiations, every key stakeholder is
available to help the parties find common denominators.
In our view, maintaining a calm atmosphere around
Al-Hudaydah and refraining from offensive action
would facilitate the implementation of this initiative.
Everyone must show restraint and reject any resort to
force. We agree with the Special Envoy that what is
needed is de-escalation and measures to build trust,
including freeing prisoners and detainees. We would
add that we need to unite the efforts of every Yemen
in combating terrorism on the Arabian Peninsula.
We should point out that from the very beginning
of the military operation we have emphasized that
Al-Hudaydah port, and Yemen’s other ports, must be
able to function reliably, since there are no alternative
routes into the country for a steady and uninterrupted
flow of humanitarian and commercial cargoes.

I would like to conclude by recalling the words
of the Executive Director of UNICEF when she
recently visited the country and learned that more than
11 million children are at risk. She said that there is no
justification for continuing this carnage.

Restraint is all the more essential in view of the
fact that two thirds of the people of Yemen are in need
of help. The civilian infrastructure lies in ruins and
the country is facing a new cholera epidemic. In that
regard, it will be vital to continue the humanitarian
efforts. We have noted the courageous work being done
by United Nations humanitarian personnel, as well as
the independent contributions of a number of Member
States, including Yemen’s nearest neighbours. Russia
has also been providing assistance to the people of
Yemen through both Sana’a and Aden.

Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank you personally,
Madam President, and the United Kingdom delegation
for convening today’s meeting. We are grateful to
Mr. Griffiths, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-

But it is obvious to all of us that humanitarian
efforts are not enough to bring the conflict to an end,
and neither is military action. We all agree that there
can be no military solution to the crisis in Yemen.
It is essential that we shift the focus on the current

18-247959/20

S/PV.8323

The situation in the Middle East

situation to a political dialogue. The Special Envoy has
a key role to play in this, and we support his efforts,
including through practical efforts with the parties
aimed at getting them to cooperate closely with the
United Nations. It is important that he work in Yemen
in person, maintaining a direct dialogue with all the
main Yemeni and regional players. The potential for
collective international assistance to the Special Envoy’s
efforts is far from being fully utilized, in our opinion,
and we still need to come up with a capable, balanced
and focused format for supporting efforts through the
United Nations, which — and this is crucial — will act
on a consolidated basis.
We would like to emphasize that establishing a
political process in Yemen would be an important
contribution to stabilizing the situation throughout
the subregion. We would like to recall our proposal
for launching a process for developing a package of
security and confidence-building measures in the
Persian Gulf and eventually the entire Middle East. This
type of structure, in which every key country of the
region should participate — including the Gulf States
and Iran — could not only help to strengthen universal,
comprehensive and undivided security in that part of
the world but also resolve long-standing and new crisis
situations, including the conflict in Yemen. Threats and
clashes must give way to dialogue and cooperation. We
must get to work right away on joint efforts to restore
a healthier atmosphere, which incidentally would make
a tremendous contribution to helping Mr. Griffiths
succeed. Russia will continue to consult with all
interested parties with the aim of implementing our
concept of security and cooperation in the Persian Gulf,
which we believe is urgent and essential.
In conclusion, we urge all the parties involved
in the conflict in Yemen to take advantage of the
opportunity offered by Mr. Griffiths’s proposal to
organize negotiations in Geneva in early September,
the success of which will be facilitated by a rejection of
military action and a willingness to work for a political
settlement. And the only priority should be a concern
for the interests of the people of Yemen.
Mr. Vaverka (Sweden): Madam President, as this
is our first open meeting under the United Kingdom
presidency of the Security Council, allow me to take
this opportunity to wish you the very best for the month
ahead. We look forward to working with you and your
team and assure you of our full cooperation.
10/20

02/08/2018

I also want to thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths
for his important briefing to the Council today. We fully
support the efforts to forge a political agreement to end
the conflict in Yemen. I also thank the Director of the
Coordination and Response Division of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, John Ging,
for his comprehensive briefing on the humanitarian
situation in the country.
Let me turn first to the political situation. We
commend Special Envoy Griffiths on his determined
and active diplomatic efforts, including his important
visits to Yemen and the region. These efforts have helped
create a window of opportunity to restart negotiations
on Al-Hudaydah and on a wider political settlement
to end this conflict and the intolerable suffering of
the civilian population. All parties must seize this
opportunity and engage sincerely and constructively
with the Envoy in good faith and without preconditions.
We call for an overall de-escalation to create an
environment conducive to talks. This includes a halt
to missile attacks and threats against shipping in the
Red Sea, as well as air strikes and fighting in civilian
areas — actions that we have repeatedly condemned.
The Council must also increase its efforts to
encourage engagement and de-escalation by the
parties. We echo the call of the Special Envoy on the
parties to, first, fully suspend or freeze the fighting
in Al-Hudaydah; secondly, engage in the upcoming
political consultations in Geneva based on the Envoy’s
framework presented to the Council on 18 June; thirdly,
ensure the effective inclusion and participation of
women in any political consultations; fourthly, respect
international humanitarian law, including as concerns
the protection of civilians and medical care, as well as
ensuring humanitarian access; and, fifthly, exchange
detainees and prisoners detained as a result of the
conflict, as a confidence-building measure.
I would now like to turn to the dire humanitarian
situation in Yemen. As we just heard from Mr. Ging,
22 million people, or three out of every four Yemenis,
are in need of humanitarian assistance or protection. We
share the concerns outlined by Mr. Ging in his briefing.
Let me pause here to join the Special Envoy and others
in praising the work of the many brave humanitarians on
the ground. We are encouraged to see the Al-Hudaydah
and Saleef ports open and functioning. As they are a
lifeline for millions of Yemenis, it is essential that they
remain that way. At the same time, we are concerned
18-24795

02/08/2018

The situation in the Middle East

by reports of the risk of reduced commercial imports,
including food and fuel.
The continued pause in the offensive is encouraging.
However, the reported escalation last week, including in
Al-Hudaydah, is cause for concern. Like others, we are
deeply concerned by the reported attack this morning
on a hospital and a fish market in Al-Hudaydah, which
has reportedly led to a significant loss of life.
As we have repeatedly heard from the United
Nations and its partners, a full-scale offensive against
Al-Hudaydah would aggravate the humanitarian
disaster even further, put hundreds of thousands of
lives at risk and pose the threat of a new, widespread
cholera epidemic and famine. Urban warfare or a siege
would be equally catastrophic.
Since the outbreak of the conflict three years
ago, 3 million children have been born in Yemen.
Al-Hudaydah alone is home to 300,000 children. We
are deeply troubled by the disastrous effects of the
humanitarian situation for children in Al-Hudaydah
and beyond, including the risk of stunting, which was
already staggeringly high in Yemen before the crisis
began. As we agreed during the debate on children and
armed conflict held on 9 July (see S/PV.8305), when the
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2427 (2018),
we have a responsibility to do all we can to protect
children trapped in conflict. The best way to do so in
Yemen is by preventing the conflict from entering its
fourth year.
Mr. Llorenty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): First and foremost, Madam
President, I should like, on behalf of my delegation, to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council and pledge our full support to you. I,
too, wish to congratulate the delegation of Sweden for
having so successfully and professionally guided the
work of the Council last month.
My delegation would like also to express its
appreciation for the briefing by the Special Envoy for
Yemen, Mr. Griffiths, and reiterates its support for his
efforts to bring about a peaceful solution to the conflict
in Yemen. We are also grateful for the informative
briefing delivered by the Director of the Coordination
and Response Division of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John Ging.
Our delegation has consistently stated in the
Council its belief that there can be no military

S/PV. 8323

solution to the conflict in Yemen. We are concerned
by the increase in violence in various cities around the
country, in particular in Al-Hudaydah governorate. As
Mr. Griffiths stated so eloquently,
(spoke in English)
“the pace of war has increased”.
(spoke in Spanish)
Moreover, Mr. Ging’s report made clear the fact that
the humanitarian situation is unravelling. According to
a UNICEF report of 31 July, the incidents that affected
civilians during the military campaign in Al-Hudaydah
governorate have led to the displacement of more than
121,000 people, who lost their means of subsistence
and now depend completely on humanitarian assistance
to survive.
Moreover, according to a report by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
dated 31 July, the indiscriminate attacks on the districts
of Al-Tuhayat and Zabid, in Al-Hudaydah governorate,
resulted in more than 59 civilian casualties during the
first half of the month of July. Unfortunately, 50 per
cent of the incidents were caused by airstrikes, followed
by shelling.
The impact in the short and medium term of an
attack against or an interruption in Al-Hudaydah port
operations delivering humanitarian assistance and
imported goods could be devastating for the more than
20 million people who need such assistance in order to
survive. As the country is on the verge of famine, an
attack against or the closing of Al-Hudaydah port would
mean condemning those people to die of starvation. As
we heard in the briefing, Al-Hudaydah is the centre of
gravity of the war.
We express our deep concern at and condemn the
indiscriminate air strikes and bombings carried out in
the past month against civilian and medical facilities
throughout the country. Today, as other members of
the Council noted, there were attacks against a market
and a hospital in the city of Al-Hudaydah, which
killed many people and wounded a number of others.
We are particularly alarmed by the structural damage
caused to health-care, water and sanitation facilities
in At-Tuhadat, Zabid and Saada. That damage and the
possible interruption in water and sanitation services
increases the threat of a massive cholera outbreak, with
devastating humanitarian consequences.

18-2479511/20

S/PV.8323

The situation in the Middle East

We therefore reject and condemn any indiscriminate
attack against the civilian population, including the
launching of missiles, the laying of anti-personnel mines
and air strikes against civilian infrastructure, including
public spaces, health-care facilities and residences.
We call on the parties and actors involved to comply
with the provisions of resolution 2286 (2016), on the
protection of civilians and medical personnel in armed
conflict, and refrain from using the civilian population,
humanitarian personnel and health-care facilities as
military targets. All parties must meet their obligations
under international humanitarian law and ensure the
safe and unimpeded access of humanitarian assistance.
It is vital that the parties abide by the presidential
statements of 15 June 2017 (S/PRST/2017/7) and
15 March 2018 (S/PRST/2018/5) and fully implement
resolution 2216 (2015), without any preconditions,
in order to ensure the resumption of dialogue, the
immediate cessation of all hostilities and a good-faith
commitment to a negotiation process leading to a
political solution that meets the needs and aspirations of
the Yemeni people, in the framework of respect for their
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
We reiterate to all parties the importance of ensuring
that ports and airports and the access routes thereto
remain fully operational, especially Al-Hudaydah and
Saleef ports and Sana’a airport, as they are lifelines for
the survival of the population.
Finally, my delegation, after hearing the report of
the Special Envoy, reiterates, as our other colleagues
have done, its fullest support for his efforts at mediation
and the promotion of dialogue, and, of course, our firm
support for the convening of the conference to be held
in Geneva in September.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Like others before me, my delegation would like to
congratulate the United Kingdom on assuming the
presidency of the Council and assure it of its support.
We also congratulate Sweden on its excellent work
during its presidency last month. And we would like
to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, and Mr. John Ging,
Director of the Coordination and Response Division
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, for the quality of their briefings on the political
and humanitarian situation in Yemen.
Côte d’Ivoire continues to be concerned about the
political impasse and increasing violence seen in Yemen
12/20

02/08/2018

in July. We urge the opposing sides to exercise restraint,
and we welcome the halt to the bombing and the Houthis’
suspension of their attacks in the Red Sea. We call on
the parties to the conflict to redouble their efforts to
support the peace initiatives that are under way. Côte
d’Ivoire also welcomes the acceptance of the Special
Envoy’s good offices by the parties to the conflict and
all the countries that have influence on the opposing
parties with a view to establishing a lasting ceasefire
so as to enable intra-Yemeni peace negotiations. In
that regard, we reiterate our support to the Special
Envoy’s proposal to transfer the management of the
port of Al-Hudaydah to a committee supervised by the
United Nations, a solution that could make a significant
contribution to reducing tensions between the parties
and could be a starting point for the settlement of a
conflict that has led to the loss of so many human lives.
The humanitarian situation is also a continuing
source of concern for my delegation. We especially
deplore the attacks on civilian infrastructure, particularly
water supply services, which are compromising the
efforts to prevent new cholera epidemics in Yemen. In
the face of this alarming situation, my delegation calls
on the parties to show restraint, respect international
humanitarian law and protect civilians and civilian
infrastructure. We reiterate our call for a de-escalation
of the fighting that would give humanitarian aid
unimpeded access to civilians in Yemen in the port city
of Al-Hudaydah and every region of the country.
Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its belief that there can be
no alternative to a political settlement to the crisis in
Yemen. We therefore once again invites all stakeholders
to end hostilities and commit constructively to a political
settlement to the crisis in order to end the impasse
plaguing the country. We call on the international
community to support the efforts by the Special Envoy
for Yemen to bring the parties to the negotiating table
and thereby give new impetus to a political dialogue in
the country.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
congratulates the United Kingdom on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council. We thank Sweden
for its work and its presidency of the Security Council
in July. China is also grateful to Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths and Director John Ging for their briefings.
The conflict in Yemen has been going on for
more than three years and political negotiations have
remained stalled for nearly two. The situation there has
18-24795

02/08/2018

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8323

continued to have a profound impact on regional peace
and security. The escalated conflict in Al-Hudaydah
and other areas, and the increased risks of famine
and cholera outbreaks, have aggravated the country’s
humanitarian crisis. That is a situation that neither
the Yemeni people, the countries of the region nor the
international community can endure.

implementation mechanism, and the outcome document
of Yemen’s National Dialogue Conference so as to reach
an inclusive solution as soon as possible. China stands
ready to join the rest of the international community in
supporting the Special Envoy’s work and will continue
to play a constructive role in facilitating a political
settlement of the problem of Yemen.

The fundamental way to achieve lasting peace in
Yemen is through a political settlement. The Special
Envoy has recently been closely engaging with the
Yemeni parties and countries of the region in his
shadow-diplomacy efforts and working tirelessly to
prevent the situation in Al-Hudaydah from evolving
into a bigger crisis. We support his intensified
mediation efforts to bring the parties to the negotiating
table and push them to cease hostilities and go back
to seeking a political settlement and achieving peace,
security and stability in Yemen as soon as possible. The
Special Envoy will organize and preside over a meeting
in Geneva in early September that will be open to all
Yemeni parties and an important opportunity for peace
in Yemen. We support his efforts in that regard and
hope that all the parties in Yemen will show good will
and seize this opportunity and try seriously to address
differences through dialogue and consultation, break
the impasse without delay and genuinely relaunch
political negotiations in Yemen. The international
community and the countries of the region should help
by lending their constructive support.

Ms. Samson (Netherlands): My delegation would
like to congratulate you, Madam President, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for this month,
and to assure you and your team of our support. We
would also like to thank Sweden for its excellent
steering of the Council’s work in July. I would like to
express our sincere thanks to both briefers, Special
Envoy Martin Griffiths and John Ging, Director of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA). As the fighting in Yemen continues, their
briefings instil in us a strong sense of urgency.

Yemen is currently in the grip of a dire humanitarian
situation. The parties to the conflict should take steps
to ensure safe, swift and unimpeded humanitarian
access and create conditions conducive to easing the
humanitarian situation. China opposes any action
that targets civilians or expands or exacerbates the
conflict, and the international community should step
up its humanitarian assistance to relieve the suffering
of the Yemeni people. Not long ago, at the opening
meeting of the eighth ministerial meeting of the ChinaArab States Cooperation Forum recently, President Xi
Jinping of China announced another ¥600 million in
aid to the people of Yemen, Syria, Jordan and Lebanon,
in support of humanitarian and reconstruction work on
the ground.
China supports Yemen’s sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity. We urge all parties in
Yemen to work through dialogue and negotiation on
the basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions,
the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and its

My statement will focus on three aspects: first,
the political process, including the situation in
Al-Hudaydah; secondly, the humanitarian consequences
of the conflict; and thirdly, our concerns about the lack
of respect for international humanitarian law in Yemen.
First, with regard to the political process, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands remains very concerned
about the ongoing hostilities in and around the port and
city of Al-Hudaydah and the impact of that escalation
on the prospects for negotiations. We fully support the
Special Envoy’s efforts to come to a peaceful solution
for Al-Hudaydah, as well as the broader Yemeni
conflict, and we support his calls to the parties. We
urge all the parties to engage constructively with the
Special Envoy without preconditions, and we expect
all of them to fully commit to the United Nationsfacilitated process by participating in consultations
in Geneva in early September, as Mr. Griffiths just
mentioned. We also support his call for all the parties
to create an environment conducive to such a meeting
and to de-escalation in Al-Hudaydah.
No political agreement is likely to last if local
grievances and regional divisions are not addressed.
The political process must therefore be an inclusive
one, and we welcome the commitment to that end that
the Special Envoy just expressed. An inclusive political
process should encompass a broad range of Yemeni
groups, with the meaningful participation of women,
young people and civil society. We encourage the

18-2479513/20

S/PV.8323

The situation in the Middle East

United Nations to further engage with them and look
forward to more information on that in future briefings.
Secondly, with regard to the humanitarian situation,
we echo the concerns raised by Mr. Ging of OCHA in
his briefing about the effects of a protracted fight for
the city and port of Al-Hudaydah. The humanitarian
consequences for the inhabitants of Al-Hudaydah city
are expected to be severe, and the same is true for the
population of northern Yemen, which is so dependent
for its very existence on humanitarian and commercial
imports through Al-Hudaydah port.
In line with the Security Council’s March
presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/5), we call for the
full and sustained opening of the ports of Al-Hudaydah
and Saleef, as well as the unimpeded distribution of
supplies throughout the country, which includes access
for ships carrying containers and fuel, as facilitated
by the United Nations Verification and Inspection
Mechanism. The use of sea mines around the port and
attacks on commercial vessels by the Houthis further
contribute to the risks for commercial and humanitarian
shipping, and we condemn such practices. The longer
the future of Al-Hudaydah remains unclear, the less
willing will commercial shippers be to deliver to Yemen.
And there is no viable plan B should Al-Hudaydah port
be further compromised.
That brings me to my third point, the importance
of respect for international humanitarian law. In
recent weeks we have seen the number of civilian
casualties rise, mostly as a result of the fighting around
Al-Hudaydah, but also in Aden, Taiz and Sa’dah.
The obligations of all parties under international
humanitarian law are clear and, as the Security Council
has repeatedly done, we once again call on them to fully
respect those obligations. In this regard, we condemn
the Houthis’ continued firing of ballistic missiles at
civilian targets. The recent strikes on health and watersanitation facilities, and today’s reports of strikes on a
fish market and Al-Thawra Hospital in Al-Hudaydah,
are equally worrying. Damage to the vulnerable watersanitation system in Al-Hudaydah could immediately
trigger a new cholera outbreak, as the United Nations
Humanitarian Coordinator underlined in her statement
on Sunday. All parties have an obligation to protect
civilian infrastructure and humanitarian workers. The
humanitarian community continues to work under
increasingly difficult circumstances, and for that it
deserves our praise, support and protection.
14/20

02/08/2018

The Group of Eminent Experts on Yemen was
mandated by the Human Rights Council to carry out a
comprehensive examination of all alleged violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights and
to identify those responsible. We reiterate our call on
all parties to continue to engage with the Group and
provide it with unfettered access. Its work remains ever
more crucial as the conflict rages on.
In conclusion, we call on all the parties to take
responsibility and engage constructively with the
Special Envoy in order to come to an agreement. We
stand ready to support the United Nations-facilitated
political process, which remains the only way to a
sustainable peaceful solution to the crisis in Yemen.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I would first like to thank the delegation
of Sweden for its leadership of the presidency of the
Security Council in July. I also want to wish you,
Madam President, and your delegation all the best for
success during your presidency, and to assure you of my
delegation’s support. We thank Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, for his briefing,
and support his proposal for consultations between
the parties in Geneva. We also thank Mr. John Ging,
Director of the Coordination and Response Division
of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), for his comprehensive
briefing, which provided a very timely explanation of
the real and difficult situation that Yemen is facing.
My delegation has followed with concern the
developments in Yemen since the beginning of the
conflict, which has claimed many human lives and
displaced thousands, leading to an unprecedented
humanitarian crisis that has jeopardized the
sustainability of the lives of the 22 million people in
need of humanitarian assistance, of whom more than
8.4 million, including children and women, are in
a very serious situation and in urgent need of food
supplies. We share the concerns expressed by other
Council members about today’s attacks on a market and
a nearby hospital that have claimed human lives.
Humanitarian organizations have been warning
us about the tragic humanitarian situation in Yemen.
After more than three years of war, and particularly
now, in the wake of the latest offensives against the
key city of Al-Hudaydah, the entire country is closer
to famine than ever before. All of this is happening
as cholera is striking with greater force. The World
18-24795

02/08/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Health Organization (WHO) says that Al-Hudaydah
has recorded the highest numbers of suspected
cholera cases since the original outbreak began in
April 2017. In this regard, we welcome the admirable
contributions of OCHA and the WHO, particularly
in view of the fact that they have had to provide even
more medical supplies and vital services. In the face
of this critical situation, we are concerned about the
3 million internally displaced persons who have been
forced to flee their homes by the conflict. In that
regard, we urge the Security Council and the relevant
parties to make concerted efforts to provide safe and
unhindered humanitarian access in order to help create
the conditions necessary to alleviate the humanitarian
situation in Yemen.
The stalemate of the political situation in Yemen is
a cause for concern for Equatorial Guinea. The military
conflict rages on, the steps taken in the political process
have been inadequate and the humanitarian situation
continues to deteriorate, so it is important that the
parties involved in the crisis understand that a political
process, conducted through direct, frank and inclusive
dialogue, is the only way to find a lasting solution to
this grave situation.
My delegation therefore continues to welcome the
approach that Mr. Griffiths outlined to the Council on
18 June, which not only updated us on Al-Hudaydah but
also set out a framework for the resumption of political
negotiations, to be guided by a set of principles based
on the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative, the results
of the National Dialogue Conference and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, particularly resolution
2216 (2015), which should include groups from the
South, civil society and women, as well as discussions
aimed at addressing political and security issues as part
of a package.

S/PV. 8323

Director of the Coordination and Response Division
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA), for their informative briefings.
I would like to begin by taking this opportunity
to express our enormous appreciation to OCHA and
the United Nations staff members and international
humanitarian personnel who continue to provide
life-saving assistance to the Yemeni people in extremely
challenging circumstances.
Poland fully support the Special Envoy’s framework
for political dialogue in Yemen. We once again call for
the resumption of an inclusive intra-Yemeni political
process aimed at achieving a political solution to the
conflict. We welcome the fact that the first round of
the negotiations is scheduled to take place in Geneva
in September. The parties to the conflict must cease
to engage in violence and refrain from taking further
action that could lead to additional displacement,
casualties, damage to civilian infrastructure and
disruptions of humanitarian and commercial access.
All parties and stakeholders must abide by the
principles of international humanitarian law and ensure
the protection of civilians. Children in particular must
be taken under special protection from the atrocities
of war.

Finally, we call for the conflict to be resolved with
negotiations, not weapons. We applaud and appreciate
the work of the Security Council, which, despite the
difficulties, continues to devise strategies to restore
peace and stability in Yemen.

It is with great concern that we have received
reports of air strikes in Al-Hudaydah in the past few
hours, including an attack on the city’s main hospital
and fish market. We are alarmed by the escalation of
violence, which further increases the humanitarian
cost of the conflict and poses a real risk to the prospect
of peace talks. We reiterate our full support for the
Special Envoy’s efforts to find a solution to the situation
in Al-Hudaydah and we urge the parties to engage
constructively with him to demonstrate flexibility.
We expect those involved to make the necessary effort
to reach a compromise on the management of the
city and its port. It will be crucial to prevent a fully
fledged attack on Al-Hudaydah, which would further
deteriorate the humanitarian situation, not only in the
city itself, but across the entire country.

Mr. Radomski (Poland): I would like to congratulate
you, Madam President, on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council, and to assure you of our full
support. I would also like to thank the delegation of
Sweden for leading the Council through the month of
July in an exemplary manner. I would like to thank
Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Mr. John Ging,

We note that there have been three successful vessel
discharges of food and fuel in Al-Hudaydah in recent
weeks. However, that is simply not enough to provide
life-saving assistance to 22 million Yemenis. We
therefore call on all parties involved to guarantee that
all of Yemen’s ports are fully operational. It is crucial
to ensure unimpeded access to humanitarian deliveries

18-2479515/20

S/PV.8323

The situation in the Middle East

throughout the country. Access for humanitarian and
medical personnel to people in need inside Al-Hudaydah
city and the surrounding districts must be guaranteed,
and safe passage ensured for those who wish to leave
the city.
Let me conclude by underscoring that there cannot
be any military solution to the conflict in Yemen. I
reiterate Poland’s strong support for the Special Envoy,
Martin Griffiths, and for his efforts to bring about an
inclusive political solution to this tragic conflict.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to join others
in taking this opportunity to congratulate you, Madam
President, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council. I would also like to congratulate Sweden on
its successful presidency last month. We thank Special
Envoy Martin Griffiths for his useful briefing and his
continued diplomatic efforts to facilitate a peaceful
solution to the Yemeni crisis. We are also grateful to
Director John Ging for his briefing. We commend the
tireless efforts of the Special Envoy and his shuttle
diplomacy with the parties. It is indeed encouraging
that he has been able to have positive and constructive
discussions with them. We hope that the upcoming
discussions in Geneva will yield positive results. We
support his diplomatic endeavours and the negotiation
framework that he has laid out, which gives priority to
addressing the issue of Al-Hudaydah as a first step to
resuming political dialogue. We encourage the parties
to continue their constructive engagement with the
Special Envoy.
Meanwhile, we note that Al-Hudaydah port remains
open and operational and that the United Nations and
its humanitarian partners have continued to deliver aid.
However, the humanitarian situation is still concerning
and we are worried by reports on the possibility of a
new cholera outbreak due to the escalating violence.
The attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure
are worrying, as are the attacks on oil tankers passing
through the Bab-El-Mandab Strait, as they have serious
implications for the safety and security of commercial
ships passing through that major sea lane. We look
forward to the discussion on the relevant reports and
updates of the Panel of Experts on Yemen on this
and other issues at the level of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014).
Finally, we all agree on the need to find a political
solution to the crisis in Yemen and, thanks to the efforts
16/20

02/08/2018

of the Special Envoy, there appears to be a window of
opportunity that we must take advantage of to restart
serious talks. That is why we also believe that the
Council should continue to support him to ensure that
his efforts succeed. That is the only way to resolve the
Yemen crisis and end the suffering of its people.
Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We too join others
in congratulating the United Kingdom on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of August, and in expressing our appreciation to the
delegation of Sweden for its successful stewardship
of the Council’s work in July. I also join others in
thanking Special Envoy Griffiths and the Director of
the Coordination and Response Division of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for
their clear and comprehensive updates, and commend
them both for their efforts to bring a political and
humanitarian solution to Yemen. Kazakhstan is closely
following the recent developments and would like to
make the following two points.
First, on the political front, we note the importance
of continuing to strive for sustainable peace, conflict
prevention and resolution through political and
diplomatic means, including confidence-building
measures, by achieving trust that can bring parties
together around the common goals of peace and
development. We are closely following the recent
United Nations diplomatic efforts in Sana’a and
Riyadh to persuade the warring parties to return to the
difficult and much-needed negotiations. Undoubtedly,
the diplomatic moves led by Mr. Griffiths have helped
to prevent an all-out military invasion of the city of
Al-Hudaydah. They have also facilitated the warring
parties’ negotiation of a potential deal that could allow
fighters to leave. Nevertheless, local health facilities
reported in mid-July that to date around 328 people had
been injured and nearly 50 killed during the fighting.
Kazakhstan supports the efforts of interested countries
and parties to reach a political path through negotiations
for a full and fair settlement, including at the upcoming
political consultations in Geneva in September. That
is the only kind of approach that can preserve the
sovereignty, independence and unity of Yemen and
realize the interests and aspirations of its people.
Secondly, with regard to the humanitarian
dimension, we voice our support for the repeated calls
of the United Nations for all parties to safeguard civilian
lives, prevent deaths and injuries, allow freedom of
movement and protect hospitals, clinics and schools,
18-24795

02/08/2018

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8323

in accordance with international humanitarian and
human rights law. We therefore note and welcome the
coordinated efforts of stakeholders — United Nations
agencies, non-governmental organizations and the
Gulf countries — to provide humanitarian assistance
to the people of Al-Hudaydah. Kazakhstan salutes the
selfless work of the humanitarian partners who have
been providing food, water, emergency kits, cash and
health care. Unfortunately, 22 million people — that
is, 75 per cent of the Yemeni population — still require
protection from malnutrition, cholera and other diseases
that have killed or afflicted thousands of civilians.
Like others, we share the concerns of the Government
authorities and the United Nations system that the hot
summer months could rapidly escalate the spread of
cholera, which infected more than 1 million people last
year. Against that backdrop, we express the hope that
critical health infrastructure, particularly reproductive
health centres, sanitation facilities and stations that
supply water to the population, will not be targeted. We
therefore believe it would be very helpful to create a
de-escalation zone, where appropriate, so as to reduce
military tensions. That in turn would mitigate the
humanitarian crisis.

from the Council. Obviously, the United Kingdom joins
that stance.

Finally, Kazakhstan fully supports the tireless
efforts of Mr. Griffiths and other interested parties to
reach an inclusive political solution in order to put an
end to the conflict in Yemen.

Mr. Bin Mubarak (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Madam President,
on your assumption of the work of leading the Council
this month, and to express to you our sincere wishes for
the usual success of the United Kingdom delegation.

The President: I will now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
First of all, I thank Mr. Ging for his briefing. He
has heard the words of appreciation today from Council
members to him and his team for all that they do, and I
would like to add the United Kingdom’s voice to those.
We will continue to disburse more than $200 million
to the people of Yemen to support his efforts. I would
also like to thank the Special Envoy for his tremendous
efforts and for those of his team. I hope that the strong
unity that he has heard from the Security Council today
can be a real spur to efforts in taking the matter forward.
I think that it has been very good that we have
all been able to express concern about the reports we
heard today of the attack on the hospital and on the
fish market. There was very strong reassurance from
members of the Council that it was important to uphold
international humanitarian law and the protection of
civilians. I think that that was absolutely unequivocal

There was also very strong condemnation of the
attacks by the Houthis on the Saudi oil tanker and the
other attacks in the Red Sea and concern about the
arms shipments that are coming through the Red Sea.
I believe that we all look forward to the forthcoming
report of the Panel of Experts on Yemen. There has
been a call from the Council to the Houthis to come
and work with the Special Envoy and to implement the
Security Council resolutions, even as we recognize the
commitment to halting attacks in the Red Sea. I think
that we all feel that it is now time to take this to the
next stage.
There was unconditional support for the efforts of
the Special Envoy and a real hope that the 6 September
talks in Geneva can start a truly viable process. The
Special Envoy can count on all members of the Council
to unify around his efforts and to build momentum for
what he has started
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Yemen.

I am also grateful for the opportunity to address
the Security Council for the first time since His
Excellency President Hadi appointed me Ambassador
Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary and Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Yemen to the United
Nations. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Envoy to Yemen, Mr. Martin
Griffiths, for his genuine efforts since he assumed the
role of Special Envoy in order to achieve lasting peace
in Yemen.
Since the beginning of the military operation in
Al-Hudaydah governorate, the Yemeni Government
and the coalition to restore legitimacy in Yemen have
supported the efforts of the Special Envoy to achieve a
peaceful solution that spares Al-Hudaydah city and all
other Yemeni cities controlled by the Houthi militias
military actions and to ensure that the suffering of
its people is not exploited by the Houthi militias to
further violate international humanitarian law and to

18-2479517/20

S/PV.8323

The situation in the Middle East

threaten international security and navigation. We have
heeded his repeated calls and those of the international
community for de-escalation on the western coast.
While the Special Envoy undertakes such efforts
to relaunch the peace operation in Yemen, the Houthis
continue their military build-up and to dig tunnels. They
are biding their time to launch counter-attacks against
our Yemeni people and to threaten the international
maritime waterways.
The political leadership and the Yemeni Government
will engaged positively with the plan proposed by the
Special Envoy so long as the plan takes into account
the three terms of reference — the Gulf Cooperation
Council initiative and its Implementation Mechanism,
the outcome of the National Dialogue Conference and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2216 (2015) — as the bases for consultations
and peace negotiations in Yemen. To that end, my
Government has provided its observations in writing to
the Special Envoy.
The choice of the Yemeni Government has
always been comprehensive and lasting peace based
on restoring the State institutions, putting an end to
the coup and re-establishing security and stability.
That will not be achieved with merely verbal support
for the efforts of the Special Envoy, but by bringing
more political pressure to bear on the Houthi militias
and through unequivocal messages from the Security
Council that the international community will not
accept the continuing Yemeni suffering, the seizing
of State institutions and threats to international
maritime navigation.
It is time to implement the resolutions of the
international legitimacy. Otherwise, the solution will
be contingent on the situation on the ground as long
as those militias continue to control vital regions of
Yemen under unfounded pretexts. That will prolong
the conflict and the suffering of civilians throughout
Yemen. There is daily bombardment by the militias
of residential areas in Taiz, Lahij, Al-Jawf, Mar’ib
and Al-Bayda, in addition to daily sniper attacks on
civilians, mostly women and children, in the city of Taiz.
Those acts should be condemned and the perpetrators
held accountable. The militias should not be allowed to
continue such acts, which are a form of genocide, let
alone turn San’a into a massive jail where the so-called
supervisors are free to loot and imprison or kill anyone
18/20

02/08/2018

who opposes them, especially after the recent uprising
in December.
The militias’ ongoing control of strategic areas
in Yemen, where they launch attacks on international
waterways, requires a decisive stand on the part of
the Security Council. The most recent attack against
the two Saudi oil tankers belonging to the National
Shipping Company of Saudi Arabia and the laying of
hundreds of naval mines to harm ships and Yemeni
fishermen and damage the marine environment are
further examples of the Iran-backed Houthi practices
to undermine the interests of Yemen, the region and the
whole world by imposing a sectarian agenda sponsored
and supported by Iran.
The Panel of Experts on Yemen, whose mandate
was extended in accordance with paragraph 5 of
resolution 2402 (2018), has confirmed beyond doubt
that the Houthis were responsible for the attack against
the Saudi and Turkish ships on 3 April and 10 May.
Those practices constitute a breach of international
humanitarian law, contribute to the deteriorating
security in the region and have a negative impact on
commercial shipments and the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to Yemen.
Everybody is aware that the attacks by these
militias continue unabated against densely populated
civilian areas of the kingdom of Saudi Arabia, using
Iranian missiles in flagrant violation of all international
laws and norms and Security Council resolutions, in
particular resolutions 2216 (2015) and 2231 (2015). With
regard to today’s explosion near Al-Thawra hospital in
Al-Hudaydah, the Arab coalition has just announced
that it did not undertake any military operations in that
area and has no targets there and that due investigations
will take place.
The Yemeni Government, which is internationally
recognized as the elected Government, underscores
that all efforts of the United Nations through its Special
Envoy should respect the constitutional State authorities
and their legitimacy as entitled to oversee Government
institutions and all the Yemeni governorates without
exception in accordance with the law. The contrary
would contravene the general terms of reference and
international standards and enable the militias and the
de facto authorities to pursue their agenda against the
Yemeni people.
The international Organization has overseen the
peace negotiations under the umbrella of the Security
18-24795

02/08/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Council in accordance with the resolutions of the
international legitimacy. For the past three years and
at every stage of the peace negotiations, those militias,
with the world watching, have sought to undermine
peace efforts by creating crises and resorting to
delaying tactics. The Yemeni Government has warned
against that repeatedly, and the Council knows that we
were very close to making progress towards peace at
the negotiations held in Kuwait, but due to the militias’
intransigence, they refused to sign at the last minute.
Therefore, based on our previous experience
and because we are keen to end the suffering of our
Yemeni people, and believing that the best and least
costly solution is a political one, we stress that any
negotiations that are not based on putting an end to
the coup and on the implementation of international
resolutions, thereby enabling the legitimate authorities
to discharge their duties towards all the people in all
areas and leading to the resumption of the political
process, which has been stalled by the coup, would be
but hollow words that complicate the situation and fail
to achieve the genuine objectives of the peace talks.
We also underscore the primacy of the
confidence-building measures that were agreed upon
during the consultations held in Switzerland, with a
focus on humanitarian aspects, including the release
of detainees and prisoners, and on ensuring that the
militias do not hinder the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. These militias not only seize humanitarian
relief supplies but also impede their delivery and use
them for military purposes. In addition, they should
cease laying mines, a crime that demonstrates HouthiIranian recklessness and undermines the future of our
people, whom they send to the front to meet their deaths
on the basis of misleading slogans and information.
The upcoming consultations cannot succeed if
they do not focus on alleviating the human suffering,
dealing with security aspects and then achieving the
desired political objectives, consecutively.
The human suffering continues in Yemen and the
situation is deteriorating daily. This unprecedented
humanitarian disaster of the twenty-first century is the
result of a war fuelled by a foreign agenda that uses the
militias to achieve its goals in the region. All relevant
United Nations reports have confirmed without a doubt
that those who are pillaging the wealth and resources
of our people, impeding the delivery of humanitarian
assistance and preventing United Nations staff from

S/PV. 8323

carrying out their duties freely are the same ones who
are fighting and perpetrating horrendous acts to retain
control of the major gateway to these resources.
My Government therefore calls on the international
organizations operating in Yemen to expand their
activities in order to cover all parts of the country.
There are five relief centres in Yemen, each of which
has land, sea and air ports that they can use to channel
assistance. The decentralization of humanitarian
efforts will ensure the effective use of funds and their
equitable access to all beneficiaries and people affected
throughout Yemen.
Looking at the international efforts made to
alleviate this humanitarian disaster, we cannot but
commend the genuine efforts of Mr. Mark Lowcock
and his team as well as those of all international and
regional organizations operating in Yemen. We also
commend those donor countries that have met their
commitments under the humanitarian response plan,
notably the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the United Arab
Emirates and the sisterly State of Kuwait. We also call
on other donor countries to meet their commitments.
The Government of Yemen will continue to make
all possible efforts and compromises in order to
achieve lasting peace. This war was imposed on us
by the militias, which staged a coup against the State
and its institutions. This situation is not acceptable
to the Yemeni people, even if they have to face it
alone. The militias will be held accountable for any
consequences related to the non-implementation of
international resolutions.
In closing, I should like to say that I was asked
recently by a Western official why we are not seeing a
migration exodus by Yemenis, as is the case with other
countries that are experiencing similar conflicts. I told
him that the Yemeni people are not only attached to their
land and soil, but they also have hope. They believe in
an inclusive national agenda, which they hope will be
implemented soon. Children in my country continue to
dream of a bright future that will bring a smile back
to their faces, and mothers continue to pray every day
for peace, security and stability to prevail throughout
Yemen. Please do not let them down.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths
to respond to the comments made and questions raised.
Mr. Griffiths: I am very grateful to all the
members of the Council and to the representative of

18-2479519/20

S/PV.8323

The situation in the Middle East

the Government of Yemen for their remarks. What I
take from this discussion is, as you indeed summed up
yourself, Madam President, when you were speaking
for the United Kingdom, that there is unanimous
support for the notion of the resumption of political
consultations to resolve this conflict. I take from that
also a confirmation that that should be the primary focus.
Efforts to resolve the crisis in Al-Hudaydah are of
crucial importance, particularly to our colleagues in
the humanitarian agencies. They are important to my
Office in the sense that they can contribute to a sense of
political confidence or, if going in the other direction,
can undermine the creation of political confidence. But
the objective for me, and I think for all the members
of the Council, for which I am most grateful, is the
resumption of political negotiations. They will be
inclusive, and that also, I think, has found support, and
they will look to a sustainable solution, based on the

20/20

02/08/2018

references and Security Council resolutions. I do not
need to repeat to Council members how we are guided
by those references and those resolutions. But they
will also be guided by the gist of what has been said
today, which is the need for urgent attention to an early
political solution.
We are all reminded constantly — as John did so
eloquently today — that delays in reaching a political
solution cost lives. The math is as simple as that. That
is the reason why we move quickly. I am grateful for
the remarks made by the Permanent Representative of
the United States, who rightly said that it is about time
we started. I feel exactly that impetus, and I am very
grateful for the discussion today.
The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his
responses to the comments made and questions raised.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

18-24795
