S/PV.8428

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8428

th meeting
Monday, 17 December 2018, 5.20 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ipo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Côte d’Ivoire)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Zhang Diabin
Mr. Ondo Nzang
Mr. Amde
Mr. Melki
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Albanai
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Duclos
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Volgarev
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-44413 (E)
*1844413*

S/PV.8428

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

The meeting was called to order at 5.20 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the outgoing Chairs of the subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council according to the year
of adoption of the related Council decisions: His
Excellency Ambassador Kairat Umarov, Permanent
Representative of Kazakhstan, Chair of the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolution 751 (1992)
concerning Somalia, Chair of the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and
associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities, and Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011); His
Excellency Ambassador Taye Atskeselassie Amde,
Permanent Representative of Ethiopia and Chair of
the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Security Council
on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa; Her
Excellency Mrs. Verónica Cordova Soria, Deputy
Permanent Representative of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia, on behalf of the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004); His Excellency Ambassador Karel van Oosterom,
Permanent Representative of the Netherlands and Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1718 (2006); and His Excellency Ambassador Olof
Skoog, Permanent Representative of Sweden, Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2374 (2017) concerning Mali, and Chair of
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Umarov.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
the delegation of Côte d’Ivoire for having organized
this briefing and giving me the opportunity to address
the Security Council as outgoing Chair of the following
sanctions Committees: the Security Council Committee
2/12

17/12/2018

pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities; the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011), on the Taliban; and the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolution 751 (1992)
concerning Somalia.
Since Kazakhstan’s tenure on this important body
ends on 31 December, and this is not a regular meeting
for the presentation of official reports, I should like to
take this opportunity to share some of my reflections
with the Council.
As the Chair of the 1267 and 1988 Committees, our
main objective was to ensure the full implementation of
the core mandates of both subsidiary bodies. In steering
the work of the Committees, Kazakhstan tried to be
transparent, followed the procedural rules strictly and
refrained from politicizing the issues.
Given the changing and evolving terrorist threat,
we are pleased that this year we managed to update
and adopt the guidelines for the conduct of the work
of the 1267 and 1988 Committees, which we hope will
greatly enhance their functioning and make it more
efficient. But my message to our successors is: do not
relax. There is plenty left to do to improve the work of
the Committees.
During the Council meeting held on 6 February (see
S/PV.8175), held under the Kuwaiti presidency on the
issue of the methods of work of the Security Council, a
number of States Members of the United Nations voiced
a great deal of criticism about the closed nature of the
discussions in our sanctions Committees. In particular,
opinions were expressed on the lack of transparency of
the deliberations and the fact that it was not possible to
make objective and realistic assessments, questioning
the accountability of the Security Council. Under these
circumstances, such views should be taken seriously
and responsibly.
These issues are being partially resolved through
the current practice of the holding of regular open
briefings by the Chair for interested Member States.
This tradition of holding briefings received positive
feedback from the States that attended the meetings,
which expressed the hope that this practice would
continue. We therefore urge the Chairs that succeed us,
as well as members of the Council, to continue with this
18-44413

17/12/2018

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

tradition, which provides an opportunity for Member
States to interact with the Committee.
Another possible area of improvement in the
transparency of the Council’s work could be to invite
interested Member States to informal Committee
meetings to hear the Chair’s reports and make remarks
during a dedicated period of time; that would strengthen
mutual trust and confidence. I believe that such an
opportunity needs to be given to any Member State
whose interests are affected by the listing of individuals
or organizations. Currently, according to the rules of
procedure, such States find themselves listed in the
documents because their territories have been used by
terrorists or terrorist groups, but this is only after the
official publication has been issued.
Such States are not able to present their evidence to
the Committee before a decision is made or to challenge
the information provided by another State, for one
simple reason: the listing State is not on speaking
terms with that country. Moreover, members of the
Committee and Monitoring Team experts are bound by
the privacy policy, which is not considered to be a fair
or transparent procedure.
In this context, transparency is essential in the work
of the Committees, particularly in the area of sanctions.
The Member States concerned should be aware of
the process of listing and delisting, contribute their
information in a way that ensures maximum objectivity
and fairness of the process, be informed on the status
of consideration of cases and be able to understand
with complete clarity the obligations that they must
fulfil. Without proper transparency, the work of the
Committees will increasingly be prone to politicization
or to the settling of scores among countries. We are
convinced that it is necessary to take every measure
to contribute to ensuring the highest standards of
transparency when the Council discusses issues that
have serious and far-reaching consequences for Member
States. This is not something new; I broached that issue
in the Committee and have discussed it previously.

S/PV. 8428

about peace and stability through the use of the
sanctions regime imposed on the Taliban. The regime’s
effectiveness is evident because the lifting of the
sanctions on the Taliban is one of the key conditions for
the movement to start negotiations. However, the overall
effectiveness of the 1988 sanctions measures relies on
close coordination with the Government of Afghanistan
and its work on listing and delisting procedures.
Such a practice, in our opinion, will further
contribute to obtaining more accurate first-hand
information and an understanding of the current
situation on the ground, which would enable us to make
more effective use of sanctions regimes so as to begin a
peaceful dialogue in Afghanistan.
For me, the most memorable point of my
chairmanship in the Committee on Somalia and Eritrea
was my visit to the region of the Horn of Africa in
May. That visit was the first since 2010 and included a
number of significant and meaningful meetings with the
regional leadership at the highest level, United Nations
country teams and other key actors. Following the visit,
the Committee adopted important recommendations
aimed at strengthening the implementation of the
arms embargo and the charcoal ban on Somalia. The
visit resulted in a better understanding of current local
misconceptions and expectations during the sanctions
regime. I therefore encourage future Committee Chairs
to continue the practice of regularly visiting Somalia
and the region.
It must be clearly understood that the existing
sanctions regime is not a punishment for Somalia. On
the contrary, the arms embargo is a useful tool for
improving control over a large flow of weapons into the
country, through both official channels and smuggling.

In addition, the Chair’s visits to select countries
enhances the engagement of the sanctions Committees
with Member States. The visits help to inform
Member States about the activities of the Committee
and ensure their knowledgeable engagement in the
Committee’s work.

On the issue of improving weapons and ammunition
management, it is important for the Secretariat and
the relevant United Nations agencies on the ground to
continue to provide support to the Somali authorities.
The Committee also should support and assist that
conflict-ravaged country in its efforts to recover
through constructive guidance, rather than punishment.
The commitment and coordinated actions of all United
Nations States Members towards the implementation of
the ban on the export of charcoal from Somalia will
also have a positive effect on the fight against terrorists
and significantly reduce their financial income.

The 1988 sanctions Committee was specifically
designed to help the Afghan Government to bring

This year’s most important development — and I
hope all members of the Council will agree — was the

18-444133/12

S/PV.8428

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

17/12/2018

historic normalization of relations between the countries
of the Horn of Africa region, which was initiated and
promoted by Ethiopia. We have witnessed how peaceful
dialogue, political will and commitment to people’s
best interests can dramatically change situations
between countries that have been in confrontation for
many years. It is gratifying to note that that positive
wave swept through the entire Horn of Africa region
and culminated with the lifting of sanctions on Eritrea.
My delegation had the great honour and privilege of
being part of that process. In order to preserve and
multiply those achievements, the coordinated efforts
of the African Union and the United Nations are now
needed to strengthen economic cooperation among the
countries of the region and create favourable conditions
for their prosperity. We note and support the decision of
Secretary-General Guterres to appoint a Special Envoy
for the Horn of Africa for that very reason.

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Umarov for his briefing.

I am also convinced that stricter compliance and
more complete implementation of the sanctions regime
can be ensured through more effective information
outreach and mutual understanding. In that regard, we
introduced the practice of issuing regular press releases
on the work of the Sanctions Committee in order to
inform a wider audience about our work and, in turn,
gain further support.

The Ad Hoc Working Group met on 9 February to
consider its activities for this year. Several members
expressed their support for holding meetings on
country-specific items. It was suggested that the Ad
Hoc Working Group could be guided by presidential
statement S/PRST/2018/1, which maps out a regional
approach to conflict prevention and resolution.
Members also suggested enhanced interaction between
the Ad Hoc Working Group and the Peacebuilding
Commission as a way to approach conflict prevention.
There was also a related suggestion for greater
interaction with representatives of regional and
subregional organizations. In the spirit of its mandate
to examine prevention, early warning and early action,
another recommendation was for the Working Group
to be flexible enough to take up items that are not
necessarily included in its provisional programme of
work. But others cautioned against the repetition of
meetings on the same topic. The members consequently
agreed to the provisional programme of work proposed
by the Chair.

In conclusion, I would like to express my
delegation’s sincere gratitude to all members of the
three Committees for their cooperation. I also express
my appreciation to the Ombudspersons, secretariats
and experts groups of all three subsidiary bodies for
their dedication and professionalism in supporting the
Chair in his daily work. I convey special gratitude to
the teams of interpreters; we would not be able to fully
carry out our activities without their help. On behalf
of our delegation, I thank all Member States for their
support and cooperation during the two years of our
country’s chairmanship, especially the delegations of
Afghanistan, Malaysia, Singapore, the Philippines,
Somalia, Ethiopia, Djibouti, Russia and the Regional
Anti-Terrorist Structure of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization. I would like to assure future Chairs who
will replace Kazakhstan on the Committee concerning
ISIL, Da’esh and Al-Qaida, the Committee concerning
the Taliban and the Committee concerning Somalia
that they can count on our unwavering cooperation
at all times. We wish them every success in their
important assignments.
4/12

I now give the floor to Ambassador Amde.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): It gives me great pleasure to
report on the activities of the Ad Hoc Working Group
of the Security Council on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa. This briefing covers the period
from 1 January to 31 December. My predecessor
served as Chair of the Ad Hoc Working Group from
January 2017 until September 2018, when I took over
from him. The representative of Côte d’Ivoire served
as Vice-Chair throughout the reporting period. I would
like to commend both of them for their excellent work.
I should also note that my briefing has been
circulated to the members of the Ad Hoc Working
Group, who approve of it. For the sake of brevity, I will
highlight only some of its most important elements.

In addition to its ongoing practice of dealing with
thematic issues raised by Member States, during the
reporting period the Ad Hoc Working Group held
useful discussions on three conflict-specific situations.
First, on 11 January, the Working Group held a meeting
on the challenges and the way forward concerning
the situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo.
Secondly, on 2 April, it discussed the challenges and
the way forward concerning the situation in GuineaBissau. Thirdly, on 31 May, it considered how to avoid a
18-44413

17/12/2018

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

reversal of the gains made and sustain peace concerning
the situation in the Central African Republic. Those
discussions gave Member States a platform outside of
the Security Council to exchange their views frankly.
I can also say with confidence that those discussions
generated useful information to be provided for the
consideration of the Security Council.
The Working Group held a meeting on 8 June on
the way forward concerning cooperation between the
United Nations Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union (AU). That was
convened in connection with a visit to New York by
the Committee of Experts of the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union for a workshop on
Security Council working methods, the United Nations
peace and security architecture and related issues
and cooperation between the Security Council and
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union.
Other attendees at the meeting included representatives
of the peace and security secretariat of the AU and the
United Nations Office to the African Union.
It was the first meeting of its kind and offered an
opportunity for useful exchanges between expert-level
representatives of member States of both Councils on
ways and means to strengthen their cooperation on
peace and security issues in Africa. Representatives
welcomed the meeting and stressed the importance of
continuing to improve cooperation. They underlined the
need to work towards a common understanding of issues,
including the root causes of conflict, and suggested
enhanced information-sharing and cooperation
between the AU and the United Nations. They drew
attention to the need for cooperation with regard to the
timing of briefings and decision-making. Speakers also
suggested an institutionalization of exchanges between
the Chair of the Peace and Security Council of the
AU and the President of the United Nations Security
Council, possibly via video-teleconference, and a
harmonization of the programmes of work of the two
Councils. Speakers also emphasized the value of the
role of the African members of the Security Council in
conveying information to other members of the Council
about the work of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union.
Another important suggestion was to convene joint
consultative meetings between the members of the two
Councils in order to establish clearly defined topics
and be results-oriented. Exchanges on proposed agenda
items and draft joint communiqués well ahead of the

S/PV. 8428

meetings would allow representatives to concentrate on
their deliberations. Another proposal was for the two
Councils to hold more frequent meetings, including
via video-teleconference. Speakers also shared their
views on the twelfth annual joint consultative meeting
to be held the next month, calling for a slimmed-down
agenda, encouraging joint field visits and discussing
the modalities of such visits.
The Ad Hoc Working Group held a joint meeting
in July with the Security Council Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations on the theme “Institutional
reform of the African Union and its contribution in
enhancing Africa’s capacity in the area of peace and
security”. The meeting included a statement from
Mr. Donald Kaberuka, AU High Representative for
Financing of the African Union and the Peace Fund. He
outlined the ongoing reform processes at the African
Union and the Peace Fund — including its objectives
and financing — and highlighted the efforts to establish
a continental free trade area in Africa. Mr. Kaberuka
also emphasized the advantage of regional organizations
and their value for regional legitimacy, their experience
and local knowledge and their ability to act fast. He
pointed out the need to ensure that the African Union
had the capacity to benefit from those advantages,
adding that military means and financial resources
were not enough to build peace and stability. Economic
prosperity, job creation and development projects are
also needed. In the course of the discussion, members
commended reform efforts and identified areas that
should be highlighted and stressed the need to enhance
cooperation and improve the distribution of tasks
between the United Nations and the African Union.
They also underlined the difficulties presented by the
lack of sustained financial support for African Union
peace support operations.
In November, a joint meeting of experts from the
Ad Hoc Working Group and the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations considered the progress
of the African Union’s human rights compliance
framework for AU peace support operations. They
were briefed by the Deputy Head of the Institutional
Reforms Unit and the Chief of the Policy Development
Unit of the Peace Support Operations Division
of the African Union Commission, as well as by
representatives of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the Department of Field Support and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights. They provided updates on the African

18-444135/12

S/PV.8428

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

17/12/2018

Union’s efforts with regard to the Peace Fund, financial
rules and regulations, predeployment training and the
compliance framework related to human rights and
sexual exploitation and abuse, as well as cooperation
between the African Union Commission and the United
Nations Secretariat. That meeting offered members an
opportunity to exchange views on those and related
issues, including the important question of financing
African Union peace support operations.

has made clear, the Ad Hoc Working Group is of
particular importance to Africa and to the relationship
between the United Nations Security Council and the
AU Peace and Security Council. I am confident that
Ambassador Matjila and his team will do everything
possible to enhance the role of the Working Group and
contribute to the further strengthening of cooperation
between the two Councils in the promotion and
maintenance of peace and security in Africa.

Throughout my own tenure in the Working Group,
as well as that of my predecessor, the significance of
country-specific discussions has been underscored.
In addition to thematic discussions, we have both
been clear about our hope that this would revitalize
the work of the Working Group. Our assessment is
that the country-specific meetings held into 2018
allowed for rich and constructive discussions. They
proved particularly useful when held prior to relevant
decision-making deliberations in the Security Council
or other bodies. The Chair strongly recommended that
the Working Group also continue to include countryspecific issues in the future programme of work. There
is no doubt that the Working Group continues to play an
essential role in facilitating preparation and exchanges
on joint consultative meetings and other activities of
the members of the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union.

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Amde for his briefing.

The Chair of the Working Group would recall
that, in paragraph 18 of its resolution 2033 (2012),
the Security Council decided to follow up on the
communiqué of the annual consultative meetings of the
two Councils, including through the Working Group.
The Chair strongly recommended that the Working
Group should continue to exercise that mandate. The
Chair also notes, in that respect, that the discussion
held with the members of the Committee of Experts of
the African Union Peace and Security Council in 2018
was indeed a valuable contribution to strengthening
cooperation between the two Councils on peace and
security issues in Africa. It specifically helped to
prepare for the twelfth joint consultative meeting, which
took place on 19 July this year. The Chair recommends
that opportunities to hold similar exchanges should be
encouraged in the future.
As we finish our term and hand over the
chairmanship of the ad hoc Working Group to South
Africa, I would like to wish Ambassador Jerry Matjila
of South Africa and his team all the best in the effective
discharge of their responsibilities. As I think our report
6/12

I now give the floor to Mrs. Cordova Soria.
Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I shall take this opportunity
to deliver a brief report on the activities carried out by
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) and the future prospects for,
and challenges to, the work of the Committee in its task
of supervising the implementation of that resolution.
After assuming chairmanship of the Committee, the
work was undertaken in the framework of the broad and
comprehensive review of the five-year implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) and based on resolution 2325
(2016), which was adopted in December 2016 and
highlighted the importance of providing States, at their
request, with effective assistance to meet their needs. In
that context, efforts were intensified to promote the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) by all States.
Our main concern was also to continue focusing
on preventing the proliferation to non-State actors,
including terrorists, of weapons of mass destruction,
their means of delivery and related materials. I must
emphasize here that it was always kept in mind that
resolution 1540 (2004) is a platform of cooperation to
prevent non-State actors from accessing precisely those
types of weapons of mass destruction. We wanted to
make it clear that, without cooperation, it would be
impossible to address the problem globally.
Regarding national reports, we continued to
intensify efforts to encourage the 17 Member States
that had not yet submitted their first national report
by January 2017 to do so. Through dialogue with those
States, including by sending written letters, as well
as direct interaction and bilateral meetings with the
Permanent Representatives of the relevant Missions to
the United Nations here in New York, we encouraged
them to send their first report to the Committee in
18-44413

17/12/2018

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

accordance with resolutions 1540 (2004) and 2325
(2016). I am therefore pleased to inform the Council that
during 2017 we received the first national reports from
Equatorial Guinea and Zimbabwe. In the current period
we received the national reports of Guinea-Bissau,
Timor-Leste and the Comoros. The total number of
States that have submitted such national reports is now
181 out of the 193 Member States.
Regarding cooperation with international, regional
and subregional organizations, we can say that, in
order to achieve several of our objectives, we worked
closely with several international organizations, as
well as regional and subregional organizations, that
were able to respond to requests for assistance. In
terms of national focal points, States were encouraged
to inform the Committee about their focal points for
resolution 1540 (2004), both to their capital cities and
to their Permanent Mission to the United Nations here
in New York.
Regarding the voluntary implementation of
national action plans, that was another priority for the
Committee, working with the support of regional and
subregional organizations. The Committee continued
to promote the exchange of experiences, including
through peer reviews, to evaluate and strengthen
effective practices in the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004).
In terms of assistance, the Committee, with the
support of its Group of Experts and the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs, is ready to cooperate
and, when requested, to facilitate assistance to States
in their resolution 1540 (2004) implementation efforts.
That will contribute to achieving the common goal of
preventing the catastrophic use of weapons of mass
destruction by non-State actors.
With regard to the comprehensive review of
resolution 1540 (2004) before the end of its mandate
in 2021, the work of the Committee and its Group
of Experts during this period was carried out in the
context of the resolution’s upcoming comprehensive
review, which will take place before the end of the
mandate of the 1540 Committee on 25 April 2021. That
is why, following the complete revision of the matrices
in 2016 and the revision of the matrix format in 2017,
the existing matrices of the Committee were converted
to a new format in 2018 to allow for updates and a
systematic review of all required information. In that
regard, the working group on assistance discussed and

S/PV. 8428

approved a method for systematically reviewing the
matrices before the next comprehensive review of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), which will
be completed before 25 April 2021.
With regard to the appointment of experts and the
Coordinator of the Group of Experts, on 24 December
2017 the Secretary-General appointed six new experts
to the 1540 Group of Experts, which supports the
Committee. They assumed their functions in April
2018. It is also worth mentioning that the SecretaryGeneral also appointed a new Coordinator on the
recommendation of the Committee.
With regard to the use of the website, it is a space
that is constantly updated and very helpful in ensuring
that States that require remote access to information on
the Committee’s work have access to it. It is important to
note that the Chair, the members of the Committee and
the experts participated in various outreach activities
during the reporting period. In order to participate as
much as possible in fulfilling his or her functions, the
Chair sent recorded messages when he could not attend
a relevant event. Those messages became an important
tool under the circumstances and were all uploaded to
the website.
In conclusion, in accordance with paragraph 11 of
resolution 2325 (2016), we believe it is important to
develop an approach to implementation and reporting
that takes into account the specificity of States, inter
alia, with respect to their ability to manufacture and
export related materials, with a view to prioritizing
efforts and resources where they are most needed
without affecting the need for the full implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). It is important to encourage
expansion and undertake initiatives to strengthen the
capacity of national points of contact. It is imperative
to develop a more effective assistance process, in
cooperation with international partners, to support
Member States.
As to the short term, we believe it is essential to
bolster additional strategies, such as the updating and
continual use of the Committee’s website, as well as the
recording of messages, which allows the Chair to cover a
greater number of events. It is important to bear in mind
the deadline for the adoption of the programme of work,
which will conclude on 31 January. It is also important
to appoint new experts in advance to replace those
who will complete their mandate during the 2019 term.
That also involves the appointment of a new Coordinator

18-444137/12

S/PV.8428

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

of the Group of Experts since, in Bolivia’s experience,
just the appointment of new experts took seven months,
during which time the Committee worked with the help
of only three experts.
On behalf of the delegation and the Government
of Bolivia, I would like to thank the Group of Experts
for their support and contribution throughout the past
two fruitful years. I would also like to highlight the
work carried out by Secretariat and all the members
of the Committee. I thank them for the support and
cooperation they have provided over the course
of the two years of my country’s chairmanship.
Finally, I congratulate the Indonesian delegation on
being elected the new Chair of the Committee. We are
sure it will demonstrate outstanding leadership at the
head of this important Committee.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mrs. Cordova Soria for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Van Oosterom.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I have had
the honour this year to serve both as the Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006), on sanctions on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, and as the Facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), on Iran.
I thank the Council very much for this opportunity to
share my reflections on the past year, as we prepare to
pass the baton to my German and Belgian colleagues.
We have built our work on the excellent work and
efforts of Italy, which we succeeded as part of the split
Council term between our two countries in 2017 and
2018. Let me pay tribute to the work of Sebastiano
Cardi as Chair of the 1718 Committee and Facilitator of
the 2231 format in 2017.
I will use this occasion to highlight three issues:
the work of the 1718 Committee, the work of the 2231
format, and, adding to that, some personal reflections on
the system of the subsidiary organs in the improvements
we see as advisable for the Council. In line with the
representative of Bolivia’s recommendation just now,
they will be of a practical nature.
Let me start with the first issue, the 1718 Committee.
With the significant expansion of the sanctions regime
based on resolutions adopted at the end of last year,
the scope, relevance and magnitude of the work of
the Committee increased this year immensely. I will
8/12

17/12/2018

briefly highlight three major aspects of the work we
performed in the Committee.
First, the Committee continued the ensure the
implementation of the sanctions regime. That in
itself proved to be a tremendous challenge given the
complexity of the sanctions regime, which is of a very
comprehensive nature. We try to provide guidance to
Member States, held open briefings for the wider United
Nations membership and held outreach meetings for
the five regional groups. We are convinced that those
efforts will continue to lead to greater implementation
of the sanctions.
Secondly, this year the Committee facilitated
diplomatic efforts to find a peaceful solution to
the situation on the Korean peninsula. We granted
exemptions to the sanctions regime to allow the
participation, for instance, of officials of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea officials in diplomatic talks
in Pyongyang, Panmunjom and Singapore. Of course,
the Committee also supported the implementation
of the Panmunjom declaration by granting several
exemptions, such as for an inter-Korean railway survey.
Thirdly, the Committee made efforts to further
mitigate adverse humanitarian consequences of the
sanctions, which is something that was of importance to
all of us in the Committee. We connected with various
humanitarian actors, including the United Nations
Resident Coordinator in Pyongyang, and provided
humanitarian actors with further guidance on obtaining
humanitarian exemptions. The Committee also granted
various humanitarian exemptions for humanitarian
aid to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and
continues to consider further exemptions.
I now turn to my second issue, the facilitation of
resolution 2231 (2016). We all know, as we discussed
last week in the Council (see S/PV.8418), this
resolution endorsed the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) and marked a fundamental shift on
the Iranian nuclear issue. As Facilitator this year, we
have aimed to support and improve the implementation
of the resolution through the facilitation of talks,
transparency and trade: talks through engagement with
all the relevant parties and discussions on possible
violations of the resolution, transparency through
comprehensive and balanced reporting and trade by
encouraging the use of the procurement channel. As we
also discussed last week, the JCPOA faced challenges
following the withdrawal by the United States and the
18-44413

17/12/2018

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

S/PV. 8428

re-imposition of United States sanctions against Iran.
But the unanimously adopted framework of resolution
2231 (2016) remains in place, and the procurement
channel is operational and effective. I mentioned last
week the numbers we are considering this year. Let me
conclude on this point by saying that resolution 2231
(2016) and the JCPOA enjoy broad support among the
wider United Nations membership.

of the accumulated reporting and implementation
requirements that other Member States face. That
is certainly a challenge for the smaller Member
States. Further streamlining and harmonizing of the
reporting and implementation requirements among
the Committees would be useful and helpful, because
currently there is a challenge in implementation for a
large part of the membership.

That brings me to my third point, concerning some
personal reflections. I will mention seven points this
time, not three.

Fifth, when it comes to chairing a subsidiary organ,
it can also be challenging. We commend Sweden for
the initiative to start a best practice guide outlining
the Committee working methods of the committees.
Together with Belgium and Australia, we are supporting
Sweden’s efforts and look forward to the result. We
hope that tool will contribute to the effectiveness of the
Security Council and its subsidiary organs.

First, a look at the work of the 1718 Committee
will reveal that it has concrete impact on the ground by
preventing further evasion of the sanctions, facilitating
the diplomatic process and working towards mitigating
adverse humanitarian consequences.
Second, the importance of the unity of the Council
cannot be overstated. When the Council is united it
wields enormous power and has great impact on peace
and security. It is crucial that unity be maintained,
especially on the issues under consideration by the
1718 Committee.
Third — I think this is a wider observation — the
Panels of Experts, and in particular their reports, are
the cornerstone of United Nations sanctions regimes.
Their reports are essential for the decision-making
of the Committee, the Council and Member States.
Panels should be able to do their work in an effective
and secure manner, while safeguarding their integrity.
Additionally, we feel very strongly that the selection
process for Panel members should be based on merits.
All candidates with the required expertise and skill
sets should be taken into account, regardless of their
nationality. In general, the Panels that are functioning
under the Council would profit from having more
experts from the wider United Nations membership.
Fourth, the effective implementation of sanctions
is a challenge for many Member States, especially
those that are unaware of their obligations or are unable
to meet their obligations owing to a lack of capacity.
The world of the sanctions committees is sometimes
a subterranean universe for the wider membership, as
our Indian colleague called it during a Council debate
under the Kuwaiti presidency earlier this year (see
S/PV.8175). Further outreach from the Council therefore
remains essential, including through an informative
website, as some of the other members mentioned as
well. The Council cannot underestimate the workload

Sixth, returning to the Committee pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006), the workload of that Committee
far exceeds that of any other Committee, as the
Security Council Affairs Division has informed us
through its statistics. The Committee received more
than 337 notifications and requests for guidance, while
649 formal notes have been circulated to members of
the Committee so far this year. Those numbers show
the significant burden of a chairmanship on the Chair’s
team, the Secretariat and the Panel of Experts. It is just
an enormous amount of work.
That brings me to my seventh, and last, point,
namely, the system around the sanctions committees.
The total number of all subsidiary organs under the
Council significantly increased since 2000, from 10 to
30. If the Council continues the practice of allocating
chairmanships exclusively to elected members, it will
continue to put a disproportional strain on the Permanent
Missions of the elected members, especially those with
smaller teams. Frankly, that is not sustainable. In our
view, therefore, it is essential that the Council agree to a
new system. Let me give some potential characteristics
of a new system.
First, it could be a system that ensures a fair
distribution of chairmanship among permanent and
elected members alike. Secondly, it could be a system
that allows for a two-year rotation of chairmanships
taken up by permanent members. It could be a system
that would allow Deputy Permanent Representatives to
fulfil the mandate of the Chair. Lastly, it could be a
system that allows Chairs, if they want, to also serve
as co-penholders on draft resolutions relevant to the

18-444139/12

S/PV.8428

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

subsidiary organ they chair. We think that the discussion
on such a new system would best be further conducted
in the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
other Procedural Questions, under the able guidance of
our Kuwaiti colleague.
In conclusion, we would like to express our
gratitude for the professionalism and dedication
of Secretariat colleagues, whose support has been
invaluable. We would also like to especially mention
the Panel of Experts of the 1718 Committee. Let me
also thank the experts of the 1718 Committee and those
of the Iran format for their contribution to the work
of the committees. Of course, we wish every success
to our successors — Ambassador Christoph Heusgen
of Germany, at the 1718 Committee, and Ambassador
Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve of Belgium, at the 2231
Committee. We have already been working closely
with their teams to ensure a smooth transition and
will remain at their disposal in the days of transition
and beyond.
I want to conclude by thanking my own team,
especially Mrs. Lila DelColle and Mr. Joost van Dieren.
They have worked incredibly hard this year, served the
Facilitator and the Committee, and have served the
Council, but certainly they have served the cause of
peace and security above and beyond the call of duty.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Van Oosterom for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Skoog.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I will try to be brief. I realize
that it is very late in the day and that it has been a
long meeting. I would like to say a few words on our
leadership of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011), on Libya sanctions, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2374
(2017), on Mali sanctions, and the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict. I will share some
experiences of chairing those subsidiary bodies and
provide some remarks on the general functioning, or
not, of subsidiary organs and the role of the Chairs.
First of all, I want to pay tribute to the Secretariat,
the Security Council Affairs Division and the Panel of
Experts for the support they provided, as many here
have mentioned. I also want to pay tribute to the 12
loyal and dedicated colleagues from Member States
outside the Council who are present and taking interest
in this debate at this time of the day.
10/12

17/12/2018

Let me say a few words about the Libya Sanctions
Committee. That Committee is very labour-intensive,
perhaps not as much as the Committee pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006), but still, it is active and operates
in a politically complex environment. At times, political
divisions inside the Security Council have made it
difficult to agree on even quite minor issues. Despite
those divisions, we have tried to enable the Committee
to be active and attuned to the political situation in
Libya itself. For example, this year the Committee
listed several individuals for the first time since 2011,
inter alia for involvement in human trafficking, migrant
smuggling and attempts to illicitly export oil. We have
adopted a separate listing criterion on sexual and
gender-based violence, which is a development that we
encourage Member States to continue to consider in
the context of other sanctions regimes. A third issue
has been adopting Implementation Assistance Notices
in relation to the assets freeze, which we hope will
facilitate the effective implementation of the sanctions.
We have listened very carefully, in our national
capacity, to Libya’s concerns regarding the management
of the frozen funds — a considerable amount of money.
We have very actively pursued a way forward on that
in discussions with other members of the Committee,
Libyan representatives and the Libyan Investment
Authority, as well as at the highest level in Tripoli,
beginning with the President. I believe that working
with the World Bank is the best way forward on that
particular issue. The people of Libya need to be satisfied
that their funds are managed in the best way possible.
We encourage Libya to continue engaging with the
World Bank and the incoming Committee Chair.
Despite great difficulty in reaching consensus, I
led the first visit by the Committee to Libya since the
inception of the sanctions regime, in 2011. I thought it
was a very useful trip, about which I have given some
personal impressions here in the Council. Regrettably,
we were not able to visit the eastern part of Libya, as
envisaged in the terms of reference, but I hope that the
second part of the trip can be realized soon.
The exploitation of Libya’s resources for personal
gain continues to do huge harm to Libya and to peace.
Understanding those detrimental undercurrents is
something that I recommend the Committee, and
other committees, to look more closely into to more
effectively deal with it: How do war economies work?
Who benefits? And what can we do to go after those
interests more forcefully?
18-44413

17/12/2018

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Turning to the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2374 (2017), on Mali, that sanctions regime
was set up at the request of the Government of Mali. The
aim of the sanctions is to advance peace, security and
stability for the benefit of the Malian people, in support
of national efforts, not least through the implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
The Government has been very good in its cooperation
with the Committee, but so have the other signatories
of the agreement. Engagement with the region has been
another important component of our work, including
through informal consultations with countries
neighbouring Mali. I visited Mali just a few days ago
and would like to reflect on a few things there.
Many actors, including the parties to the peace
agreement, pointed to the positive impact of the
sanctions regime in maintaining pressure to move
forward in the implementation process. There was also
a general awareness of the expectations of the Council,
as put forward in resolution 2423 (2018), including the
evaluation of progress needed before March of next
year. Of course, there is a time when expectations and
words must translate into concrete action if deadlines
are not met. There are some positive dynamics among
the parties since the elections this summer and the
signing of the pact for peace. At the same time, spoilers
and violators of international humanitarian law need
to be contended with and the momentum seems not
to have been matched by concrete results. We remain
ready, in the last few days of our term on the Council,
to consider listing individuals in accordance with the
designation criteria.
I was also the Chair of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. I would like to thank
countries for their support of the Working Group and our
efforts to work towards a more proactive chairmanship
of the Working Group. We are witnessing utter disregard
for international humanitarian law and human rights,
as reflected in the increase in violations and abuses
against children in many conflicts around the world
and under many Council agenda items. I believe that
reality demands a strengthening of engagement, both
in the field and in dialogue with States. United Nations
efforts must also be reinforced at the country level in
order to reverse that very negative trend.
The Working Group is now efficiently adopting
country conclusions within a one- to two-month time
frame and making regular field visits, focusing on
countries that are ready to engage but need a push,

S/PV. 8428

as was the case in Darfur in the Sudan and in South
Sudan, most recently. I see room for improvement
with more engagement from all Council members and
better follow-up and implementation by the Council as
a whole, in a more determined and consistent manner.
I believe that the questions related to children
and armed conflict are central to prevention and
sustaining peace, and efforts must not be limited to the
Working Group. I want to come back to the Council
later on with a more extensive list of lessons learned
and recommendations as the Council moves forward
without Sweden. Finally, I think that the Working
Group’s collaboration with civil society has been
absolutely crucial, as is so often the case for many other
issues on the Council’s agenda.
I would like to turn now to some general remarks
about the working groups. I agree with most, if not
all, of what our Dutch colleague just suggested in his
recommendations on moving forward. Sanctions can
never be successful in isolation. They must always be
part of a broader political strategy. Sanctions committees
should not operate in a vacuum, disconnected from their
political context. The Council needs to become better
at discussing country-specific items and sanctions
regimes together, and there should be closer interaction
between Chairs of sanctions committees and the
penholders of draft resolutions mandating sanctions, as
the two are mutually reinforcing.
Chairing subsidiary organs is an important and
demanding task that comes with great responsibility.
Sanctions remain one of the most intrusive instruments
available to the Security Council, apart from the use
of force, and the sanctions committees are mandated
with the important task of ensuring the effective use
of that instrument, with direct effect for sanctioned
individuals and entities.
Chairs should therefore enjoy greater trust and
cooperation from all members of the Council. They have
been appointed by the Council and should be entrusted
with a higher degree of independence, without being
hamstrung or micromanaged in the discharge of their
mandates. That holds true when it comes to travelling
on behalf of their committees, communicating about
their work or interacting with the Council itself. The
fact that any committee decision, no matter how minor,
must be taken by consensus, has in essence conferred
the right of the veto on all Council members. Of course,

18-4441311/12

S/PV.8428

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

as we all know, in most cases it is the permanent
members that block effective committee action.
Effective stewardship of subsidiary organs is a
challenge and a responsibility that requires resources
and extensive knowledge of the United Nations sanctions
system. Given the extent of that responsibility, Sweden,
as my Dutch colleague has just mentioned, together with
other Member States, have developed a best practices
guide for Chairs and delegations of subsidiary organs
to help incoming delegations prepare for that important
task. We hope that the guide will be published before
the end of the year. Since we are leaving, we hope that it
can be a legacy for our colleagues and their delegations

12/12

17/12/2018

in trying to make the overall work of the Council, as it
relates to sanctions, more effective and efficient.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Skoog for his briefing.
On behalf of the Security Council, I would like
to thank the outgoing Chairs for the manner in which
they have discharged the important duties mandated by
the Council.
The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.

18-44413
