A /74/PV.43

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fourth session

43rd plenary meeting

Tuesday, 10 December 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Muhammad-Bande  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nigeria)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Dogan
(Croatia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 74 (continued)
Oceans and the law of the sea
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/74/70 and
A/74/350)
Report on the work of the Ad Hoc Working
Group of the Whole on the Regular Process
for Global Reporting and Assessment of the
State of the Marine Environment, including
Socioeconomic Aspects (A/74/315)
Report on the work of the United Nations Openended Informal Consultative Process on Oceans
and the Law of the Sea at its twentieth meeting
(A/74/119)
Draft resolution (A/74/L.22)
(b) Sustainable fisheries, including through the
1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating
to the Conservation and Management of

Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory
Fish Stocks, and related instruments
Draft resolution (A/74/L.21)
Ms. Cerrato (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, my delegation wishes to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his reports prepared on the agenda item
“Oceans and the law of the sea” (A/74/70 and A/74/350).
As a State party to the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) since October 1993,
Honduras recognizes the Convention as the legal
framework within which all activities in the oceans and
seas must be conducted. We acknowledge the strategic
importance of the Convention as the basis for activities
and cooperation in the marine sector at the national,
regional and global levels.
As we commemorate the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the entry into force of the Convention, my delegation
is aware of its historical significance as an important
contribution to the maintenance of peace, justice and
progress for all the peoples of the world, in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and the objectives set out in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
It is important to highlight the negotiation process
that is currently under way towards the adoption of a
legally binding instrument within the framework of
UNCLOS relating to the conservation and sustainable
use of marine biological diversity beyond areas of
national jurisdiction. Honduras reaffirms the pertinent
need to comply with the agreed deadline to finalize

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-40242 (E)

*1940242*

A/74/PV.43

the treaty negotiations by the end of 2020. The
determination, motivation and commitment shown by
delegations in the process has enabled us to achieve
sustained technically oriented progress towards the
implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14.
For that reason, Honduras urges the continuation of the
constructive work being carried out during the sessions
of the intergovernmental conference until the treaty
negotiations are concluded.
Honduras’ priorities include continuing to develop
national programmes and strategies to eliminate the use
of plastic and its disposal in the seas and oceans, so as
to achieve a healthy marine environment. Likewise, my
country shares the urgency of mitigating the impacts of
climate change, marine pollution, ocean acidification,
habitat destruction, river basin degradation, overfishing,
loss of biodiversity, unregulated aquaculture and sealevel rise.
Moreover, we underscore that concerted action is
still essential for the protection of underwater cultural
heritage and in order to achieve gender equality and the
empowerment of women in all ocean-related sectors.
In that connection, I would like to recall that, in June,
the Honduran island of Roatán hosted the fifteenth
Meeting of the Contracting Parties to the Cartagena
Convention for the Protection and Development of the
Marine Environment of the Wider Caribbean Region,
held on the theme “Protecting our Caribbean Sea
and our sustainable future”. In addition, Honduras
co-sponsored resolution 73/292, adopted on 9 May, on
the 2020 United Nations Conference to Support the
Implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14, to
be held in Lisbon in June 2020. We thank Portugal and
Kenya for their leadership of the coordination efforts.
In conclusion, my delegation congratulates and
thanks the countries that have contributed to research
and training initiatives under various programmes
within the framework of the bodies established under
UNCLOS by providing scholarships for students from
Member States. We encourage that those benefits
be increased for developing countries in order to
achieve the objectives regarding the sustainable use of
the oceans.
As reflected in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Addis Ababa Agenda for Action,
some middle-income countries, including Honduras,
face significant challenges in achieving sustainable
development. As a coastal country with island territory,
2/29

10/12/2019

Honduras shares many challenges with small island
developing States and least developed countries. We
therefore require capacity-building and increased
scientific marine knowledge in our academic and
national research centres in order to contribute to
decision-making and improve the exchange of scientific
data and best practices on oceans and climate change.
Ms. Pierce (United States of America): My
delegation is pleased to co-sponsor draft resolution
A/74/L.22, on oceans and the law of the sea. The
United States underscores the central importance of
international law, as reflected in the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, whose universal
and unified character is emphasized in the draft
resolution. As we see attempts to impede the lawful
exercise of navigational rights and freedoms under
international law, it is more important than ever that we
remain steadfast in our resolve to uphold those rights
and freedoms.
Among the places where the freedom of the seas is
most threatened is the South China Sea. The assertion
of unlawful and sweeping maritime claims, including
through ongoing intimidation and coercion against
long-standing oil and gas development and fishing
practices by others, threatens the rules-based regime
that has enabled the region to prosper. Our position on
the South China Sea, and elsewhere in the world, is
simple: the rights and interests of all nations, regardless
of size, power and military capabilities, must be
respected. In that regard, we call on all States to resolve
their territorial and maritime disputes peacefully and
free from coercion; to fashion their maritime claims
and conduct their activities in the maritime domain in
accordance with international law, as reflected in the
Convention; to respect the freedoms of navigation and
overflight and other lawful uses of the sea that all users
of the maritime domain enjoy; and to settle disputes
peacefully in accordance with international law.
The United States values the platform that the
General Assembly provides to elevate those important
issues. The annual oceans and law of the sea draft
resolution serves as an opportunity for the global
community to identify key ocean issues and develop
constructive ways to address them. In particular, we
appreciate that this year’s draft resolution recognizes
many of the robust global and regional efforts to
combat marine debris, which imposes significant social
and economic costs and threatens marine ecosystems.
We are also pleased that this year’s draft resolution
19-40242

10/12/2019

supports the United Nations Decade of Ocean Science
for Sustainable Development by highlighting the
contributions of the 2019 informal consultative process
on oceans and the law of the sea towards planning
for the Decade, to begin in 2020. Ocean science,
ocean observation and ocean exploration are key to
understanding the full breadth of the ocean’s bounty.
Turning to sustainable fisheries, the United States
values deeply the important work being done throughout
the world on sustainable fisheries management, which
helps to support economic activity and healthy marine
ecosystems. We wish to call particular attention to
new language in this year’s draft resolution related
to enhancing fishing vessel safety, improving labour
conditions and addressing illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing, including by encouraging
collaboration between the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the International
Labour Organization and the International Maritime
Organization. This year’s draft resolution also
recognizes the valuable contributions of women to the
fisheries sector, as well as the challenges they face.
We would also like to draw attention to the
paragraphs that emphasize the importance of effective
performance reviews of regional fisheries management
organizations and reflect the productive discussions
held at the fourteenth round of informal consultations
of States parties to the United Nations Fish Stocks
Agreement. We look forward to continuing substantive
discussions at next year’s informal consultations on the
implementation of an ecosystem approach to fisheries
management and to preparing for the next session of the
resumed Review Conference of the Agreement. Next
year, as called for by the General Assembly, we will
also focus on reviewing actions to address the impacts
of bottom fishing on vulnerable marine ecosystems and
the long-term sustainability of deep-sea fish stocks,
with a view to ensuring the full implementation and
strengthening of commitments where necessary.
With regard to both draft resolution A/74/L.22 and
A/74/L.21, we refer members to our remarks delivered
on 21 November 2018 regarding our position on the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Addis
Ababa Action Agenda, technology transfers, the Paris
Agreement and climate change, and reports of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Before concluding, we would like to congratulate
the Government of Norway for hosting another

A/74/PV.43

successful Our Ocean Conference, at which participants
announced commitments worth more than $63 billion to
address key issues facing the ocean. The United States
announced 23 new commitments, worth approximately
$1.21 billion, to promote sustainable fisheries, combat
marine debris and support marine science, observation
and exploration. We look forward to the 2020 Our Ocean
Conference in Palau, as well as the 2021 conference
in Panama.
We would also like to express our appreciation
for the important leadership of Ambassador Rena
Lee of Singapore in her role as President of the
intergovernmental conference on an international
legally binding instrument under the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation
and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of
areas beyond national jurisdiction. We look forward
to working with delegations as the intergovernmental
conference continues and hope to have a broadly
supported outcome that takes into account the views of
all delegations.
We would like to thank the coordinators of the
informal consultations on both draft resolutions,
namely, Ms. Natalie Morris-Sharma of Singapore,
for her outstanding coordination of the oceans draft
resolution and, in particular, for her encouragement of
efforts to update and reorganize the draft resolution,
and Mr. Andreas Kravik of Norway, who patiently
guided Member States through a challenging but
ultimately constructive and successful negotiation. We
would also like to thank the Division for Ocean Affairs
and the Law of the Sea for its expertise and hard work
throughout the consultations on both draft resolutions.
In particular, we would like to thank the Director of
the Division for her tireless and exemplary leadership
and service.
Finally, we would like to express our appreciation
for delegations’ hard work and cooperation in
negotiating both draft resolutions. It is our hope that
this spirit of cooperation will characterize our efforts to
address the numerous and complex issues that lie ahead
for the ocean and for fisheries.
Mr. Machida (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to thank Ms. Natalie Morris-Sharma of Singapore
and Mr. Andreas Kravik of Norway for their excellent
coordination on the two draft resolutions (A/74/L.22
and A/74/L.21) under agenda item 74, entitled “Oceans
and the law of the sea”. Japan also wishes to express its

19-402423/29

A/74/PV.43

appreciation for the contributions of our fellow Member
States and for the invaluable support of the Division for
Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea.
This year we celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the entry into force of the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). Japan supports
the universality of UNCLOS, which regulates the
freedom of navigation, freedom on the high seas, the
peaceful settlement of disputes and the protection and
preservation of the marine environment. We firmly
believe that the entire international community is
responsible for and can benefit from promoting and
developing an ever-more predictable maritime order
under UNCLOS.
In that connection, we would further like to stress
the importance of open seas and the rule of law as
the basis for peace and prosperity in every part of the
oceans of the world, including the South China Sea.
We embrace the international law of the sea, based
primarily on UNCLOS, as indispensable for securing
our maritime rights and interests and ensuring that
maritime activities are undertaken smoothly. We will
continue to make every effort to promote and maintain
a free and open Indo-Pacific region. This year’s draft
resolution on oceans and the law of the sea confirms
our commitment to a rules-based maritime order and
covers a wide range of oceanic issues. Japan is pleased to
co-sponsor the draft resolution. Japan remains engaged
on promoting the law of the sea. Let me mention some
examples in that regard.
Japan co-hosted symposiums in Hamburg
and Tokyo in October to celebrate the twentyfifth anniversary of UNCLOS. We will continue
to proactively contribute to the international order
at sea, which UNCLOS clearly sets out, and to the
propagation of the rule of law at sea. Japan has been
contributing actively through both human and financial
resources to international organizations established
under UNCLOS. This year, the Deep Ocean Resources
Development Company, a Japanese contractor, offered
a training programme including onboard training at
sea for candidates from developing States in order to
support developing countries’ capacity-building and
help them acquire practical, hands-on skills to enable
their full participation in the exploitation of the deep
seabed. Japan hopes that those trainees will take full
advantage of that opportunity and play active roles in
the maritime affairs in their home countries.
4/29

10/12/2019

Japan recognizes the importance of conserving the
marine biological diversity of areas beyond national
jurisdiction. We support the development of a wellbalanced, effective and universal legally binding
instrument under UNCLOS on the conservation and
sustainable use of marine biological diversity of
areas beyond national jurisdiction and have actively
contributed to the discussions in that regard.
At the Osaka Summit of the Group of Twenty
(G-20), we shared our Osaka Blue Ocean Vision and
endorsed the new G-20 implementation framework for
actions on marine plastic litter to tackle the issue of
marine plastic waste on a global scale. Japan has taken
on a leading role in those initiatives with a view to
stopping additional marine pollution.
Japan attaches great importance to combating
illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing,
which threatens the sustainable use of living marine
resources. In the G-20 Osaka leaders’ declaration, we
recognized the importance of addressing IUU fishing
to ensure the sustainable use of marine resources
and conserve the marine environment, including its
biodiversity. We also reaffirmed our commitment
to eliminating IUU fishing. As Japan places strong
emphasis on the rule of law in the Arctic, we actively
participated in the negotiation of the Agreement to
Prevent Unregulated High Seas Fisheries in the Central
Arctic Ocean, acceding to it this year. In addition, as
recognized in this year’s sustainable fisheries draft
resolution, we underscore the importance of major
port States becoming parties to the Agreement on Port
State Measures. The significance of the Agreement
in addressing IUU fishing cannot be overstated. We
encourage States that have not yet joined the Agreement
to do so.
In October, Japan presented various concrete
measures at the sixth Our Ocean Conference, including
our MARINE Initiative towards the Realization of the
Osaka Blue Ocean Vision, so as to advance effective
actions to combat marine plastic litter. To enhance its
maritime domain awareness capabilities, Japan has put
in place maritime domain awareness situation indication
linkages, which enable us to better understand marine
security and in turn help ensure safe maritime activities
and maintain the openness and stability of the oceans.
In addition, Japan is providing capacity-building
assistance to marine law enforcement agencies to combat
maritime crimes and is continuing its efforts to address
IUU fishing. We look forward to further continuing our
19-40242

10/12/2019

contributions at the seventh Our Ocean Conference, to
be held in Palau next year. As a member of the Highlevel Panel for a Sustainable Ocean Economy, Japan has
proactively engaged in discussions and will continue to
work with other countries in preparation for the 2020
United Nations Ocean Conference.
We appreciate the role of the Committee on Fisheries
of the Food and Agriculture Organization, the only
specialized agency of the United Nations with technical
expertise on fisheries. As one of the first Vice-Chairs
of the Committee, Japan will further contribute to
international discussions on living marine resources.
In conclusion, let me reiterate Japan’s hope that
the draft resolutions before us, which are the result of
intensive and cooperative work by Member States, will
be duly adopted by the General Assembly.
Ms. Zolotarova (Ukraine): The delegation of
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union (see A/74/
PV.42) and would like to make a few remarks in its
national capacity.
Ukraine is pleased to join many others today in
co-sponsoring the draft resolution entitled “Oceans
and the law of the sea” (A/74.L.22). We would like to
express our appreciation for the excellent stewardship
demonstrated by the facilitators of the draft resolution.
Despite the progress made by the international
community to address the challenges facing the
oceans, the health, resilience and productivity of the
oceans continue to deteriorate. Moreover, the increased
cumulative impacts of human activities have led to
an unprecedented decline in marine biodiversity and
in the health of marine ecosystems. It is therefore of
paramount importance that we pay more attention to
these problems and take concrete steps to address them.
We would like to echo the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on the Oceans and the law of the sea (A/74/350),
which emphasizes that international cooperation is
crucial to successfully addressing the challenges facing
the oceans, including those of the people who depend
on the oceans.
We acknowledge the need for enhancing ocean
governance as a cornerstone for preserving and
protecting the marine environment and biodiversity,
as well as ensuring peaceful relations among States.
The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS) establishes the overarching legal framework

A/74/PV.43

within which all activities in the oceans and seas must
be carried out. By setting out a legal order for the seas
and oceans, the Convention continues to contribute to
the peace, security, cooperation and friendly relations
among all nations, as well as to sustainable development.
The Convention requires States parties to settle
any dispute among them concerning the interpretation
or application of the Convention by peaceful means.
Consistent with Article 33 of Charter of the United
Nations and article 279 of UNCLOS, Ukraine has strived
to peacefully resolve its dispute with Russia. Since
early 2014, Russia has engaged in numerous blatant
violations of Ukraine’s rights under UNCLOS and
other relevant rules of international law; has unlawfully
excluded Ukraine from exercising its maritime rights in
the Black Sea, the Sea of Azov and the Kerch Strait; has
exploited Ukraine’s sovereign resources in those waters
for its own ends; and has usurped Ukraine’s right to
regulate its own maritime areas in those waters.
Through those violations of international law,
Russia is, among other things, stealing Ukraine’s
offshore hydrocarbons and fisheries resources,
harming the livelihoods of Ukrainian fishermen and
interfering with navigation, including the navigation of
vessels heading through the international Kerch Strait
and towards Ukrainian sea ports in the Sea of Azov.
On 16 September 2016, Ukraine served on the Russian
Federation a notification and statement of claim under
annex VII to UNCLOS referring to a dispute concerning
coastal State rights in the Black Sea, the Sea of Azov
and the Kerch Strait.
On 19 February 2018, Ukraine filed a memorial
through the Permanent Court of Arbitration with
the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea
establishing that Russia has violated Ukraine’s
sovereign rights in the Black Sea, the Sea of Azov
and the Kerch Strait. On 31 August 2018, the Tribunal
hearing Ukraine’s case against the Russian Federation
under the Convention on the Law of the Sea published
a procedural order determining that it would rule on
certain jurisdictional objections raised by the Russian
Federation in a preliminary phase of the proceedings.
Ukraine does not believe that the Russian Federation’s
jurisdictional objections are plausible or that they will
be accepted by the Tribunal.
Moreover, on 25 November 2018, Russia engaged
in a new wave of violations of UNCLOS by blocking,
attacking, detaining and seizing Ukrainian military

19-402425/29

A/74/PV.43

vessels in the Black Sea and near the Kerch Strait.
Such actions constitute grave violations of UNCLOS
provisions that regulate territorial waters, international
straits and exclusive economic zones.
On 1 April 2019, the Ukrainian party, in accordance
with the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea, notified the Russian Federation about a dispute
concerning the immunity of three naval vessels and
24 servicemen on board. According to the order of
the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea of
25 May 2019, Russia was obliged to immediately return
the vessels to the custody of Ukraine. It took Russian
almost half a year to return them.
Today Russia continues to violate UNCLOS,
denying the immunity of the servicemen and
continuing to prosecute them based on actions taken
while they were on board the Ukrainian naval vessels.
On 21 November 2019, the procedural hearings by
the Arbitral Tribunal under annex VII to the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea in the case
concerning the detention of three Ukrainian naval
vessels and the 24 servicemen on board took place. The
immunity of warships is the fundamental principle of
international customary and maritime law. Nobody has
the right to violate it, and, in the case of its violation,
one should bear full responsibility.
In that regard, we call upon the Russian Federation
to comply with international law, implement the
relevant General Assembly resolutions and return,
unconditionally and without delay, all equipment
and weapons seized from the released vessels — the
Berdyansk, the Nikopol and the tugboat Yana Kapu — to
the custody of Ukraine.
We would like to stress that much greater efforts
are necessary by Member States to achieve the targets
of Sustainable Development Goal 14, including through
enhanced international cooperation and coordination,
increased capacity-building and the transfer of
technology to developing States, and that, in order to be
cohesive, effective and long-lasting, such efforts must
be undertaken within the context of the legal framework
set out by UNCLOS.
In conclusion, we would like to express our
gratitude to the Secretariat and to the Division for
Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea for their work
and constant support throughout the year.
6/29

10/12/2019

Mr. Park Chull-Joo (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report (A/74/350) on oceans
and the law of the sea. My appreciation also goes to
our facilitators from Singapore and Norway for their
excellent work in coordinating draft resolutions
A/74/L.21 and A/74/L.22, which are before us today.
The Republic of Korea actively participated in the
informal consultations on the draft resolutions and
is pleased to be a sponsor of the draft resolutions on
oceans and the law of the sea. My delegation takes this
opportunity to express its sincere thanks to Ms. Gabriele
Goettsche-Wanli, Director of the Division for Ocean
Affairs and the Law of the Sea (DOALOS), for her
dedicated work and invaluable assistance to Member
States throughout her career at DOALOS.
Oceans, seas and coastal areas form an integrated
and essential component of Earth’s ecosystem.
Conservation and the sustainable use of the oceans and
their resources are vital for both the livelihood and wellbeing of humankind. As a coastal State surrounded by
seas on three sides, Korea strongly supports the full
implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14
and its 10 targets in line with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. In line with that guiding
commitment, we are pleased to have contributed to the
development of a draft methodology under target 14.c
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development by
participating in a pilot testing phase.
Korea also welcomes the decision to convene the
high-level 2020 United Nations Conference to Support
the Implementation of Sustainable Development Goal
14. We believe that the 2020 Conference will serve
as a valuable follow-up to the successful 2017 United
Nations Ocean Conference and provide a timely
opportunity for taking stock of the implementation and
further commitments in support of Goal 14. We remain
committed to active engagement with the preparatory
process and the 2020 Conference itself.
As a strong advocate for the Ad Hoc Working
Group of the Whole of the General Assembly on the
Regular Process for Global Reporting and Assessment
of the State of the Marine Environment, including
Socioeconomic Aspects, Korea has been actively
participating in both the Bureau and the Group of
Experts. We look forward to the successful completion
of the second cycle of the Regular Process and the
smooth transition to its third cycle, which coincides
19-40242

10/12/2019

with the first five years of the United Nations Decade
of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development.
This year marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
entry into force of the United Convention on the Law
of the Sea (UNCLOS). The three bodies established
by UNCLOS, namely, the International Tribunal for
the Law of the Sea, the Commission on the Limits of
the Continental Shelf and the International Seabed
Authority have all played important roles in enhancing
the rule of law in maritime spaces.
In particular, my delegation would like to commend
Mr. Jin-Hyun Paik, President of the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, for his able leadership,
especially as the Tribunal continues to play an
important role in the peaceful resolution of law of the
sea disputes and in the enhancement of the rule of law
in the oceans. We believe that the role and function of
the Tribunal can be strengthened through an expansion
of training programmes and outreach activities, and
wish to continue working closely with the Tribunal in
that direction.
Finally, Korea has been actively participating in
the intergovernmental conference on the development
of an international legally binding instrument under the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction. We
welcome the developments made so far through the
negotiation phase of the draft text. My delegation
believes that the new instrument should be consistent
with the provisions of UNCLOS, as it could be widely
accepted by the international community without
undermining the existing relevant regional and global
bodies. We look forward to continuing constructive
discussions at the fourth session of the conference early
next year.
As new challenges continue to emerge, there is a
greater need for concerted efforts among all Member
States and other key stakeholders. I would like to take
this opportunity to renew my Government’s strong
commitment to ensuring the sound and rules-based
governance of the oceans and seas.
Mr. Koba (Indonesia): At the outset, Indonesia
would like to express its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive reports (A/74/70 and
A/74/350) under this agenda item. We would also like
to thank Ms. Natalie Morris-Sharma of Singapore and
Mr. Andreas Kravik of Norway for their tremendous

A/74/PV.43

efforts in coordinating the informal consultations
on the draft resolutions on oceans and the law of the
sea (A/74/L.22) and sustainable fisheries (A/74/L.21),
respectively. Indonesia is pleased to co-sponsor both
draft resolutions, noting our particular interest, as the
largest archipelagic State and a country with a vast
area of water as its territory, in the protection and
sustainable use of the ocean and its resources. We also
thank the Director of the Division of Ocean Affairs and
the Law of the Sea and her team for their support for
the delegations.
Indonesia welcomes the success of the 20th
meeting of the United Nations Open-ended Informal
Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea
and the 29th Meeting of the States Parties to the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).
As a nation with over 17,000 islands and 100,000
kilometres of coastline, Indonesia attaches great
importance to the oceans and seas. We depend very much
on the ocean, with millions of Indonesians relying on it
for their food and livelihoods. In that regard, Indonesia
strongly supports the international community’s
efforts to promote the protection and sustainable use
of natural resources, including fisheries. We encourage
all stakeholders to strengthen cooperation in ensuring
maritime safety and security. Our Government also
strongly advocates the implementation of UNCLOS
to promote the rule of law and global order at sea.
Indonesia remains steadfast in its belief that UNCLOS
is a critical component in the attainment of the three
pillars of the United Nations: peace, development and
human rights.
This year’s draft of the annual omnibus resolution
on oceans and the law of the sea therefore stresses
the universal and unified nature of the Convention.
It also affirms that the Convention establishes a legal
framework for all activities in the world’s oceans and has
strategic significance as the basis for national, regional
and global action and cooperation in the maritime
sector. We rely on the implementation of that resolution
to address the current critical challenges facing the
oceans and seas, including illegal, unregulated and
unreported (IUU) fishing, transnational organized
crime, the destruction of marine environment and
maritime safety and security.
Indonesia emphasizes the effective application of
the existing legal instruments that have been adopted
based on UNCLOS, as well as the coordinated efforts

19-402427/29

A/74/PV.43

of global, regional and sectoral bodies. In our case, we
strive for the best implementation of the Convention in
the South-East Asian region through the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). Furthermore, we
wish to particularly point out the successful cooperation
under the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation of
the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to
the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish
Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks.
Special attention should also be paid to issues
relating to efforts to combat IUU fishing. In that regard,
Indonesia’s position is very clear. Our fight against IUU
fishing has also confirmed that this threat is deeply
interconnected with various forms of other criminal
acts, inter alia, trafficking in persons, corruption,
drug trafficking and slavery. Hence, we urge States
to work together to strengthen their cooperation in
addressing IUU fishing and other related crimes that
are transnational and organized in nature.
In the area of the conservation and sustainable use of
marine resources, we fully support the ongoing process
of deliberation at the intergovernmental conference on
the development of an international legally binding
instrument under UNCLOS on the conservation and
sustainable use of marine biological diversity of areas
beyond national jurisdiction. We share the view that
biodiversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction should
be considered as the common heritage of humankind
and that the benefits resulting from their use and
exploitation should be equitably shared among States.

10/12/2019

Finally, Indonesia wishes to once again reaffirm
our full support for and commitment to the objectives,
purposes and universal principles enshrined in
UNCLOS. We would also like to use this opportunity
to express our commitment to manage our seas and
oceans in a sustainable way. That is an integral part
of Indonesia’s commitment to achieve Sustainable
Development Goal 14 of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would like
to thank Ms. Natalie Morris-Sharma of Singapore and
Mr. Andreas Kravik of Norway for their tremendous
efforts in coordinating the informal consultations
on the draft resolutions on oceans and the law of the
sea (A/74/L.22) and sustainable fisheries (A/73/L.21),
respectively.
We take this opportunity to reiterate our
appreciation for the work of the General Assembly and
its subsidiary organs on oceans and the law of the sea
over the past year. Our appreciation also extends to the
bodies established under the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) for their contribution
to promoting the rule of law and maintaining order
at sea.

Our delegation underlines the importance
of capacity-building and the transfer of marine
technology as the avenues for achieving our goals of
conserving and sustainably benefiting from maritime
resources. Furthermore, Indonesia is very pleased that
this year’s oceans omnibus and sustainable fisheries
draft resolutions include the topic of climate change,
particularly its implications for oceans and seas,
including fisheries.

This year marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
entry into force of the Convention, which is referred
to as the constitution of the oceans. As a fundamental
multilateral instrument, the Convention sets out the
comprehensive legal framework within which activities
in the ocean and seas must be carried out. We join
others in echoing the universal and unified character of
the Convention and its strategic importance as the basis
for national, regional and global action. As we witness
our oceans and seas confronted by acute challenges and
pressure, including marine pollution, marine resource
depletion, marine plastic debris and climate change,
we firmly believe that UNCLOS and the relevant
legal instruments should continue to serve as a legal
framework and basis for cooperation at all levels to
address those common challenges.

We also commend and deeply appreciate
the fundamental role, as well as the works of the
Convention bodies — the International Tribunal for
the Law of the Sea, the Commission on the Limits of
the Continental Shelf and the International Seabed
Authority — in promoting the fulfilment of the objectives
of the Convention. Indonesia welcomes the decision by
States to provide them with adequate resources.

After 25 years of implementation, the Convention
remains valid and continues to play a crucial role,
especially in regions with maritime and territorial
disputes, such as the South China Sea, known as the
East Sea in Vietnamese. Viet Nam is one of the countries
of the world that are most vulnerable to climate change,
sea-level rise and extreme weather events and that also
suffer from the adverse effects of maritime pollution and

8/29

19-40242

10/12/2019

marine resource depletion. We strongly support global
efforts to promote the conservation and sustainable use
of oceans, seas and marine resources, combat illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing and achieve all
the targets under Sustainable Development Goal 14.
Along with that process, we call for full compliance
with UNCLOS, including the peaceful settlement of
disputes and full respect for the rights of coastal States
in their maritime areas as defined under UNCLOS,
such as the right to the peaceful conduct of legitimate
economic activities. Efforts should also be made to
strike a balance between the goal of the conservation
and sustainable development of fisheries and coastal
populations’ need for social security and livelihoods.
We welcomed the open discussion and the
progress that was made at the third session of the
Intergovernmental Conference on an international
legally binding instrument under the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation
and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of
areas beyond national jurisdiction. We share the view
that the process should gather broad consensus and enjoy
the widest possible participation of Member States and
relevant stakeholders. We look forward to discussions
at the fourth session of the Conference on the basis of
a revised text of the draft agreement prepared by the
President of the Conference (A/CONF.232/2019/6).
As a link between the Indian and Pacific Oceans,
the South China Sea is strategically important to peace,
security and prosperity in the Asia-Pacific region, and
to the maintenance of peace and stability, maritime
security and safety. The issues of freedom of navigation
and overflight in the South China Sea are of common
concern and interest to the region and the world.
There have been complex developments in the South
China Sea, including serious incidents that infringe
on Viet Nam’s sovereign rights and jurisdiction in our
maritime zones, as defined in UNCLOS. We urge all
the parties concerned not to repeat such incidents, to
exercise self-restraint, refrain from unilateral acts that
might further complicate or escalate the disputes, such
as the expansion and militarization of occupied areas,
settle disputes by peaceful means in accordance with
international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations and UNCLOS, fully respect diplomatic and
legal processes, implement the Declaration on the
Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea in its entirety
and expedite the conclusion of an effective, substantive
code of conduct.

A/74/PV.43

I would like to take this opportunity to once
again affirm my full support and commitment to the
objectives and purposes of the universal principles
enshrined in UNCLOS. We urge all countries to respect
and fulfil their obligation to ensure peace, stability and
the sustainable development of the oceans and seas for
the benefit of current and future generations.
Mr. Proskuryakov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): As a leading maritime Power, Russia pays
special attention to the development and improvement
of international cooperation on ocean affairs on the
basis of the 1982 United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea. We thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (A/74/350) on the subject.
My delegation is pleased with the results of the
negotiation process on draft resolutions A/74/L.22,
on oceans and the law of the sea, and A/74/L.21, on
sustainable fisheries.
The Assembly’s annual omnibus resolution on
oceans and the law of the sea underscores the universal
and unified nature of the Convention, which has
strategic significance as the foundation for national,
regional and global activities and cooperation in the
maritime sector. Maintaining its integrity is especially
important, and we believe it is vital to ensure and
guarantee the inviolability of such foundations. We
continue to support the effective application of the legal
instruments adopted on the basis of the Convention, as
well as their contribution to coordinating the work of
the relevant global, regional and sectoral bodies. We
consider any attempts to revise their remits that might
weaken them or disrupt harmonious international
cooperation to be counterproductive.
We are pleased with the success of cooperation under
the framework of the 1995 Agreement on Straddling
Fish Stocks and the corresponding establishment
of a network of regional fisheries management
organizations. Practice has shown the effectiveness of
the Agreement as a reliable instrument for regulating
fishing beyond areas of national jurisdiction while
balancing the interests of both sustainable fisheries
and the preservation of the marine environment. We
urge States to continue to improve the effectiveness of
existing regional fisheries management organizations.
We would like to highlight the role of Convention
bodies such as the International Tribunal for the Law of
the Sea, the Commission on the Limits of the Continental
Shelf and the International Seabed Authority, which

19-402429/29

A/74/PV.43

continue to perform their functions effectively. Russia
has traditionally taken an active part in the work of the
Tribunal and the Commission.
Particular attention should be paid to discussing
issues related to the conservation and sustainable use of
marine biodiversity beyond national jurisdiction. The
outcome of the third session of the Intergovernmental
Conference on that topic, held in August, shows that
delegations continue to hold opposing positions on a
number of key issues. The draft document prepared by
the President of the Conference (A/CONF.232/2019/6)
contains a wide range of alternatives reflecting the
diversity of the participants’ views, and we urge
delegations to take a balanced and progressive
approach. We believe it is essential to focus on
achieving a good-quality result that will enable us to
reach a consensus solution.
We would like to comment on the latest jabs by
the Ukrainian delegation. Ukraine’s standard arsenal
of clichés is pure propaganda and has no relationship
to reality, and we have no intention of commenting
on matters that are currently in judicial or arbitration
proceedings. With regard to the maritime claims, we
do not consider that they are related to the agenda item
under discussion, just as we do not consider the General
Assembly a suitable platform for considering fictional
insinuations. We would like to remind our Ukrainian
colleagues that Crimea and Sevastopol are part of the
Russian Federation. The peninsula’s inhabitants chose
reunification with Russia through a free vote based on
the principle of a people’s right to self-determination,
as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. As a
coastal State, Russia has sovereignty, enjoys sovereign
rights and exercises jurisdiction over its maritime
spaces in accordance with international law. Our
country complies in good faith with its international
obligations with regard to its activity in the maritime
space under its sovereignty and jurisdiction, including
along the shores of Crimea.
Mr. Yedla (India): Oceans are the world’s single
largest ecosystem, covering nearly three quarters of the
Earth’s surface and thereby providing a massive arena
for emerging complex and interconnected development
issues such as climate change, livelihoods, commerce
and security. Water has provided a harvest for
humankind in many dimensions, not the least of which
is the concourse of ideas, culture and partnerships
across vast distances. The world’s oceans are an
essential part of sustainable human life on Earth. The
10/29

10/12/2019

world as a whole relies on healthy and resilient oceans
for climate stability.
We thank the Secretary-General for his reports
A/74/70 and A/74/350, on oceans and the law of the sea,
which cover, inter alia, legal and policy framework,
maritime spaces, the importance of the human
dimension, maritime safety and security and climate
change. We would also like to thank Natalie MorrisSharma of Singapore and Andreas Kravik of Norway
for coordinating the resolutions on oceans and the law
of the sea (A/74/L.22) and on sustainable fisheries
(A/74/L.21), respectively.
We believe that the Indian Ocean has been a
powerful force for good in the geo-economics of
world history. It can become the ocean of the twentyfirst century, a free and secure pathway for exchange
of intellect, information, trade and culture that will
help to fashion truly international harmony. It is in
that context that India, in its interactions with other
States, especially the littoral States of the Indian
Ocean, underscores the importance of cooperation in
the blue economy. In that context, we commend the
Group of Experts for preparing the second world ocean
assessment, scheduled to be considered by the Ad Hoc
Working Group of the Whole on the Regular Process
for Global Reporting and Assessment of the State of
the Marine Environment, including Socioeconomic
Aspects, in 2020. We welcome the revised preliminary
timetable and implementation plan considered by the
Ad Hoc Working Group and the estimated time to
complete the second world ocean assessment.
The twentieth meeting of the Open-ended Informal
Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law of
the Sea, held in June, provided a unique forum for
comprehensive discussions on ocean science and the
United Nations Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable
Development, facilitating the exchange of views among
multiple stakeholders and improving coordination and
cooperation between States and competent agencies.
We welcome report of the meeting (A/74/119) and
support the continuation of that process.
While the 1982 United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) lays down the basic
framework of International Law governing the
jurisdiction of coastal States over adjacent maritime
areas, what happens to the governance of areas
beyond such jurisdiction is becoming increasingly
important, especially in view of the rapid advancement
19-40242

10/12/2019

in technology and our scientific understanding. In
that context, we acknowledge the third session of the
intergovernmental conference on an international
legally binding instrument under the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation
and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of
areas beyond national jurisdiction (BBNJ), convened
under resolution 72/249. We take note of the substantive
discussions held, which addressed the topics identified
in the package agreed upon in 2011. The BBNJ is an
important process that is expected to give shape to
global governance in that area.
India has over 7,500 kilometres of coastline and
more than 1,000 islands. India is a seafaring nation
with a large coastal economy. We are acutely aware
of the challenges and opportunities that oceans
represent, from sustainable fisheries to the prevention
and control of marine litter and plastic pollution;
from affordable renewable energy to ecotourism and
early warning systems for disaster risk reduction and
management; and from the building of resilience and
to adaptation to climate change. India recognizes the
blue economy as a driver of inclusive and sustainable
economic growth and development. We must work
towards innovative technologies for offshore renewable
energy, aquaculture, deep-seabed mining and marine
biotechnology, which provide a new source of jobs.
The need to make the ocean economy greener is also
gaining importance.
India has an extensive institutional and legal
architecture for managing issues relating to oceans and
coastal regulation. The Ministry of Earth Sciences,
the National Institute of Oceanography, the Indian
National Centre for Ocean Information Services, the
Centre for Marine Living Resources and Ecology and
the National Biodiversity Authority are some of the
institutions doing pioneering work related to the oceans.
An Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management
project is involved in monitoring sea water quality,
shore protection measures, shoreline management and
oil spill models through the application of geographical
information systems, remote sensing and mathematical
modelling for the management of vulnerable habitats.
India is an active participant in multilateral efforts
for the development of a collective management of
ocean affairs and is one of the early parties to the
1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea. In addition to UNCLOS, India is party to the
Agreement relating to the implementation of Part XI

A/74/PV.43

of the Convention of 10 December 1982, the 1995
Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish
Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, the 1973
International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution
from Ships as modified by the Protocol of 1978, the
2004 International Convention for the Control and
Management of Ships’ Ballast Water and Sediments,
which protects against the transfer of invasive aquatic
alien species, the 1972 Convention on the Prevention
of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other
Matter and other agreements that regulate various
activities conducted in the oceans, especially the
conservation and sustainable use of ocean resources.
While the legal regime on the regulation of the oceans
is fairly well developed, the challenges faced for the
effective implementation of UNCLOS obligations and
other related agreements are an important focus area.
Effective global partnership is necessary for
capacity-building and collaboration on technology
and financial assistance, increased awareness and the
sharing of scientific knowledge with least developed
countries, developing countries and those with special
vulnerabilities in order to help them meet their
international obligations. India cooperates with its
partners in the region through its membership of the
South Asian Seas Action Plan of 1995, which is serviced
by the secretariat of the South Asia Cooperative
Environment Programme. The main focus of the South
Asian Seas Action Plan is on integrated coastal-zone
management, oil-spill contingency planning, human
resource development and the environmental effects of
land-based activities.
We cannot allow our seas to turn into zones of
contention. An age of shared prosperity demands
cooperation. Secure and open sea lanes are critical to
peace, stability, prosperity and development. In that
context, India reiterates the importance of freedom of
navigation and overflight on the high seas, unimpeded
lawful commerce and resolving maritime disputes
by peaceful means, in accordance with universally
recognised principles of international law, including
UNCLOS. The smooth functioning of the institutions
established under the Convention — namely, the
International Seabed Authority, the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea and the Commission
on the Limits of the Continental Shelf — hold the key
to the proper implementation of the provisions of the
Convention and to the realization of the desired benefits
of the uses of the seas.

19-4024211/29

A/74/PV.43

Three decades ago, India was the first country to
receive the status of pioneer investor in the Indian Ocean.
Indian scientists today collaborate in research stations
on the Arctic Ocean, studying its links to climate in our
own region. Indian hydrographers partner in capacity
building efforts with our maritime neighbours. Indian
institutions work closely with regional partners in
improving early warning systems for tsunamis and
cyclones. Indian naval ships are deployed in the delivery
of humanitarian assistance and emergency evacuation,
as well as for patrolling sea lanes against pirates. A
disaster resilient world demands disaster resilient
infrastructure. India remains committed to addressing
the challenges of complex humanitarian emergencies
by building disaster resilient infrastructure. In that
context, India took the initiative to launch the Coalition
for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure, in partnership
with several other countries, during the Climate Action
Summit 2019.
India is strongly committed to protecting its
coastal and marine environment and attaches special
importance to preventing and significantly reducing
marine debris and litter by 2025 through global action
and the collective efforts of all stakeholders. In that
regard, the Government of India has launched a massive
campaign called Clean India to clean up cities and
villages and rejuvenate its rivers. Since a major source
of plastic debris comes from land, that campaign will
contribute immensely to reducing the inflow of plastic
into the seas. Under that campaign, we have undertaken
the commitment to eliminate single-use plastic in India
by 2022.
India is committed to the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, including
Sustainable Development Goal 14, for the sustainable
development of its blue-economy partnership. The
Prime Minister of India has announced my country’s
priority of helping the Indian Ocean region through
the concept of security and growth for all in the
region. Under that concept, India would continue to
actively pursue and promote its geopolitical, strategic
and economic interests on the seas, in particular the
Indian Ocean.
Mr. Fox-Drummond Gough (Brazil): Allow me
to start by thanking Norway and Singapore for their
facilitation of the consultations that led to this year’s
texts of the omnibus draft resolution A/74/L.22, on
oceans and the law of the sea, and draft resolution
A/74/L.21, on sustainable fisheries. Brazil is pleased to
12/29

10/12/2019

co-sponsor both draft resolutions. Let me also express
appreciation for the spirit of cooperation that continues
to prevail in crafting those resolutions, which are
comprehensive and reflect the close interrelation of the
problems of the ocean space and the need to consider
them as a whole. We also welcome the reports prepared
by the Secretary-General (A/74/70 and A/74/350). They
reflect the relevance of the issues dealt with in today’s
draft resolutions.
Oceans are a vital element, not only for those who
inhabit coastal areas, but for humankind as a whole.
We depend on oceans for environmental services, food,
trade, transportation and energy, among other sectors.
It is crucial that we understand the impact of human
activity on our oceans. Only now are we starting to
understand the deeper and subtler ways through which
interaction between humans and the oceans happens.
Despite their vital importance to all humankind,
science has been indicating that conditions in the oceans
continue to deteriorate due to anthropogenic activity.
Fisheries have been deeply affected by overexploitation.
Ocean acidification remains a pressing challenge, while
climate change has also been affecting sea levels and
coral reefs, inflicting increasingly severe damage on
coastal areas.
Understanding the effects of climate change on
the marine environment and marine biodiversity is
imperative, as is the need to develop ways and means
of mitigation and adaptation. In that context, Brazil
welcomes the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change’s Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere
in a Changing Climate. We are also looking forward to
the findings of the International Law Commission on
the topic of sea-level rise in relation to international law.
The United Nations Open-ended Informal
Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law of the
Sea and the Regular Process for Global Reporting and
Assessment of the State of the Marine Environment,
including Socioeconomic Aspects, continue to be
important elements under the institutional framework
established by the General Assembly to integrate
knowledge and policymaking and enhance awareness on
key issues, while promoting sustainable development.
Concern for the conservation and sustainable use of
marine resources has increased exponentially in Brazil
and in the world, as Governments, societies and the
private sector are being requested to raise awareness
and take increased action to curb the negative impacts of
19-40242

10/12/2019

human activity on oceans. In that context, a number of
policies and initiatives focused on the oceans have been
introduced in Brazil with the aim of conserving marine
resources and diminishing the potentially negative
impacts of some of our activities. In particular, I would
like to highlight the Brazilian national action plan on
marine litter, launched last March, which provides for a
number of short-, medium- and long-term actions.
Brazil is also engaged in the implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14 so as to ensure the
conservation and sustainable use of the oceans, seas and
marine resources. All activities related to the marine
environment should aim at leading to sustainable
development in its three dimensions — economic, social
and environmental. In that sense, we look forward to
joining efforts next year in Lisbon in the 2020 United
Nations Ocean Conference.
Likewise, Brazil has been actively contributing
to the negotiations on an international legally binding
instrument under the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) on the conservation and
sustainable use of marine biological diversity of areas
beyond national jurisdiction (BBNJ). We welcome the
progress achieved so far and look forward to a successful
outcome of the BBNJ process in 2020 in order to
address in a balanced manner questions such as access
and benefit-sharing arising from the commercialization
of marine genetic resources, capacity-building, the
transfer of marine technology, area-based management
tools and environmental impact assessment.
Brazil would also like to reaffirm its full support and
commitment to the objectives, purposes and principles
enshrined in UNCLOS, which sets the universal legal
framework within which all activities in the oceans and
seas must be carried out. In that vein, it is of the utmost
importance to ensure the full and effective functioning
of the organs established under the Convention. In that
regard, we recognize the fundamental role played by the
Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf, the
International Seabed Authority and the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea.
In concluding my remarks, I wish to recognize
the high level of expertise and professionalism of all
delegations, which enabled the outcome before us
today. I also wish to thank the team at the Division
for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea for its hard
work during the process of consultations. Its role, as

A/74/PV.43

always, was vital to the outcome before the General
Assembly today.
Mr. Nasimfar (Islamic Republic of Iran): Let me
begin by commending the representatives of Singapore
and Norway for leading the consultations on the
draft resolutions under consideration (A/74/L.22 and
A/74/L.21), which reflect the latest developments in
the area of oceans and the law of the sea, as well as
sustainable fisheries, respectively. We also thank the
Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea
for its valuable support to various ongoing processes
within the United Nations system.
The Islamic Republic of Iran is of the view that
although the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea (UNCLOS) plays a fundamental role in and
constitutes the main legal framework for activities in
the sea, the sixth preambular paragraph of the draft
omnibus resolution should be revised in a way to also
reflect the important role of international customary
law, as well as other relevant conventions in that regard.
With respect to the marine biological diversity of
areas beyond national jurisdiction (BBNJ), we are of
the view that the BBNJ has notable environmental,
economic and social importance and could contribute
to poverty eradication, sustained economic growth
and the development of science, public health and
food security. The accumulation of a number of
threats to marine ecosystems beyond areas of national
jurisdiction, including the unsustainable exploitation of
resources, the destruction of habitats, pollution, ocean
acidification and climate change, are matters of concern.
There is an urgent need to establish a legally binding
instrument to address the issue of conservation, as well
as access and utilization, including benefit-sharing
from marine genetic resources in areas beyond national
jurisdiction of States. We will continue to contribute to
that process.
The Islamic Republic of Iran has been active in
combating maritime piracy and armed robbery at sea
and has been dispatching navy fleets to the Gulf of
Aden and other areas to combat maritime piracy. It
should be reiterated that Iran’s policy in countering
maritime piracy and armed robbery at sea is based
on cooperation with other countries, especially the
coastal States of the region, in accordance with the
respective rights and duties of coastal States enshrined
in international law of the sea.

19-4024213/29

A/74/PV.43

We are committed to the freedom of navigation and
safety of oceans and seas. The President of the Islamic
Republic of Iran launched the Hormuz Peace Endeavour
at the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly
(see A/74/PV.5). That initiative arose from Iran’s sincere
conviction that the protraction of conflicts and everescalating tensions among States bordering the Persian
Gulf is prone not only to further destabilize the region
but also to severely endanger the right to development
of the peoples of the region.
It is in that understanding that the Islamic Republic
of Iran has devised a holistic, subject-oriented and
inclusive plan that, through an elaborate process of
consultations and inclusive participation, would allow
the Governments, private sector, academia, civil
society and other stakeholders of the eight littoral
States of the Persian Gulf to join forces and make
use of their local wisdom, expertise and experiences
to cooperatively tackle the very serious challenges
currently arising from terrorism, extremism,
sectarianism, poverty, environmental degradation,
expansionism and interventionism. The initiative
recognizes the responsibility of the States surrounding
the Strait of Hormuz to ensure tranquillity, peace,
stability, progress and prosperity in their region and to
maintain the freedom of navigation and energy security
for all the producers and consumers who depend on the
Strait of Hormuz.
Finally, we hope to see an expansion of cooperation,
interaction, business, trade and investments at various
levels and fields among the Governments, peoples and
private sectors of the Hormuz community through
implementing the Hormuz Peace Endeavour.
Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): Let me begin by thanking
the delegations of Norway and Singapore, coordinators
of the two draft resolutions under today’s agenda
(A/74/L.22 and A/74/L.21), for their excellent work.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
on oceans and the law of the sea (A/74/70). We
appreciate the discussion in the 20th meeting of the
Open-ended Informal Consultative Process on Oceans
and the Law of the Sea on the theme of ocean science
and the United Nations Decade of Ocean Science for
Sustainable Development.
The role of ocean science, cutting across Sustainable
Development Goal 14 and each of its interrelated
targets, in furthering sustainable development can
never be overemphasized. Maintaining the health of
14/29

10/12/2019

the oceans, ensuring the conservation of the marine
environment and the sustainable use of marine
resources is critical to realizing the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. To that end, we should put
renewed emphasis on increasing the use of natural
materials and preventing marine pollution.
Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing
remains one of the greatest threats to fish stocks and
marine ecosystems and continues to have serious
and major implications for the conservation and
management of ocean resources, as well as for the food
security and economies of many States, particularly
developing States. Bangladesh therefore attaches the
utmost importance to regulating fish-stock harvesting;
ending illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing
and destructive fishing practices; and implementing
science-based management plans in order to restore
fish stocks in the shortest feasible time. In that context,
we stress the importance of completing the World Trade
Organization negotiations to address fisheries subsidies
that can contribute directly or indirectly to overcapacity
and illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing.
We express deep concern over the impacts of global
climate change and ocean acidification on coral reefs
and other ecosystems relevant to fisheries. We urge
all States and relevant organizations to assess and
consider the impacts of climate change on fisheries and
aquaculture sectors in their policies and planning.
Large movements of refugees and migrants at sea,
mostly in perilous situations, are a matter of concern
for Bangladesh, as they are for many. To address that,
States Members of the United Nations need to comply
with their obligations for search and rescue at sea and
to work towards addressing the factors that cause
such irregular movements. That issue, particularly
against the backdrop of the outbreak of the Rohingya
humanitarian crisis arising from Myanmar’s Rakhine
state since August 2017, requires the particular attention
of all regional countries concerned.
A climate-induced sea-level rise would have
severe socioeconomic and environmental impacts on
coastal States, including on their maritime boundary
delimitation. Rising sea levels are the biggest threat to
Bangladesh among all the external drivers related to
climate change. We therefore thank the International
Law Commission for its decision to include sea-level
rise in relation to international law in its long-term
programme of work.
19-40242

10/12/2019

As a country with limited natural resources,
Bangladesh has long explored alternative options for
resources. The blue economy is the new frontier of
opportunity, which we are tapping into to meet our
enormous demand for resources. An international
legally binding instrument on the conservation and
sustainable use of marine biodiversity of areas beyond
national jurisdiction (BBNJ) would significantly
help the development endeavours of countries like
Bangladesh, and we therefore strongly advocate for a
text-based negotiation in that regard.
Bangladesh welcomes the deliberations at the
third session of the intergovernmental conference on
the development of an international legally binding
instrument under the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) on the conservation and
sustainable use of marine BBNJ, based on a zero draft
submitted by the President of the intergovernmental
conference. We hope that the deliberations at the third
session will enable the President to produce a second
draft before the fourth session of the conference, to be
held in New York in March 2020. In view of some of
the common constraints of developing countries, we
would expect the draft to adequately address, inter alia,
the issues of capacity-building, new and predictable
financing and the transfer of technology and know-how.
We urge the Commission on the Limits of the
Continental Shelf (CLCS) to expedite its work towards
disposing of the pending submissions. Bangladesh
submitted its claims on the continental shelf in 2011
and later deposited updated baseline information to the
Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea, as
per UNCLOS provisions. We appreciate the amendment
of the terms of reference of the trust fund created to
facilitate the preparation of submissions to the CLCS
by developing countries.
The Acting President: I now call on His Excellency
Mr. Jin-Hyun Paik, President of the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea.
Mr. Jin-Hyun Paik (International Tribunal for
the Law of the Sea): It is an honour for me to address
the General Assembly this year on behalf of the
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea during the
Assembly’s consideration of the agenda item “Oceans
and the law of the sea”.
Before referring to matters of interest at the
Tribunal, it is with great sadness that I must inform
the Assembly of the passing of two former Judges of

A/74/PV.43

the Tribunal: Judge Alexander Yankov of Bulgaria, on
17 October, and Judge Hugo Caminos of Argentina,
only two days ago, on 8 December.
Judges Yankov and Caminos served as members of
the Tribunal during the same period, from 1996 until
2011. They were involved, throughout their long and
distinguished careers, in the development of the law of
the sea and the peaceful settlement of disputes. Among
many other achievements, they played important roles
during the third United Nations Conference on the
Law of the Sea. Judge Yankov served as Chairman
of the Third Committee of the Conference, and Judge
Caminos was Deputy Director of the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations for the Conference. On behalf of the
Tribunal, I wish to pay tribute to Judges Yankov and
Caminos and their important contribution to the work
of the Tribunal.
Turning to the judicial work of the Tribunal, I wish
to inform the Assembly that 2019 has been a productive
year for us in Hamburg. The Tribunal delivered a
judgment on the merits and two orders in response
to requests for provisional measures. Dealing with a
wide range of legal issues, including the freedom of
navigation, exclusive flag State jurisdiction on the high
seas and the military activities exception to compulsory
dispute settlement, the Tribunal was called upon in
those cases to interpret and apply key provisions of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and,
in doing so, provided greater clarity to States on the
content of their rights and obligations thereunder.
On 10 April, the Tribunal delivered its judgment in
the M/V “Norstar” Case (Panama v. Italy). Assembly
members may recall that Panama had instituted
proceedings against Italy by means of an application to
the Tribunal dated 16 November 2015, with respect to a
dispute between the two States in connection with the
arrest and detention of the vessel M/V “Norstar”, an oil
tanker flying the flag of Panama.
In its judgment of April, the Tribunal considered
the application of article 87 of the Convention to a
situation in which a vessel was detained in internal
waters in relation to activities allegedly carried out
in part on the high seas. The Tribunal determined
that the decree of seizure issued by Italy in respect
of the M/V Norstar and its execution concerned both
alleged crimes committed in the territory of Italy and

19-4024215/29

A/74/PV.43

bunkering activities conducted by the M/V Norstar on
the high seas.
In respect of the bunkering activities of the M/V
Norstar on the high seas, the Tribunal found that they
constituted not only an integral part but also a central
element of the activities targeted by the decree of
seizure and its execution.
In this context, the Tribunal provided an important
clarification on the legal status of bunkering under
the Convention. The Tribunal stated that bunkering
on the high seas is part of the freedom of navigation
to be exercised under the conditions laid down by the
Convention and other rules of international law. On
that basis, the Tribunal concluded that the bunkering
of leisure boats carried out by the M/V Norstar on the
high seas falls within the freedom of navigation under
article 87 of the Convention.
The Tribunal also made important pronouncements
with regard to article 87 of the Convention. It observed
that this provision proclaims that the high seas are open
to all States and that save in exceptional cases, no State
may exercise jurisdiction over a foreign ship on the
high seas. The Tribunal underlined that the principle
of exclusive flag State jurisdiction is an inherent
component of the freedom of navigation under article 87
of the Convention and held that this principle prohibits
not only the exercise of enforcement jurisdiction on the
high seas by States other than the flag State but also
the extension of their prescriptive jurisdiction to lawful
activities conducted by foreign ships on the high seas.
Observing that the place where enforcement
takes place is not the sole criterion in determining
the applicability of article 87 to a given situation,
the Tribunal found that article 87, paragraph 1, of
the Convention was applicable to the case of the M/V
Norstar and that Italy, by extending its criminal and
customs laws to the high seas, by issuing a decree of
seizure and by requesting the Spanish authorities to
execute it, breached the freedom of navigation which
Panama, as the flag State of the M/V Norstar, enjoyed
under that provision.
The judgment of the Tribunal brought to an end
a long-running dispute concerning the M/V Norstar.
It also represents a significant contribution to the
jurisprudence regarding the scope of freedom of
navigation and exclusive flag State jurisdiction on the
high seas.
16/29

10/12/2019

Shortly after issuing its judgment on the M/V
Norstar, the Tribunal was seized of a new case: on
16 April 2019, Ukraine submitted to the Tribunal a
request for the prescription of provisional measures
under article 290, paragraph 5, of the Convention. By
its notification and statement of claim dated 31 March
2019, Ukraine had instituted arbitral proceedings
under annex VII to the Convention against the Russian
Federation in a dispute concerning the immunity of
three Ukrainian naval vessels and the 24 servicemen on
board. The dispute relates to an incident that occurred
in the Black Sea near the Kerch Strait on 25 November
2018, in which three Ukrainian naval vessels and
their 24 servicemen were arrested and detained by the
authorities of the Russian Federation.
The Tribunal adopted its order on provisional
measures on 25 May 2019. The Tribunal examined
whether article 298, paragraph 1(b), of the Convention,
relating to disputes concerning military activities,
was applicable, thus excluding the case from the
jurisdiction of the annex VII arbitral tribunal. The
Tribunal considered that the underlying dispute leading
to the arrest of the three Ukrainian naval vessels
concerned their passage through the Kerch Strait and
that the parties’ differing interpretation of the regime
of passage through the Kerch Strait was at the core of
the dispute.
Considering the context in which the Russian
Federation used force when arresting the Ukrainian
vessels and the sequence of events, the Tribunal held
the view that what occurred appears to be the use of
force in the context of a law-enforcement operation
rather than a military operation. For the Tribunal, these
circumstances suggested that the arrest and detention of
the Ukrainian naval vessels by the Russian Federation
took place in the context of a law-enforcement operation.
In addition, the subsequent proceedings and
charges against the servicemen further supported the
law-enforcement nature of the activities of the Russian
Federation. Accordingly, the Tribunal considered
that prima facie article 298, paragraph 1(b), of the
Convention did not apply.
Having found that prima facie the annex VII arbitral
tribunal would have jurisdiction over the dispute
submitted to it, the Tribunal examined the plausibility
of the rights asserted by Ukraine and considered that
the rights claimed by Ukraine on the basis of articles
19-40242

10/12/2019

A/74/PV.43

32, 58, 95 and 96 of the Convention are plausible under
the circumstances.

interpretation or application of the Convention prima
facie appears to have existed.

The Tribunal then found that there was a real and
imminent risk of irreparable prejudice to the rights of
Ukraine pending the constitution and functioning of
the annex VII arbitral tribunal and that the urgency of
the situation required the prescription of provisional
measures under article 290, paragraph 5, of the
Convention. The Tribunal recalled that a warship is an
expression of the sovereignty of the State whose flag
it flies. The Tribunal further noted that any action
affecting the immunity of warships is capable of causing
serious harm to the dignity and sovereignty of a State
and has the potential to undermine its national security.

In accordance with the requirements necessary for
the prescription of provisional measures, the Tribunal
determined that the rights claimed by Switzerland on
the basis of paragraphs 1 and 2 of article 58 and of
article 92 of the Convention were plausible. Regarding
the requirement of urgency, the Tribunal noted, inter
alia, that not only had M/T San Padre Pio been detained
for a considerable period of time, but also that the vessel
and its crew were exposed to constant danger.

Pending a decision by the Annex VII arbitral
tribunal, the Tribunal ordered that the Russian
Federation should immediately release the three
Ukrainian naval vessels and return them to the custody
of Ukraine, and immediately release the 24 detained
Ukrainian servicemen and allow them to return
to Ukraine.
Pursuant to article 95, paragraph 1, of the Rules,
the parties submitted to the Tribunal reports and
information on compliance with the provisional
measures prescribed.
On 21 May 2019, while the Tribunal’s decision
on Ukraine’s application for provisional measures
was pending, Switzerland submitted to the Tribunal a
request for the prescription of provisional measures.
By its notification and statement of claim dated 6 May
2019, Switzerland had instituted arbitral proceedings
under annex VII to the Convention against Nigeria in
respect of a dispute concerning the arrest and detention
of the Swiss-flagged M/T San Padre Pio, its crew
and cargo. The dispute concerns events occurring on
22 and 23 January 2018, when the motor tanker San
Padre Pio engaged in ship-to-ship transfer of gasoil in
the exclusive economic zone of Nigeria, was arrested
by the Nigerian navy. The M/T San Padre Pio, together
with its crew members and cargo, was detained at Port
Harcourt, Nigeria, on 24 January 2018.
The Tribunal adopted an order on provisional
measures on 6 July. The Tribunal considered that at
least some of the provisions invoked by Switzerland
appeared to afford a basis on which the jurisdiction of
the annex VII arbitral tribunal might be founded and
accordingly concluded that a dispute concerning the

Pending a decision by the annex VII arbitral
tribunal, the Tribunal ordered that Switzerland should
post a bond or other financial security with Nigeria and
that Switzerland should undertake to ensure that the
master and the three officers would be available and
present at the criminal proceedings in Nigeria if the
arbitral tribunal found that the arrest and detention of
the M/T San Padre Pio did not constitute a violation of
the Convention. The Tribunal further ordered that upon
posting the bond or other financial security and issuing
the undertaking, Nigeria should immediately release
the M/T San Padre Pio, its cargo and its crew. Pursuant
to paragraph 1 of article 95 of the rules of the Tribunal,
both parties submitted reports and information on
compliance with the provisional measures prescribed.
I would now like to inform the Assembly of another
case recently submitted to the Tribunal. On 18 June,
Mauritius initiated annex VII arbitral proceedings
against Maldives in relation to a dispute concerning
the delimitation of the maritime boundary between the
two States in the Indian Ocean. I held consultations
with the parties at the Tribunal on 17 September and,
on 24 September, they transmitted to the Tribunal
a notification and special agreement to submit their
dispute to the Special Chamber of the Tribunal, to be
constituted pursuant to paragraph 2 of article 15 of
the Statute of the Tribunal. By order of the Tribunal,
on 27 September a Special Chamber of the Tribunal,
composed of nine judges, was formed to deal with the
dispute. On 10 October, in my capacity as President of
the Special Chamber, I adopted an order fixing the time
limits of the submission of the written pleadings of
the parties. I believe that the willingness of Mauritius
and Maldives to transfer their dispute from annex VII
arbitration to the Tribunal is a testament to the Tribunal’s
reputation for effective and efficient dispute settlement.

19-4024217/29

A/74/PV.43

As the Assembly is aware, alongside its judicial
work, the Tribunal is also active in the field of capacitybuilding. I would like to take the opportunity to provide
a brief overview of those activities.
In November, the Tribunal held another of its
regional workshops on the settlement of disputes
related to the law of the sea, this time regarding the
South-American region. The event, which took place
in Montevideo, was the fourteenth in a series of
workshops held in different regions of the world to
provide national experts with practical information
on the dispute-settlement procedures available before
the Tribunal. The Montevideo workshop was attended
by representatives of 10 States of the region. It was
organized in cooperation with the Ministry for Foreign
Affairs of Uruguay and with the financial support of
the Korea Maritime Institute, to which I express our
sincere gratitude.
Every year, the Tribunal offers some 15 internships
to university students spanning a three-month period.
In the 22 years of its existence, the programme has
given 375 interns from 95 States the opportunity to
acquire experience with the work of the Tribunal; many
of them have gone on to pursue careers in the field of
the law of the sea. I am glad to note that the Tribunal’s
internship programme is able to support interns from
developing countries through a trust fund set up by
the Tribunal. Several grants have been made to the
fund over the years by, among others, the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China
and the Korea Maritime Institute. I wish to express my
sincere gratitude to them for their support.
Since 2007, the Tribunal has also run the Nippon
Foundation Fellowship Programme, a nine-month
capacity-building and training programme in
international dispute settlement in the law of the sea.
Five fellows are participating in the current, thirteenth,
cycle of the programme. They are nationals of Bahrain,
Chile, Côte d’Ivoire, Guyana and Lithuania. To date,
81 fellows have had the opportunity to participate in
the programme, which has been organized with the
financial support of the Nippon Foundation of Japan.
I wish to take this opportunity to express my sincere
gratitude to the Nippon Foundation for its commitment
to the programme.
Before I conclude, allow me to say a few words
about the dispute-settlement system to be included
in the new international legally binding instrument
18/29

10/12/2019

under the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea on the conservation and sustainable use of
marine biological diversity of areas beyond national
jurisdiction. I read, with great interest, the advanced
revised draft text of the new instrument of 27 November
2019, and I wish to congratulate the President of the
conference, Ambassador Rena Lee, on her stewardship
of the negotiations.
The issue of the dispute settlement is an important
matter. I have already expressed some of my views on
that, here and elsewhere. Therefore, without reiterating
what I have already stated, may I simply ask that the
Assembly look into the matter and consider what the
most appropriate system for the dispute settlement
would be in order to ensure the consistent and efficient
interpretation and application of the new instrument.
In this context, I wish to highlight that the Tribunal
stands ready to deal with any further tasks with which
the international community may wish to entrust in
the future.
Finally, regarding organizational matters, this
year has seen changes in the Registry of the Tribunal.
In September, the judges of the Tribunal elected
Ms. Ximena Hinrichs Oyarce, of Chilean nationality,
as the new Registrar of the Tribunal. Prior to her
election as Registrar, Ms. Hinrichs Oyarce served as
Deputy Registrar of the Tribunal. I am very proud
to inform the Assembly that Ms. Ximena Hinrichs
Oyarce is the first female Registrar of the Tribunal. She
succeeds Mr. Philippe Gautier, who resigned following
his election as Registrar of the International Court of
Justice on 22 May. The Tribunal is currently receiving
expressions of interests for the post of Deputy Registrar.
In closing, I would like to add that the Tribunal
benefits from excellent cooperation with the United
Nations. In that respect, I wish to express our gratitude
to the Secretary-General, the Legal Counsel and the
Director of the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law
of the Sea for their support and cooperation.
The Acting President: I now call on His
Excellency Mr. Michael Lodge, Secretary-General of
the International Seabed Authority.
Mr. Lodge (International Seabed Authority): A few
weeks ago, on 16 November, an important milestone
was commemorated, as the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea — one of the most comprehensive
treaties in the history of international law — reached 25
years of age since its entry into force. The Convention,
19-40242

10/12/2019

our ocean treaty, has stood the test of time and remains
relevant to address contemporary challenges. Today’s
near-universal character of the Convention has been
reached thanks to the resolution of the outstanding
issues related to Part XI through the conclusion of the
1994 Agreement. The Convention’s first implementing
Agreement is to be interpreted and applied as a single
instrument together with Part XI of the Convention.
One of the most significant consequences of the
Convention was the establishment of an international
machinery to control and administer the seabed and
its mineral resources beyond the limits of national
jurisdiction for the benefit of humankind as a whole.
That machinery acquired a concrete expression
through the establishment of the International Seabed
Authority. Across this 25-year journey, the members
of the Authority have been working together to
build a solid institutional architecture and an evergrowing regulatory framework for the oversight of the
activities in the Area, which currently constitutes the
most comprehensive and equitable regime to govern
access to and the utilization of the mineral resources
and the protection of the marine environment in
areas beyond national jurisdiction. That has been a
remarkable achievement.
In that context, I wish to commend the General
Assembly for having recognized in draft resolution
A/74/L.22 the far-reaching implications of this
achievement by noting with satisfaction the special
commemorative session, held in July on the occasion
of twenty-fifth anniversary of the Authority. Along
the same lines, I wish to express my appreciation to
the General Assembly for welcoming in the draft
resolution the adoption of the high-level action plan
and performance indicators developed for each of the
strategic directions found in the strategic plan of the
Authority for the period from 2019 to 2023, which, as
accurately described in the draft resolution, provides a
uniform basis for the strengthening of existing working
practices of the Authority.
I am grateful to the General Assembly for
highlighting the serious issue of arrears of contributions
to the Authority and to the Tribunal. As of today,
I regret very much that only 64, or 38 per cent, of
the members have paid their assessed contributions
for 2019. Ten members of the Authority have never
paid any contributions whatsoever since joining the
Convention. Just more than $1 million is owed in
contributions outstanding for more than two years.

A/74/PV.43

That is unacceptable and places an undue burden on
those members that pay their contributions, including
many small island developing States. I therefore urge
all Member States to redouble their efforts to ensure
that contributions are paid on time and in full.
I wish now to highlight three other significant
ongoing processes in the Authority, which not only
map the work ahead during 2020, but also have major
implications for ocean governance in areas beyond the
limits of national jurisdiction.
First, the Council of the Authority is currently
seized with the negotiation of draft exploitation
regulations. Upon the invitation of the Council at its
July session, 39 written submissions were received from
members, observers and stakeholders. In compliance
with the decision of the Council, and well ahead of
the fixed deadline, a compilation of the proposals
and observations sent by members of the Council and
a compilation of proposals and observations sent by
other States members of the Authority, observers and
other stakeholders are available as of today on the
Authority’s website.
In addition, the secretariat has prepared a note
providing a broad overview of the main issues raised
in the written submissions in connection with the draft
regulations. The Council will continue its negotiations
during its forthcoming meeting, which will take place
from 17 to 21 February 2020. The next meeting of the
Council will be preceded by the third meeting of an
open-ended informal working group to discuss the
economic model for deep-seabed mining that will
form the basis for the financial terms of contracts. I
look forward to the broadest possible participation in
those meetings.
A second major development, and as appropriately
encouraged by the draft resolution, relates to the
implementation of the strategy endorsed by the Council
to develop regional environmental management
plans. At the end of November, a workshop on the
regional environmental management plan for the
northern Mid-Atlantic Ridge took place in Evora,
Portugal. The workshop was made possible by the kind
collaboration of the Government of Portugal and the
European Commission.
One of its objectives was to advance the description
of potential areas that could be impacted by extractive
mineral activities and that would require enhanced
management measures for marine biodiversity

19-4024219/29

A/74/PV.43

protection through area-based management tools. The
process of development of regional environmental
management plans, which the Council had decided to be
undertaken under the auspices of the Authority, affords
us a unique opportunity to get it right from the start
and serves as a tangible expression of the Authority’s
commitment to the protection of marine biodiversity
and the application of a precautionary approach, in
accordance with its mandate under the Convention.
That brings me to my third point. Benefits for
humankind and a global system for the protection of
the marine environment will not be complete without
long-term engagement to deliver on capacity-building
needs, in line with the priorities identified by States.
That is why the Authority, on the basis of a proposal by
the Group of African States, will organize a workshop
in Kingston, from 10 to 12 February 2020, on capacity
development, resources and needs assessment, with a
view to improving the delivery of capacity-building
programmes and initiatives by the International
Seabed Authority. I welcome everyone to participate in
the workshop.
After outlining those three major ongoing processes
under the auspices of the Authority, I must highlight
that the secretariat alone will not be able to meet those
ambitious goals without the active and committed
engagement of the international community as a whole.
We need everybody on board, working together. When
they are, I am convinced that in the next 25 years
the Authority and the framework provided under
Part XI of the Convention will further consolidate as
one of the most successful projects in the history of
international relations.
The Acting President: We have heard the
last speaker in the debate on agenda item 74 and its
sub-items (a) and (b).
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolutions A/74/L.21 and A/74/L.22, as orally revised.
We turn first to draft resolution A/74/L.21, entitled
“Sustainable fisheries, including through the 1995
Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation
and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly
Migratory Fish Stocks, and related instruments”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat to make an oral statement.
20/29

10/12/2019

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): This oral statement
is made in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly and has been made
available on the PaperSmart portal.
Under the terms of paragraphs 57, 58, 59, 60, 63, 64,
211 and 249 of draft resolution A/74/L.21, the General
Assembly would take the following actions.
Pursuant to operative paragraph 57, the Assembly
would recall that the resumed Review Conference
agreed to keep the Agreement under review through
the resumption of the Review Conference at a date
not earlier than 2020, and note the agreement at the
fourteenth round of informal consultations of States
parties to the Agreement that the Review Conference
should be resumed in 2021.
Pursuant to paragraph 58, the Assembly would
request the Secretary-General to resume the Review
Conference, convened pursuant to article 36 of the
Agreement, in New York for one week in the first part
of 2021, with a view to assessing the effectiveness
of the Agreement in securing the conservation and
management of straddling fish stocks and highly
migratory fish stocks, and to render the necessary
assistance and provide such services as may be required
for the resumption of the Review Conference.
Pursuant to paragraph 59, the Assembly would
encourage wide participation in the resumed
Review Conference, in accordance with article 36 of
the Agreement.
The Assembly would, pursuant to paragraph
60, request the Secretary-General to submit to the
resumed Review Conference an updated report,
prepared in cooperation with the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and with the
assistance of an expert consultant to be hired by the
Division to provide information and analysis on
relevant technical and scientific issues to be covered
in the report, to assist the Review Conference in
discharging its mandate under article 36, paragraph 2,
of the Agreement, and also in this regard request the
Secretary-General to develop and circulate to States
and to regional fisheries management organizations
and arrangements in a timely manner a voluntary
questionnaire regarding the recommendations made by
the Review Conference in 2016, taking into account the
specific guidance to be proposed at the fifteenth round
of informal consultations.
19-40242

10/12/2019

The Assembly would, pursuant to paragraph 63,
request the Secretary-General to convene the fifteenth
round of informal consultations of States parties to
the Agreement for three days in May 2020: two days
to focus on the topic “Implementation of an ecosystem
approach to fisheries management” and one day
to serve as a preparatory meeting for the resumed
Review Conference.
Pursuant to paragraph 64, the Assembly would
also request the Secretary-General to prepare a draft
provisional agenda and draft organization of work for
the resumed Review Conference, taking into account
contributions from States, and to circulate them at the
same time as the provisional agenda for the fifteenth
round of informal consultations of States parties to the
Agreement, 60 days in advance of those consultations.
The Assembly would, pursuant to paragraph 211,
recall its request in resolution 73/125 to the SecretaryGeneral to convene, with full conference services,
without prejudice to future arrangements, a two-day
workshop in the second half of 2020 in order to discuss
implementation of paragraphs 113, 117 and 119 to 124 of
resolution 64/72, paragraphs 121, 126, 129, 130 and 132
to 134 of resolution 66/68 and paragraphs 156, 171, 175,
177 to 188 and 219 of resolution 71/123, and to invite
States, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations and other relevant specialized agencies,
funds and programmes, subregional and regional
fisheries management organizations and arrangements,
other fisheries bodies, other relevant intergovernmental
bodies and relevant non-governmental organizations
and relevant stakeholders, in accordance with United
Nations practice, to attend the workshop.
The Assembly would, pursuant to paragraph 249,
note the desire to further improve the efficiency of
and the effective participation of delegations in the
informal consultations concerning the annual General
Assembly resolution on sustainable fisheries, decide
that the informal consultations on this resolution would
be held in a single round of consultations in November
for a period of seven days, request the SecretaryGeneral to provide support to the consultations through
the Division, and invite States to submit proposals for
inclusion in the text of the resolution to the Coordinator
of the informal consultations no later than five weeks
before the start of the consultations.
Pursuant to the requests contained in paragraphs
57 and 58 of the draft resolution, it is envisaged that

A/74/PV.43

the Review Conference in New York would convene
for one week in the first part of 2021 comprising 10
meetings, one in the morning and one in the afternoon
for five days, with interpretation in all six languages.
This would constitute an addition to the meetings
workload for the Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management in 2021 and entail additional,
non-recurrent resource requirements in the amount of
$84,000 in 2021.
With regard to paragraph 63, the fifteenth round
of informal consultations of States parties to the
Agreement for three days in May 2020, comprising six
meetings, would be serviced on an if-available basis.
Likewise, with regard to operative paragraph 249, the
informal consultations on the annual resolution on
sustainable fisheries, in November 2020 for a period of
seven days, comprising 14 meetings, would be serviced
on an if-available basis.
Resource requirements for the two-day workshop
in the second half of 2020 requested in resolution
73/125 and contained in paragraph 249 are included in
the proposed programme budget for 2020.
The dates for all of the meetings mentioned
above would have to be determined in consultation
with the Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management.
In addition, the requests for documentation
contained in paragraphs 57, 58, 59, 60 and 64 would
constitute an addition to the documentation workload of
the Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management in New York of seven pre-session
documents with a total word count of 44,300 words in all
six languages in 2021, three in-session documents with
a total word count of 2,200 words in all six languages in
2021, and one post-session document with a word count
of 21,000 words in all six languages in 2021. Additional
non-recurrent requirements for documentation would
arise in 2021 in the amount of $214,600.
Furthermore, pursuant to the request contained in
paragraph 60, it is estimated that a non-recurrent amount
of $22,000 for consultancy services would be required
under section 8, “Legal Affairs”. The expert consultant
would assist in the preparation of the report to the
resumed Review Conference, in particular by providing
information and analysis on the relevant scientific and
technical issues to be covered in the report.

19-4024221/29

A/74/PV.43

10/12/2019

Accordingly, should the General Assembly
adopt draft resolution A/74/L.21, additional resource
requirements estimated in the amount of $320,600
would be included in the proposed programme budget
for 2021, under section 2, “General Assembly and
Economic and Social Council Affairs and Conference
Management”, and section 8, “Legal Affairs”, as
mentioned earlier.
I should like to announce that since the submission of
the draft resolution and in addition to those delegations
listed in document A/74/L.21, the following countries
have become sponsors of the draft resolution: Australia,
Cabo Verde, Bangladesh, Brazil, Djibouti, Eritrea, Fiji,
Jamaica, Kiribati, Maldives, Marshall Islands, Nauru,
Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Samoa, Seychelles,
Somalia and the United States of America.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/74/L.21?
Draft resolution
(resolution 74/18).

A/74/L.21

was

adopted

The Acting President: We now turn to draft
resolution A/74/L.22, as orally revised, entitled
“Oceans and the law of the sea”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/74/L.22, the following countries have also
become sponsors of draft resolution, as orally revised:
Albania, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Equatorial
Guinea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia,
Greece, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland,
Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Kiribati, Latvia,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Samoa, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Slovakia, Spain, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Sweden, Togo,
Tonga, Tuvalu, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great
22/29

Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of
America and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Nauru,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Samoa, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Thailand, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Zambia
Against:
Turkey
Abstaining:
Colombia, El Salvador, Venezuela
Draft resolution A/74/L.22, as orally revised,
was adopted by 135 votes to 1, with 3 abstentions
(resolution 74/19).
19-40242

10/12/2019

[Subsequently, the delegations of Costa Rica and
Switzerland informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote after the vote, I remind delegations
that explanations of vote about are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Trejo Blanco (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish):
The Republic of El Salvador wishes to underscore
the importance of resolution 74/19, on oceans and
the law of the sea, adopted today in the General
Assembly. My delegation is aware of the importance
of the oceans, especially in terms of their exploitation
within the framework of sustainable development,
which is essential to ensuring food security for all
human beings on the planet in an orderly fashion. We
also understand that gaps continue to exist in areas
such as the sustainability of fisheries, transport and
the conservation and the sustainable use of marine
biodiversity, among other issues, in which there
have been positive developments in terms of their
importance for the international community, but where
much remains to be done.
As the Republic of El Salvador is not a State party
to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
we believe that the provisions of the resolution 74/19
and our role in its adoption should not be considered or
interpreted to imply that El Salvador accepts expressly
or tacitly the provisions of the Convention. In addition,
my delegation considers that the provisions, agreements
and resolutions agreed among States parties or that
emanate from the General Assembly do not reflect the
norms of general international law in the sense that
they do not create obligations for non-State parties
without their consent, except for those provisions,
agreements and resolutions that non-State parties
expressly recognize.
Over the years, El Salvador has made repeated
appeals to the General Assembly to make the contents
of this annual resolution comprehensive and inclusive
of every Member State’s views, and to avoid making
it an exercise in negotiations that would be more
appropriate within the framework of the Meetings of
States Parties to the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea. Such a limited vision of the subject
prevented my delegation from supporting resolution
74/19. Nevertheless, as El Salvador is aware of the
importance of holding multifaceted discussions on the

A/74/PV.43

oceans within a variety of frameworks, including that
of the Sustainable Development Goals, and as testament
to my country’s resolve to work once again towards
fostering a universal vision to address the issue, El
Salvador decided to abstain in the voting.
El Salvador calls on all States to pursue their work
on issues related to the use, conservation and protection
of the oceans and seas with the goal of ensuring
the quality of life for future generations, with the
cooperation of all countries, be it in bilateral, regional
or universal formats. That would allow us to strengthen
international peace and security, in accordance with
the principles of justice and equal rights pursuant
to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
Mr. Guerra Sansonetti (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Ms. Natalie
Morris-Sharma of Singapore and Mr. Andreas
Motzfeldt Kravik of Norway for having facilitated the
negotiations on the respective texts of resolutions 74/18
and 74/19.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is not a
signatory to the 1982 United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) or to the Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December
1982 relating to the Conservation and Management
of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory
Fish Stocks, as their norms are not applicable to my
country either under customary law or international
custom, except for those that the Venezuelan State has
expressly recognized or will recognize in the future by
incorporating them into its domestic legislation. The
reasons that have prevented the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela from becoming party to those instruments
remain unchanged.
The Venezuelan State believes that UNCLOS does
not enjoy universal participation, unlike many other
multilateral instruments. Similarly, we have reiterated
our position within various international forums that
the Convention must not be considered the only legal
framework governing all activities carried out in the
oceans and seas, given the fact that there are other
international instruments in this sphere that, together
with the Convention, make up the body of law known
as the law of the sea. Those include the 1958 Geneva
Convention on the Territorial Sea and Contiguous Zone,
the Convention on the High Seas, the Convention on the

19-4024223/29

A/74/PV.43

Continental Shelf and the Convention on Fishing and
Conservation of Living Resources of the High Seas, all
of which have been ratified by Venezuela.
UNCLOS codifies certain norms of customary
international law that have been incorporated into
the Venezuelan domestic legal system either through
the ratification of the Geneva Conventions of 1958
or through domestic legislation. The agenda item
“Oceans and the law of the sea” is a priority in the
policies of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
which has complied with its international obligations
under the law of the sea, while advocating its integral
development from a standpoint of equity and stressing
the fact that all negotiations related to that right must
reflect criteria and principles linked to the right to
sustainable development of the marine environment
and its resources for future generations. Our country
has also cooperated with efforts aimed at promoting
coordination on issues related to the oceans and the law
of the sea, in accordance with international law, and has
participated constructively in all relevant consultations
on the subject.
With regard to resolution 74/19, entitled “Oceans
and the law of the sea”, we believe that it has positive
aspects. We would caution, however, that it contains
elements that led Venezuela to express reservations
about the outcome document of the 2012 United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development
(resolution 66/288, annex) and about target 14.c under
Sustainable Development Goal 14 set forth in resolution
70/1, entitled “Transforming our World: the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development”. We believe
that future updates of the terms of the Convention
should be considered, given the fact that there are new
situations for which the current approach has proved
inadequate and in some cases counterproductive, and
which has affected the development of a regime that
should address the most important contemporary issues
related to the oceans and seas in a balanced, equitable
and inclusive manner.
Our delegation reaffirms Venezuela’s relationship
with UNCLOS is in general terms constructive and
positive, and, in this regard, we are emphatic that
appropriately balanced textual solutions can be found
that all stakeholders can live with and which take into
account the debate on the nature of the Convention
and its value in regulating all human activities in seas
and oceans, in conjunction with other relevant binding
international instruments in these areas.
24/29

10/12/2019

Although our country is not party to the 1995
sustainable fisheries agreement, the fisheries and
aquaculture sector is a priority in our national
development plans, which include the goals of promoting
fisheries development through the modernization of our
fleets and maritime and river fisheries infrastructure.
Venezuela reiterates its commitment to sustainable
fisheries through the application of the principles
of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries of
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and Chapter 17 of Agenda 21, approved by the
United Nations Conference on the Environment and
Development of 1992. Accordingly, our country is party
to a number of various international instruments that
advocate the preservation and organization of fisheries.
Similarly, our national development plan is
complemented by a broad set of regulations allowing
us to rely on programmes aimed at achieving the
conservation, protection and management of marine
biological resources, while promoting their responsible
and sustainable use, including, inter alia, the relevant
biological, economic, food security, social, cultural,
environmental and commercial aspects. Venezuelan law
on fisheries prohibits bottom trawling and establishes a
sanctions regime for the failure to respect conservation
and management measures, including measures for
monitoring fishing vessels flying the Venezuelan flag
that involves a system for the monitoring and inspection
of their operations on the high seas through relaying the
pertinent data back to the fisheries-management entity,
which enables determining the exact geographical
locations of where the fishing operations are being
carried out and whether the established fisheriesmanagement regulations established by law are
being respected.
For the sake of consensus, our delegation joined in
the adoption of resolution 74/18. However, Venezuela
expresses reservations with regard to its content, as it
is not a State party to the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea or to the Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December
1982 relating to the Conservation and Management
of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks. For the same reasons, the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela abstained in the voting on resolution 74/19.
Mrs. Chigiyal (Federated States of Micronesia):
My delegation aligns itself with the statements
delivered today by the representatives of Belize,
19-40242

10/12/2019

Vanuatu and Papua New Guinea on behalf of the
Alliance of Small Island States, the Pacific Islands
Forum and the Pacific small island Developing States,
respectively (see A/74/PV.42).
I wish to speak now in my national capacity in
explanation of vote after the adoption of resolution
74/19 on oceans and the law of the sea.
For many years, Micronesia sponsored the annual
resolution on oceans and the law of the sea. Our
sponsorship of the resolution reflected our recognition
that the resolution is a valuable method for the General
Assembly to canvas key developments with regard to the
ocean and the law of the sea in each calendar year and
address those developments in appropriate ways. Our
sponsorship also reflected our long-standing conviction
that international law, particularly the law of the sea, is
a valuable tool for small island developing States like
Micronesia to engage with the broader international
community on the conservation and management of the
ocean and its resources, which form the foundation of
our economies, livelihoods and cultural identities.
This year, however, Micronesia, having voted in
favour, finds itself unable to sponsor the resolution.
It is deeply unfortunate that delegations were unable
to achieve consensus to include robust references to
the Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a
Changing Climate of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC), which is indisputably one of
the major developments in ocean matters during the
calendar year under review.
Specifically, it is deeply unfortunate that consensus
was not reached to include references to key findings in
the special report pertaining to the extensive adverse
impacts of rampant anthropogenic greenhouse-gas
emissions on the ocean, its resources and the coastal
communities that rely on, and are intimately connected
to, the ocean. It is also deeply unfortunate that consensus
was not reached to include references to concrete actions
that the international community must take to address
these adverse impacts, including ambitious mitigation
efforts undertaken on an urgent basis.
Such references are clearly within the remit of
the resolution and emanate directly from the special
report, whose summary for policymakers was adopted
by consensus by the Governments of the members
of the General Assembly this past September. The
General Assembly should have welcomed the adoption
of the special report and its summary for policymakers,

A/74/PV.43

identified its key relevant findings and called on the
international community to act in accordance with
those findings.
The failure of the General Assembly to have done
so is a disservice to the work of the IPCC and a betrayal
of this body’s commitment to keep under review all
activities of relevance to the ocean and the law of the sea
every calendar year. As the ocean is increasingly beset
by the adverse impacts of the climate crisis, Micronesia
strongly calls on the international community to take
all necessary measures to address the root causes
of such impacts and adapt to them, with the full
acknowledgement of the scientific work to determine
and study those impacts, as well as of the legal, policy
and political measures necessary to address them. We
hope that future iterations of the annual resolution
on oceans and the law of the sea will heed and carry
forward this call.
Mr. Marani (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina would like to speak in explanation of vote on
resolution 74/18.
Although Argentina joined the consensus on
resolution 74/18, on sustainable fisheries, it wishes
to once again stress that no recommendations in the
resolution can be interpreted as signifying that the
provisions contained in the 1995 Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December
1982 relating to the Conservation and Management
of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks and related instruments can be considered
to be obligatory by those States that have yet to
explicitly express their consent to being bound under
this Agreement.
The resolution that we have just adopted
contains paragraphs related to the implementation
of the recommendations of the Review Conference
on the Agreement. Argentina reiterates that those
recommendations cannot be considered to be
enforceable, even as recommendations for States that
are not parties to the Agreement. At the same time,
Argentina reaffirms that existing international law
does not empower regional fisheries management
organizations or their member States to adopt measures
of any kind against vessels whose flag States are not
members of those organizations or party to those
arrangements, or have not explicitly consented to
such measures being applicable to vessels flying their

19-4024225/29

A/74/PV.43

10/12/2019

flags. Nothing in the General Assembly’s resolutions,
including those we just adopted, can be interpreted as
running contrary to this conclusion.

Hernandez in her statement delivered to the General
Assembly on 11 December 2018 (see A/73/PV.49)
remain unchanged.

On the other hand, I would like to recall once
again that the application of conservation measures,
the conduct of scientific research or any other activity
recommended in General Assembly resolutions,
in particular, resolution 61/105 and its successors,
come necessarily under the legal framework of the
international law of the sea in force, as reflected in
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
including paragraph 3 of article 77, which must be
strictly respected.

Mr. Yakut (Turkey): Turkey requested a vote on
and voted against resolution 74/19, entitled “Oceans
and the law of the sea”, which was submitted under
sub-item (a) of agenda item 74. Turkey agrees with
the general content of the resolution in principle and
believes that the resolution is particularly important in
that it recognizes the importance of the conservation
and sustainable use of the oceans, seas and marine
resources for achieving the goals contained in the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. We
therefore appreciate the efforts of the coordinator of the
resolution, the Division of Ocean Affairs and Law of
the Sea of the United Nations Secretariat and Member
States in finalizing it.

Consequently, compliance with these resolutions
cannot be construed as justification for ignoring or
denying the rights established in the Convention, and
nothing in the resolutions of the General Assembly
provides for curtailment of the sovereign rights of
coastal States over the continental shelf or the exercise
of jurisdiction of coastal States with respect to their
continental shelf in accordance with international law.
Finally, I wish to point out that paragraph 196 of
the resolution we have just adopted contains a highly
relevant reminder in this regard, as reflected in
resolution 64/72 and subsequent resolutions. In this
regard, and as at previous sessions, paragraph 197 notes
the adoption by coastal States, including Argentina,
of measures relating to the impact of bottom fishing
on vulnerable marine ecosystems in the entire area of
their continental shelf, as well as their efforts to ensure
compliance with those measures.
Ms. Pierce (United States of America): I wish
to deliver the following explanation of position on
resolution 74/18, on sustainable fisheries.
While we strongly support the vast majority of
the sustainable fisheries resolution, the United States
continues to have significant concerns with the
language in the resolution pertaining to the World
Trade Organization and trade negotiations occurring
outside the United Nations, including that related to
the Doha Development Agenda, fisheries subsidies and
technology transfer. As President Trump stated in the
General Assembly on 25 September 2018, the United
States will act in its sovereign interest, including on
trade matters (see A/73/PV.6), which means that we
do not take our trade-policy direction from the United
Nations. Furthermore, the views expressed on behalf of
the United States by Public Delegate Margarita Palau26/29

However, due to the nature of the references made
to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea (UNCLOS) in the text of the resolution, Turkey felt
obligated to call for a vote on the resolution. Turkey
is not a party to UNCLOS and does not agree with
the view that UNCLOS has a universal and unified
character. We also maintain that it is not the only legal
framework regulating all activities in the oceans and
seas. Turkey is ready and willing to continue working
with Member States towards ensuring consensus on this
matter. Until then, the language relating to UNCLOS
in the resolution should not set a precedent for other
United Nations resolutions.
We would also like to take this opportunity to
note that the reasons that have prevented Turkey from
becoming a party to UNCLOS remain valid. Turkey
supports international efforts aimed at establishing
a regime of the seas that is based on the principle of
equity and is acceptable to all States. However, in our
opinion, the Convention does not provide sufficient
safeguards for particular geographical situations and,
as a consequence, does not take into consideration
conflicting interests and sensitivities stemming from
special circumstances. Furthermore, the Convention
does not allow States to register reservations to
its articles. Therefore, although we agree with the
Convention in its general intent, and with most of its
provisions, we are unable to become a party to it due to
those prominent shortcomings.
Turkey joined the consensus on the resolution 74/18,
on sustainable fisheries, since we are fully committed
19-40242

10/12/2019

to the conservation, management and sustainable use of
marine living resources and attach great importance to
regional cooperation to that end. However, as it is not
a party to UNCLOS, Turkey disassociates itself from
references made in that resolution to the Convention.
Those references should therefore not be interpreted
as a change in the legal position of Turkey with regard
to UNCLOS.
Mr. Mavroyiannis (Cyprus): Fully subscribing
to the statement delivered earlier in the debate by
the observer of the European Union (see A/74/
PV.42), Cyprus, speaking in its national capacity,
would also like to stress that, as it does every year,
it co-sponsored and voted in favour of the omnibus
General Assembly resolution on “Oceans the law of
the sea” (resolution 74/19).
We thank Singapore for its hard work in facilitating
the consultation on the draft resolution. We regret that
a vote has was requested once again in a futile attempt
to question the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea (UNCLOS) as the Constitution of the oceans
and indisputable legal framework for all activities in
the oceans and seas. My delegation would like to stress
once again that the Convention represents a carefully
crafted balance among the rights and interests of all
States despite their specific characteristics. No State
can continue requesting special treatment or denying
the rights of other States, such as island States or
States comprising islands. Article 121 of UNCLOS
definitively put an end to such claims.
Furthermore, no country can pursue outlandish
maritime claims guided by might and not by wellestablished rules of international law. Nor should any
State enter into dubious bilateral arrangements that
contravene the Convention, neither as a matter of
principle nor as a method of creating faits accomplis
that reflect their own distorted perception of
international law based on relative power and not on
customary rules of international law that international
jurisprudence has repeatedly deemed the Convention
to reflect. Such arrangements have no legal effect,
nor do they affect the status of UNCLOS as the sole
pertinent universal legal framework on the delimitation
of maritime zones, codifying relevant international
law. Upholding the integrity of the Convention is the
collective responsibility of all of us.
Mr. Papakostas (Greece): Greece fully aligns itself
with the statement delivered earlier by the observer

A/74/PV.43

of the European Union on the matter in question
(see A/74/PV.42). I add the following remarks in my
national capacity.
As it does every year, Greece co-sponsored and
voted in favour of the omnibus resolution on oceans
and the law of the sea (resolution 74/19). In this respect,
we would like to express our appreciation to the
coordinator, Ms. Natalie Morris-Sharma of Singapore,
for her tireless efforts during the negotiations to
reach consensus.
We regret that a vote was requested once again
in an attempt to challenge the pre-eminent role and
universal character of the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). By establishing
the legal framework within which all activities in the
oceans and seas must be carried out, the Convention
promotes the stability of the law and the maintenance
of international peace and security, thereby holding
special importance in a difficult international context.
The universal character of the Convention is primarily
evidenced in its unprecedented and almost universal
participation — to date, 168 States parties, including
the European Union, are bound by its provisions. In
addition, international jurisprudence has long accepted
that its provisions either embody or reflect customary
international law.
This year’s omnibus resolution is of particular
significance as it marks the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the entry into force of the Convention. Therefore,
the renewed commitment of all States to respecting the
public order of the oceans and the rule of law is more
appropriate and relevant than ever. States should respect
the fundamental principles of the law of the sea, such
as the right of islands to generate the same maritime
rights as other land territory — a rule enshrined in
paragraph 2 of article 121 of UNCLOS and confirmed
by jurisprudence — while entering into bilateral
arrangements or defining their maritime limits. It is
imperative that the international law of the sea, the
principle of good-neighbourly relations and sovereignty
and sovereign rights over the maritime zones of all
States, including those generated by islands, are
respected. All members of the international community
must abide by those principles and refrain from any
actions undermining regional stability and security.
Mr. Cuellar Torres (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of Colombia wishes to express its sincere
thanks to Ms. Natalie Morris-Sharma of Singapore and

19-4024227/29

A/74/PV.43

Mr. Andreas Motzfeldt Kravik of Norway for their
excellent work as coordinators of the resolutions on
oceans and law of the sea (resolution 74/19) and on
sustainable fisheries (resolution 74/18), respectively.
Since assuming their role as facilitators, they have
conducted discussions with aplomb, transparency
and a constructive spirit, which are reflected in the
resolutions we adopted today.
Colombia is a nation with coasts bordering the
Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, the biogeographic
conditions of which have granted it a great diversity
of marine and coastal ecosystems. The health of those
ecosystems depends not only on their coherent and
responsible management at the national level, but also
on the management of other countries in terms of impact
on the oceans. As a mega-diverse country, Colombia
is fully committed to the conservation, protection and
sustainable development of our oceans through the
implementation of policies, plans and programmes that
underscore the national, regional and global importance
of the issue. Furthermore, my country has a significant
institutional structure in marine-coastal matters and a
comprehensive vision that considers the sea, the coast
and their resources to be fundamental elements of our
country’s actions. Therefore, my delegation reaffirms
its commitment to the development and sustainable
management of fishery resources in order to build not
only a country that is sustainable, but also a sustainable
fishing system at the global level, thereby guaranteeing
access to fishery resources for future generations.
It is in line with that commitment that Colombia
recognizes the valuable contributions made by the
resolutions of oceans and the law of the sea and
sustainable fishing. However, we note that they contain
language that the Colombian Government does not
share with respect to the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea of 1982, such as the opinion that the
Convention is the sole normative framework regulating
activities that take place in the oceans.
Colombia’s activities in the marine environment
strictly adhere to the various international commitments
that it has expressly adopted or accepted. We avail
ourselves of this opportunity to reiterate that Colombia
has not ratified the Convention and so the provisions
therein are neither enforceable nor opposable in our
country, except for those that we have expressly agreed
to enter into. Colombia understands that resolution
74/19 and participation in its adoption process cannot
be considered or interpreted in such a way that implies
28/29

10/12/2019

the express or tacit acceptance by the Colombian State
of the provisions contained in Convention.
The constructive spirit that guides our country
on matters pertaining to the oceans and the law of the
sea is based on the firm conviction that all nations are
committed to protecting the sea and its resources, given
that a sustainable future for our world depends upon it.
Colombia is prepared to work in cooperation with other
nations to overcome the challenges that maintaining
the health of our oceans entails. Accordingly, Colombia
expresses its reservation with regard to any mention in
resolution 74/19 of the Convention as the only regulatory
framework that regulates activities conducted in the
oceans. We reaffirm that we do not consider ourselves
bound by its content and request that this statement be
included in the official record of this meeting.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote after the vote.
The exercise of the right of reply has been
requested. I remind members that statements in the
exercise of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes
for the first intervention and to five minutes for the
second intervention, and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mr. Liu Yang (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to exercise its right of reply in response
to the statements made by the representatives of the
United States and other countries on the question of the
South China Sea.
China is the staunchest force for maintaining peace
and stability in the South China Sea. China has long
been committed to properly managing and finally
settling relevant disputes through negotiations with
the countries that are directly concerned in order to
safeguard peace and stability in the South China Sea.
At present, thanks to China’s concerted efforts and
those of members of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN), the situation in the South China Sea
is largely stable. The question of the South China Sea is
back on the right track of negotiations and consultations
to settle outstanding disputes.
Under the framework of the comprehensively and
effectively implemented Declaration on the Conduct of
Parties in the South China Sea, China and the countries
of ASEAN are actively advancing in their consultations
on the Code of Conduct in the South China Sea. By
strengthening cooperation, deepening mutual interest
19-40242

10/12/2019

and managing disputes, we are maintaining peace and
stability in the South China Sea region. We hope that
the United States can recognize the prevailing positive
and sound momentum in the South China Sea, while
respecting and supporting the efforts of the countries
of the region to maintain regional stability, rather than
working against them.
Certain countries seem to enjoy saying that
navigational freedom in the South China Sea is an
issue, but the facts speak for themselves. The South
China Sea is one of the safest and freest sea routes in
the world, with 50 per cent of the world’s commercial
ships and one third of global maritime trade — some
100,000 commercial ships from a broad range of
countries — passing through it every year. If there
really is an issue with navigational freedom in the South
China Sea, why is it that the Sea is one of the busiest
and most dynamic sea routes in the world? In fact, there
has never been an issue with freedom of navigation and
overflight in the South China Sea.
It is truly worrisome that some countries, for
instance, the United States, on the pretext that
navigational freedom in the South China Sea has been
compromised, has sent military ships and airplanes to
the area to flaunt their military power, thereby provoking
and threatening countries with coasts on the Sea. Actions
of that kind are what all parties should firmly oppose.
China has always respected and supported countries’
enjoyment of freedom of navigation and overflight in
the South China Sea in keeping with international law,
including the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea (UNCLOS). When enjoying those freedoms,
countries should fully respect the sovereignty and
security interests of the countries bordering the South

A/74/PV.43

China Sea. China firmly opposes the attempt by any
country to infringe on its sovereignty and security in
the name of navigational freedom.
While the United States emphasizes the universality
of UNCLOS, it is not a State party to the Convention.
This is very hard to understand. Were the United States
to accede to the Convention and comply with it as soon
as possible, that would be conducive to maintaining
international maritime order.
China would like to point out that all countries
should interpret and apply UNCLOS in good faith,
accurately and in full. In the meantime, we should
recognize that UNCLOS is not an exhaustive list of all
maritime rules. The preamble stipulates that matters
not regulated under the Convention should continue
to be governed by the rules and principles of general
international law.
China’s territorial sovereignty and maritime
interests and rights in the South China Sea are consistent
with relevant international law and practice. We stand
ready, on the basis of historical facts and international
law, to continue working with countries directly
concerned to peacefully settle disputes related to the
South China Sea through negotiation and consultation.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 74?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 74 and its sub-item (a).
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.

19-4024229/29
