S/2019/69

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 January 2019
Original: English

Status of implementation of Security Council
resolution 2451 (2018)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present note is submitted pursuant to paragraph 7 of Security Council
resolution 2451 (2018), in which the Council requested the Secretary-General to
report on progress regarding implementation of that resolution, including any
breaches of commitments by the parties, on a weekly basis, as called for by the parties,
until further notice. The present report covers the period from 12 to 18 January 2019.

II. Situation in the city of Hudaydah and the ports of
Hudaydah, Salif and Ra’s Isa
A.

Monitoring of the ceasefire in Hudaydah
2.
During the reporting period, mutual allegations of ceasefire violations
continued. Alleged incidents were most commonly reported in front-line areas of the
southern part of Hudaydah governorate, along key routes running from Houthi -held
territory in the east to territory held by the Government of Yemen on the western
coastal strip, and in contested areas of Hudaydah city. M ost alleged incidents related
to engagements involving direct and indirect fire.
3.
The Durayhimi district, located to the south of Hudaydah city, continues to be
the subject of most of the alleged incidents. Durayhimi is contested, with both parties
controlling sections of the district along the approach to Hudaydah city. The Tuhayta ’,
Jah and Hays districts were also the subject of several alleged incidents. In Hudaydah
city, there was an increase in exchanges of fire from 12 to 14 January, with advance
team personnel noting a significant volume of artillery fire on the evenings of 13 and
14 January. Its origins and the areas targeted could not immediately be verified. The
Liaison and Coordination Mechanism was in contact with the parties to undertake
de-escalation efforts. The Chair of the Redeployment Coordination Committee also
addressed the situation in his bilateral meetings with the respective Committee
delegations, continuing to impress upon the parties the requirement to restrain their
forces and uphold their commitments.

19-01014 (E)

240119

*1901014*

S/2019/69

B.

Redeployment of forces
4.
The Chair of the Committee presented the parties with a bridging proposal for
phase I redeployment. The proposal included suggestions on distances to which forces
would redeploy from the ports, as well as from their respective positions along the
Hudaydah-Sana’a road, creating a buffer zone that would free up humanitarian
facilities and operations. On 12 and 13 January and then again on 16 and 17 January,
the Chair shuttled between the parties to receive feedback and discuss alternative
proposals for phase I redeployment.
5.
Independent of discussions on redeployment, the parties have confirmed to the
Chair in writing their commitment to facilitating access to the Red Sea Mills, which
contain 51,000 tons of food commodities, enough to feed 3.5 million people for a
month. The Red Sea Mills and other humanitarian facilities became inaccessible as
hostilities between the Government of Yemen and Houthis moved closer to the city
several months ago. In the coming days, the Chair and his team will propose a plan
for the parties and humanitarian partners on how to access the area and retrieve the
commodities before they exceed their shelf life and become unfit for human
consumption.

C.

Strengthened United Nations presence
6.
As at 18 January, both the Resident Coordinator’s Office and the United Nations
Development Programme had established a presence on the ground in Hudaydah.
Eight monitors of the United Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism for
Yemen received visas and were prepared to deploy to the ports pending confirmation
of accommodation.
7.
Accommodation in Hudaydah continues to be a constraint. Nevertheless, the
United Nations country team is working with local authorities to quickly expan d
options for housing United Nations personnel. Additionally, a vessel that can
accommodate up to 100 passengers will be contracted for a period of six months to
meet interim accommodation needs.

III. Humanitarian situation and access
8.
There were no reported improvements to overall humanitarian access in
Hudaydah or in other parts of Yemen.
9.
On 11 January, the Emergency Relief Coordinator allocated $32 million from
the Central Emergency Response Fund to support critical services to enable the scale up of the lifesaving humanitarian response in Yemen. The allocation from the Fund
will allow the World Food Programme to ramp up humanitarian logistical operations,
including through increases in humanitarian air cargo; transport more humanitarian
workers; provide more accommodation spaces, including in Hudaydah; and expand
emergency telecommunications. This will support the work of United Nations
agencies, as well as non-governmental organizations engaged in the humanitarian
relief operation across Yemen. In December 2018, humanitarian organizations
reached a record 9.5 million people with food assistance. Through the scale -up,
humanitarian organizations aim to reach 12 million people a month in 2019.
10. During the reporting period, commercial vessels continued offloading in the
ports of Hudaydah and Salif. The Ra’s Isa port remains closed, as has been the case
since June 2017, owing to directives issued by the Government of Yemen. On
14 January, the Coalition, at the request of the Government of Yemen, re jected one
2/4

19-01014

S/2019/69

commercial vessel carrying 23,959 tons of fuel, owing to Decree 75 of 2018. The
vessel was inspected in Djibouti and cleared by the United Nations Verification and
Inspection Mechanism for Yemen on 14 January after no prohibited material listed in
paragraph 14 of resolution 2216 (2015) was found. On 16 January, the Government
of Yemen issued a permit for the vessel; the Mechanism is awaiting formal
notification from the Coalition to that effect.
11. The Mechanism conducted one other inspection of a commercial vessel on
14 January. The vessel was inspected in Djibouti and cleared by the Mechanism on
the same day after no prohibited material listed in paragraph 14 of resolution 2216
(2015) was found. It is currently en route to the Hudaydah port. As at 17 January,
inspections of four vessels at the Djibouti port were planned.
12. The exchange rate remained at 525 Yemeni rials per 1 United States do llar
throughout the reporting period.

IV. Prisoner exchange
13. During the reporting period, the Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary General for Yemen continued to work with the parties to finalize the verification of
the lists of detainees and prisoners. On 16 and 17 January, the parties met in Amman
with the Office of the Special Envoy and the International Committee of the Red
Cross to assess implementation to date and discuss the verification of information and
logistical arrangements to advance the implementation of the exchange procedures.
The parties have presented more comments on the lists in support of the verification
process and have agreed to respond to the updated comments.
14. The parties decided to form a committee on bodies and human remains, which
would meet as soon as possible in either Sana’a or Say’un to plan the exchange of
bodies and remains.

V. Situation in Ta‘izz
15. Bilateral discussions with each party of the joint committee have yet to take
place, although they were scheduled for early January. The Office of the Special
Envoy has continued to follow up with the parties to organize these meetings as a step
preceding a joint meeting of the committee, including both parties, along with the
participation of the United Nations. The Office has also worked with Yemeni and
international partners to identify ways to enhance civil society engagement in support
of the statement of understanding on Ta‘izz.

VI. Observations
16. While the Government of Yemen and the Houthis continue to express
commitment to the Stockholm Agreement, progress in the implementation of the
various aspects of the Agreement, including the fragile ce asefire, has faced
challenges. My Special Envoy and the Chair of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee have worked to build trust between the parties, of which there continues
to be a deficit as a result of this protracted conflict. I urge the leaders of both parties
to take steps to overcome obstacles and work constructively with the United Nations
to implement the Stockholm Agreement. The meeting in Sweden, we must not forget,
was the first time in two and a half years that both Government of Yemen and Houthi
leaders came together to promote the interests of the Yemeni people. I urge them to
stay the course, set aside military objectives, facilitate the urgent lifesaving
19-01014

3/4

S/2019/69

humanitarian operation and commit to finding a political solution to the conflict in
Yemen.
17. This past week, the Security Council, by its resolution 2452 (2019), established
the United Nations Mission to support the Agreement on the City of Hudaydah and
the Ports of Hudaydah, Salif, and Ra’s Isa. For this Mission to deliver on its mandate,
it will need the full cooperation of the parties to the conflict. So far, the Chair of the
Redeployment Coordination Committee and his advance team have encountered
several challenges to their operations. The timely issuance of visas and other
administrative approvals, including for accommodation and required equipment, are
critical for the further deployment of additional United Nations personnel.
Unrestricted access and freedom of movement are also essential. The current pattern
of delays and last-minute concessions in order for the Chair of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee and his team to move cannot continue.
18. I also remain concerned by the security situation on the ground and I fear it w ill
have serious implications for our operations. As I have reported previously, threats
against the Redeployment Coordination Committee and United Nations personnel in
Hudaydah are increasing. In the past week alone, the rhetoric in the media about the
Committee has been unhelpful and inflammatory at times. Let me underscore that the
responsibility for the safety and security of United Nations personnel and assets rests
with the parties. Both parties and their supporters must now decide whether they will
implement the provisions of the Stockholm Agreement in good faith.
19. Finally, I continue to urge unity of purpose from the Security Council and the
broader international community to sustain pressure on both parties as they work
together to implement the Stockholm Agreement. Maintenance of a sustainable
ceasefire and redeployment of forces from the ports and the city of Hudaydah will be
a first step in the direction of easing the stark humanitarian outlook and fostering a
more peaceful and stable future for Yemen.

4/4

19-01014
