S/2014/707

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 September 2014
Original: English

Letter dated 29 September 2014 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the letter dated 16 July 2014 from the President of
the Security Council in which the members of the Council requested me to conduct
an assessment mission by 1 October 2014 on the progress that Liberia has made
towards meeting the conditions set out in Council resolution 1521 (2003) for the
termination of sanctions, and to provide recommendations on United Nations and
other technical assistance to the Government of Liberia in improving its capacities
to undertake the proper management of arms and ammunition, including enacting
the necessary legislative frameworks, and facilitating the effective monitoring and
management of the border regions between Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire (S/2014/504).
The assessment is attached (see annex).
In the wake of the Ebola virus disease crisis in Liberia, the assessment was
carried out from Headquarters in New York principally through video- and
teleconferences with relevant interlocutors. The assessment team was composed of
representatives of the Department of Political Affairs, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Office for Disarmament Affairs, the United Nations
Mission in Liberia and the Panel of Experts on Liberia.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

14-61345 (E)

300914

*1461345*

S/2014/707

Annex
Assessment mission concerning the Liberia sanctions regime
From 5 to 12 September 2014, the assessment team held consultations with the
following: the Government of Liberia; 1 representatives of China, France, the
Russian Federation and the United States of America to Liberia; the United Nations
country team in Monrovia; the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament in Africa, in Lomé; the United Nations Office for West Africa; the
Peacebuilding Support Office of the United Nations; the Group of Experts on Côte
d’Ivoire; and the Commission of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). The assessment team also met my Special Representative for Liberia
and Head of the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), Karin Landgren, and
the Deputy Permanent Representative of Côte d’Ivoire to the United Nations.
Key findings
The incremental gains achieved by Liberia over the past 11 years in the
consolidation of peace and the rebuilding of State institutions, with the assistance of
the United Nations and other international partners, have been accompanied
throughout by the targeted sanctions measures contained in Security Council
resolution 1521 (2003). The centrality of those measures in ensuring the stability of
the country has arguably reduced over time, but so too have the measures
themselves, which have been adjusted gradually during the length of the sanctions
regime.
In its resolution 1521 (2003), the Security Council expressed its readiness to
end the sanctions based on a determination that the separate and specific conditions
for each measure were being met. This is the third review that the Council has
requested to assess progress made towards meeting the conditions for the
termination of sanctions measures (see S/2004/428 and S/2005/376).
The situation in Liberia has changed dramatically since the Security Council
requested this assessment. As described in my letter dated 28 August 2014 to the
President of the Council (S/2014/644), the Ebola outbreak, which began as a
medical emergency, has become more complex. The political, security and
humanitarian implications of the epidemic are significant and dynamic. My Special
Representative, in her briefing to the Council on 9 September 2014, noted that the
Ebola crisis had revealed institutional weaknesses, including in the security sector.
Senatorial elections might be postponed until December, and the constitutional
reform and decentralization processes have slowed down. The deployment and
specific conduct of military personnel with respect to the Ebola crisis, particularly
with the implementation of state-of-emergency measures, have also raised some
human rights concerns. My Special Representative has also observed challenges in
coordination among security agencies in the response to the Ebola virus disease. The
epidemic has already significantly weakened previously built Government capacity
and has the potential to reverse the gains achieved in the national security sector
__________________
1 The Ministry of National Defence, the Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization, the Executive

Protection Service, the National Security Agency, the Liberia Refugee Repatriation and
Resettlement Commission, the Liberia National Commission on Small Arms, the Liberian
national police, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of
State/Office of the President and the Permanent Mission of Liberia to the United Nations.

2/14

14-61345

S/2014/707

reform process. The response to Ebola is overstretching the limited capacity of
Liberian security forces, which may be completely overwhelmed if the disease
spreads significantly to the security forces themselves.
Against this backdrop of crisis management and fragility, it will be many
months before the Government of Liberia and many of its international partners can
focus on the recommendations contained herein. In that regard, the Security Council
may wish to consider deferring any adjustments to the existing sanctions measures
(arms embargo on non-State actors, asset freezes and travel bans) for six months or
until the current situation in the country stabilizes and the Government and its
partners are better able to implement the capacity-building efforts proposed in the
present document. Given the importance of continued monitoring of the border
regions, however, should the Council decide to further adjust the current monitoring
arrangements for sanctions on Liberia, it may also wish to consider mandating the
Group of Experts on Côte d’Ivoire with monitoring cross-border militia and
mercenary activities, in particular until the elections to be held in 2015 in
Côte d’Ivoire have been completed.
Progress made by Liberia towards meeting the conditions set out in
Security Council resolution 1521 (2003) for the termination of sanctions
On 22 December 2003, the Security Council imposed sanctions measures on
Liberia in connection with arms, diamonds and timber. It also adopted targeted
measures on designated individuals in relation to travel. On 12 March 2004, by its
resolution 1532 (2004), the Council decided that States should freeze the assets of
designated individuals and entities. The establishment of a new sanctions regime
reflected changes on the ground since the sanctions measures contained in Council
resolution 1343 (2001) were first imposed: the departure of former President
Charles Taylor from Liberia, the signing of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
and progress made with regard to the peace process in Sierra Leone.
The new sanctions regime reflected the commitment of the Security Council to
use sanctions measures to protect the nascent political transition in Liberia; to stem
the proliferation of armed non-State actors, including mercenaries, and the
trafficking in illegal arms; and to end the illegal exploitation of and illicit trade in
natural resources. Targeted travel bans were imposed against designated individuals
who constituted a threat to peace and stability in Liberia and the subregion,
including senior members of the Government of former President Charles Taylor,
their spouses and former members of the Liberian armed forces who retained links
to the former President. Targeted financial sanctions (asset freezes) were adopted
against individuals and entities misappropriating funds and property to interfere in
the restoration of peace and stability in Liberia and the subregion.
Conditioned removal of the measures on natural resources
Through the sanctions measures imposed to protect natural resources, the
Security Council was able to effectively encourage the Government of Liberia to
undertake specific, time-bound steps to ensure greater accountability and
transparency regarding the use of those national assets. The conditional removal of
measures related to timber and diamonds and the review by the Council every six
months has allowed the Government to demonstrate its political commitment to
reforms in this sector. Similarly, the fact that the Panel of Experts continued to

14-61345

3/14

S/2014/707

monitor the situation throughout 2013, after the sanctions regarding timber and
diamonds were lifted in 2006 and 2007 respectively, highlighted the Council’s
determination that progress would not be eroded. The institutional reforms required
by the Council in the natural resources sector that were ultimately put in place also
served to support ongoing work by UNMIL in extending State authority throughout
the country.
Timber embargo
Termination of the timber-related embargo was conditional on the ability of the
National Transitional Government of Liberia to exert its full authority and control
over timber-producing areas. Concomitantly, the Transitional Government needed to
undertake all steps necessary to ensure that government revenues from the timber
industry were not used to fuel conflict but, rather, to benefit the Liberian people,
including for development.
After elections were held successfully and President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf was
inaugurated in January 2006, the new Government of Liberia demonstrated clear
efforts to meet the conditions for lifting sanctions regarding timber. It promulgated
Executive Order No. 1, which voided all forest concessions that failed to comply
with the rule of law, and created the Forest Reform Monitoring Committee. That
piece of legislation addressed concerns raised by both the Panel of Experts and the
Liberia Forest Initiative, 2 such as the weak capacity of the Forestry Development
Authority to manage the timber sector, lack of control over timber resources and
overlapping and undocumented timber concessions.
Citing that effort, on 20 June 2006 the Security Council adopted its resolution
1689 (2006), by which it decided not to renew the prohibition on the importation by
States of all round log and timber products from Liberia. The Council also decided
to review the decision after a period of 90 days, with a view to reinstating the
measures should forestry legislation proposed by the Forest Reform Monitoring
Committee not be passed. A reinstatement of the ban on timber was obviated by the
passage of the National Forestry Reform Law for the management of the timber
sector in October 2006.
Despite the termination of timber-related sanctions, the Security Council
continued to monitor natural resource governance by mandating the Panel of
Experts to assess the extent to which natural resources were contributing to peace,
security and development, rather than instability, in the country. From 2006 to 2013,
the Panel identified various natural resource governance issues, notably the illegal
allocation of forest resources through the misuse of private use permits. The Panel
observed a significant increase in the issuance of private use permits in 2011 and, in
2012, uncovered widespread illegal activity that circumvented the formal
concessions process. The fact that the Council paid attention to this issue, even in
the absence of targeted measures regarding natural resources, provided the catalyst
for Executive Order No. 44 of 4 January 2013, which suspended the issuance of
private use permits and any activity related to timber felling or exporting under such
licences. In addition, the President commissioned a national investigation, the
results of which confirmed the findings of the Panel regarding massive irregularities
__________________
2 A multilateral initiative launched to help the Forestry Development Authority of Liberia to

improve governance and transparency in the timber sector.

4/14

14-61345

S/2014/707

associated with the allocation of such permits. The investigation led to the
suspension of a number of officials in the forestry sector and could result in criminal
prosecutions. The Government has instituted a review process that has led to many
private use permits being cancelled and the possibility that all such permits may
eventually be nullified.
Similarly, through the sanctions regime, the Security Council laid the
groundwork for United Nations and other international engagement to tackle issues
such as illegal pit sawing, fraud and misappropriation of timber revenues, resolution
of land and tenure rights, the commercial concession allocation process and
requirements for public participation and transparency, for example through the
Liberia Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative.
Diamond embargo
Termination of the diamond embargo was conditional on the establishment of a
transparent, effective and internationally verifiable certificate-of-origin regime for
Liberian rough diamonds.
When the civil war ended in 2003, Liberia lacked a functioning system of
internal and export control and was therefore unable to participate in the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme. The conditions set out in the sanctions regime paved
the way for Liberia to join the Kimberley Process. In September 2004, legislation on
diamonds was adopted and, in 2006, regional offices of the Ministry of Lands,
Mines and Energy and a Kimberley-compliant certificate were created. UNMIL
helped to train, equip and deploy mineral inspectors and mining agents to implement
the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme procedures. After a review by officials
of the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme concluded that Liberia had made
significant progress towards compliance with the Scheme, the Council decided, in
its resolution 1753 (2007), to terminate the measures regarding diamonds.
Nevertheless, the Security Council maintained its focus on the diamond sector
until the end of 2013 by mandating the Panel of Experts to assess compliance by the
Government with the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme and the extent to
which diamond extraction was contributing to peace and development, rather than
instability.
Notwithstanding the successful application by Liberia to join the Kimberley
Process, it was clear that further action would be required in the longer term. This
included building capacity and training officials working on the implementation of
the Kimberley Process, such as Government Diamond Office staff, mineral
inspectors, mining agents and customs, police, immigration, banking and finance
officials. Further improvement with regard to the regulation of natural resources was
also necessary owing to the remoteness of the sites of operations and the weakness
of the infrastructure. In assessing government compliance with the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme between 2007 and 2013, the Panel focused on
improvements to the internal control system. Because of capacity and infrastructure
constraints, diamond trafficking throughout Liberia remains an ongoing concern.
The Panel, in cooperation with UNMIL, provided advice on the creation of
Kimberley-compliant governance structures, thus establishing a good basis for the
Government to make progress in this area.

14-61345

5/14

S/2014/707

Amendments to the arms embargo over time
The arms embargo has remained in effect since 2003 but has been adjusted by
the Security Council to reflect improvements in the security situation in Liberia and
the efforts of UNMIL and bilateral donors to effect meaningful security sector
reform. A gradual easing of the embargo on weapons and ammunition supplies to
the Government, coupled with ongoing monitoring and inspections, has tested the
capacity of the Liberian security sector and highlighted some gaps. It does not
appear, however, to have affected the gains already made.
In paragraph 5 of its resolution 1521 (2003), the Security Council expressed its
readiness to terminate the measures imposed in relation to the arms embargo and the
travel ban when it determined that the ceasefire in Liberia was being fully respected
and maintained, that the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration, repatriation
and restructuring of the security sector had been completed, that the provisions of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement were being fully implemented and that
significant progress had been made in establishing and maintaining stability in
Liberia and the subregion.
The progress made against the above benchmarks has been set out in my
earlier reports submitted to the Security Council pursuant to resolutions 1521 (2003)
and 1579 (2004) and has also been addressed in the progress reports on UNMIL.
Some of the key political and security benchmarks achieved, which have benefited
from the effectiveness of the sanctions measures, the focus of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1521 (2003) and the monitoring
efforts of the Panel of Experts are set out in the paragraphs below.
On the political front, in the aftermath of war, the National Transitional
Government of Liberia, with the support of UNMIL, United Nations agencies and
other international partners, successfully implemented key elements of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. There has been no breach of the ceasefire since
the Agreement, which has since lapsed, was signed. National elections were held
successfully in November 2005 and the installation of the new Government on
16 January 2006 under President Johnson Sirleaf marked the end of the transitional
process.
In terms of security, the weapons collection and demobilization process, which
started in December 2003, was concluded successfully in July 2009. A total of
103,019 combatants were demobilized and 6,486,136 rounds of ammunition, 10,996
grenades and 28,314 weapons were collected and destroyed. The two main rebel
groups, Liberians United for Reconciliation and Democracy and the Movement for
Democracy in Liberia, were both dissolved.
The armed forces of Liberia too were dissolved after the war. The new national
armed forces were restructured and the new recruits vetted and trained. The
remaining officers of the old armed forces are currently in the process of retiring.
The armed forces were under the command of an ECOWAS General from Nigeria
until February 2014, when he was replaced by a Liberian Chief of Staff.
The Liberian national police has been reformed, although the personnel of the
Drug Enforcement Agency, the National Security Agency, the Bureau of
Immigration and Naturalization and the Executive Protection Service, formerly the
Special Security Service, still have not been fully vetted and these institutions have
some way to go before that important task will be completed.

6/14

14-61345

S/2014/707

In terms of the governance of the security sector, the National Defence Act
(2008), for the armed forces, the National Security Reform and Intelligence Act
(2011), for the National Security Agency and the Executive Protection Service, and
the Drug Enforcement Agency Act (2014) were also enacted. A national security
strategy published in 2008 is currently undergoing review and a defence strategy
was signed in February 2014.
Given that the armed forces and the national police were undergoing reform,
the Security Council decided, by its resolution 1683 (2006), that the arms embargo
would no longer apply to limited supplies of weapons and ammunition intended for
use by members of the national police and security forces who had been vetted and
trained since the inception of UNMIL. This modification to the arms embargo was
made to support the new Liberian security forces in assuming greater responsibility
for national security, albeit under the continued supervision and subject to the
approval of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1521
(2003).
Shortly thereafter, the Security Council increased the police component of
UNMIL to intensify training activities and reduced the mission’s military
component. Pursuant to its resolution 1683 (2006), it also required the Government
of Liberia to mark weapons and ammunition, maintain a registry of them and
formally notify the Committee that those steps have been taken. It should be noted,
however, that in May 2014 the Panel of Experts reported that it was still not aware
of any such notifications by the Government to the Committee. Also in its resolution
1683 (2006), the Council requested UNMIL to inspect inventories of weapons and
ammunition obtained to ensure that all such weapons and ammunition were
accounted for. To date, UNMIL has submitted 16 weapons inspection reports to the
Committee.
By its resolution 1903 (2009), the Security Council decided that arms and
related materiel could be supplied to the Government as long as the supplying State
notified the Committee, but that the arms embargo would continue to apply to
non-State actors. The decision to continue applying the arms embargo against
non-State actors was taken at a time when the situation along the border was
considered to be unpredictable and the national authorities had limited capacity to
control the sea and land borders, leaving Liberia vulnerable to international
organized crime networks and trafficking in light weapons. Since 2009, through the
various reports of the Panel of Experts and UNMIL, the Council has successfully
paid sustained attention to any threat to the peace consolidation process in Liberia
emanating from the border region. The arms embargo has further contributed to the
consolidation of peace through its deterrent effect, making the illegal import of arms
more difficult.
In its most recent resolution on the sanctions regime in Liberia, resolution
2128 (2013), the Security Council decided that the Liberian authorities would have
primary responsibility for notifying the Committee of all supplies of arms.
Travel ban and asset freeze
The only measures imposed that have remained unaltered are those concerning
the travel ban and the asset freeze. The total number of designated individuals on
each list has gradually decreased since 2006, signalling that the threat to the
stability of Liberia posed by those individuals has declined. During a meeting of the

14-61345

7/14

S/2014/707

assessment team and several national security sector agencies, an official indicated
that the Government remained concerned by only one listed individual.
Panel of Experts on Liberia
Just as the Security Council has adjusted the measures imposed under its
resolution 1521 (2003) in response to the situation, so too has it altered the size,
scope and composition of the Panel of Experts on Liberia. In 2003, the Panel
comprised five members with expertise in civil aviation, arms, diamonds, timber,
the humanitarian and socioeconomic impact and finance. In July 2007, after Liberia
was admitted to the Kimberley Process and one year after the ban on timber was
lifted, the Council reduced the size of the Panel to three experts focusing on arms,
finance and natural resources respectively. In 2014, the size of the Panel was further
adjusted, following the removal of the natural resources component of its
monitoring mandate. The Panel is now composed of two members with expertise in
arms and finance.
Throughout its existence, the Panel has played an essential role in raising
awareness about the sanctions regime, reporting on violations and drawing the
attention of the Security Council to developments with the potential to threaten
stability in Liberia. It has also monitored progress towards accountability and
transparency in natural resources governance, arms management and border
security, and has highlighted and made recommendations to close capacity gaps.
Improving the capacity of the Government of Liberia to properly manage arms
and ammunition, including by enacting the necessary legislative framework
The security sector reform process in Liberia has yet to be completed. The
Government of Liberia should harmonize laws relating to the security sector to
ensure that the functions assigned to each agency do not conflict and that no
legislation for certain security services remains outstanding. An act setting out the
powers, roles and responsibilities of the national police is still pending, although a
draft act is currently in the Office of the President, where it is awaiting transmittal
to the Legislature. Legislation on the Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization is in
the early stages of the drafting process. The Uniform Code of Military Justice has
been signed by the Minister of Defence and the President, but is still awaiting
ratification by the Legislature. During the state of emergency, there were reports
that the national police had issued weapons to untrained officers, in violation of
resolution 1683 (2006). It should be noted that in the past a number of senior
officers have obtained weapons before being properly trained and vetted.
At present, Liberia has no comprehensive legislation regulating weapons and
ammunition. The Legislature has ratified the ECOWAS Convention on Small Arms
and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and Other Related Materials, which bans the
transfers of small arms and light weapons and related materials into or through the
territory of States parties unless an exemption is granted. There is little indication,
however, that the Convention is being fully implemented by the national authorities.
Even if the Council prohibition on the supply of arms to non-State actors were to be
adjusted, there would currently be no legal means for the Government to restrict and
regulate the purchase and possession of arms.
Some progress has been made recently to address this gap in national
legislation. In June 2014, the Liberia National Commission on Small Arms

8/14

14-61345

S/2014/707

submitted the draft firearms and ammunition control act to the Office of the
President through the Ministry of Justice. Immediately following the assessment
team’s meeting with the Liberia National Commission on Small Arms, the draft
legislation was forwarded to the Law Reform Commission, which may make its
transmittal to the Legislature more likely. It remains doubtful, however, that the
Legislature will consider the draft act before the commencement of its next regular
session, in 2015.
Regulations on licensing and registration will also be required. Currently no
national database of government-owned or privately owned firearms is being
maintained, as required by the ECOWAS Convention. Furthermore, while the draft
firearms and ammunition control act seeks to address arms management in all
sectors, it is unclear whether it would be fully consistent with the legislation already
governing some of the security sector agencies. The same uncertainty exists in the
case of agencies whose enabling legislation has yet to be enacted.
Effective implementation of any law on arms and ammunition management
requires that the responsible agencies have sufficient capacity to undertake their
new functions. The draft firearms and ammunition control act places new
responsibilities on the national police and the Liberia National Commission on
Small Arms, both of which lack capacity in terms of human resources and technical
expertise. The assessment team received from the Liberia National Commission on
Small Arms a detailed needs analysis and workplan outlining core operating and
logistical support requirements, training needs for staff, including in the areas of
arms marking and tracing, and the need for the establishment of a central arms
database. The assessment team requested, but has not received, similar planning
documentation from the other security agencies in relation to arms management.
In its resolution 2128 (2013), the Security Council requested the Government
of Liberia to carry out a needs-based assessment, with the assistance of UNMIL and
any other relevant actors, for any future weapons purchases. The assessment team is
aware that the armed forces have conducted a needs-based assessment for
ammunition and explosives, but that to date no comprehensive and coordinated
assessment involving all security agencies has been carried out. The assessment
team is also aware that the national police has expressed a desire to acquire more
firearms, as has the Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization Border Patrol Unit,
which at present is unarmed. An increased interest in obtaining firearms by civilian
agencies and the diffuse system of managing procurement speaks to the need for
coordination among all government agencies responsible for national security.
The marking of weapons and ammunition is a requirement of the Security
Council, as set out in resolution 1683 (2006) and reiterated in resolution 1903
(2009). To date, the firearms of the national police, the National Security Agency
and the Executive Protection Service are only being marked by hand engraver, while
the firearms of the armed forces (by far the largest armoury in Liberia) are marked
only with painted numbers, a method considered insufficient by ECOWAS
standards. Through a European Union-funded activity in February 2014, ECOWAS
provided two marking machines and all the required equipment. The training
provided was limited to familiarization, so the Liberian security institutions still
lack the technical knowledge to use the machines. UNMIL has proposed carrying
out a quick-impact project that would enable the Ghana National Commission on
Small Arms to provide further training on how to use the marking machines. That

14-61345

9/14

S/2014/707

proposal has been suspended, however, owing to the Ebola crisis, and is unlikely to
be taken up again this year.
In its resolution 2138 (2013), the Security Council placed the primary
responsibility for notifications regarding future supplies of arms and ammunition on
the Government of Liberia. To date, the Government is working on a submission to
the Committee which is still incomplete. As the Government assumes full
responsibility for weapons and ammunition management, it is important that its
ability to better understand the notification process be improved. UNMIL is well
placed to support the armed forces and the national police in preparing these
notifications to the Committee.
Under the terms of the sanctions set out in Security Council resolutions,
UNMIL undertakes quarterly inspections of all armouries established by the
Government of Liberia. Those armouries belong to the armed forces, the national
police, the Executive Protection Service and the National Security Agency. In
general, the armouries belonging to the authorities appear to be better managed than
other armouries in the region. The Ministry of National Defence has expressed its
readiness to address issues pertaining to the permanent storage of explosives with
support from the Mine Action Service of the United Nations, pending the
availability of funding for the activity. The Government of Liberia has fully
complied and cooperated with UNMIL inspections.
The Office of Disarmament Affairs, through the United Nations Regional
Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa and in cooperation with UNMIL and
the Mine Action Service, trained 32 officials of the Government of Liberia and
armed forces officers for three days in ammunition management through a joint
regional project of the Office of Disarmament Affairs and the European Union. In
addition, in an assessment with the Liberia National Commission on Small Arms,
the Regional Centre identified concrete needs for capacity-building in arms and
ammunition management.
Recommendations on United Nations assistance and other technical assistance to
the Government of Liberia
In relation to the area of arms
recommendations should be considered:

and

ammunition,

the

following

(a) The Government of Liberia must prioritize, as soon as feasible,
consideration by the Legislature of the draft firearms and ammunition control
act. No further technical assistance is required to establish the national legislative
framework for the proper management of arms and ammunition. Until legislation,
regulations and sufficient capacity are put in place, the Government should, by
executive order, introduce a complete moratorium on the importation or
possession of small arms by non-State actors;
(b) UNMIL should assist the Government, including the Law Reform
Commission, to harmonize laws relating to the security sector to ensure that the
relevant agencies are assigned appropriate powers, that there are no conflicting
functions among the various security agencies and that the most appropriate
accountability mechanisms are put in place;
(c) International assistance is required to enhance the technical, human
resources and administrative capacity of the Liberia National Commission on

10/14

14-61345

S/2014/707

Small Arms, the national police of Liberia and other national security agencies
to enable them to carry out their responsibilities under the arms and
ammunition management legislation. With this enhanced capacity, the Liberia
National Commission on Small Arms, together with the national police and other
national security agencies should, as applicable:
(i) Develop standard operating procedures
registration and licensing of small arms;

and

regulations

for

the

(ii) Undertake a comprehensive weapons-marking programme involving all
national security agencies;
(iii) Develop a central arms database, in accordance with internationally
accepted best practice standards, in particular the International Small Arms
Control Standards, 3 the General Assembly-mandated International
Ammunition Technical Guidelines and the recommendations contained in my
report on small arms of 22 August 2013 (S/2013/503); 4
(iv) Conduct a baseline survey to assess national arms and ammunition
stockpiles using the Register of Conventional Arms; 5
(d) Coordination among the agencies responsible for arms and
ammunition management must be further enhanced. As the government body
whose membership comprises all the national security agencies, the Liberia National
Commission on Small Arms is mandated to coordinate all aspects of government
policy and practice regarding arms and ammunition management issues and should
act as a central point of contact for potential donors;
(e) The current system whereby arms embargo notifications are sent to
the Committee and inspections are made by UNMIL to accompany the transfer
of increased responsibility to the Government of Liberia should be maintained
until the current Ebola crisis is brought under control.
Effective monitoring and management of the border between Liberia and
Côte d’Ivoire
Owing to inter-ethnic and land-related clashes and the uncertainty that
followed the mass movement of fighters and refugees during the 2010-2011 Ivorian
post-elections violence, the border between Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire has remained
an area of specific focus by the Security Council. In the past, cross-border attacks
have been mounted by dissident former fighters with the support of former Liberian
militia men who had themselves been displaced during that conflict. Until 2014,
there were attacks on the Ivorian side involving Liberian fighters and Ivorian
militants. The most significant of the cross-border attacks led to the killing of
United Nations peacekeepers in 2012.
While there has been an increase in the number of Bureau of Immigration and
Naturalization personnel posted to the borders of Liberia during the past year, the
Government still lacks adequately trained personnel and the logistical,
communications and mobility capacity to secure its borders. Personnel of the
Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization are deployed at 36 strategic border posts
__________________
3 See www.smallarmsstandards.org.
4 See, in particular, recommendations 1, 2, 10, 11 and 12.
5 See www.un-register.org/NationalHoldings/Index.aspx.

14-61345

11/14

S/2014/707

and patrol the 176 identified border points along the boundaries between Liberia and
its neighbours (Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea and Sierra Leone) to prevent cross-border
crimes and enhance border security. The border between Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire
is 716 km long and is heavily forested, making it even more challenging to monitor.
The Liberian coast guard has four small boats with a limited range and is
unable to patrol the maritime border with Côte d’Ivoire. It therefore relies on
UNMIL to monitor that area. Operations Restore Hope I and Restore Hope II, which
were implemented in 2012 and 2013, demonstrated that the Government, even with
UNMIL assistance, has limited capacity to mobilize and deploy troops, police and
border guards in a coordinated manner to combat the threat posed by Ivorian militia
members resident in Liberia and Liberian mercenaries along the border between
Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire.
The principal intergovernmental security mechanisms are those organized
through the Mano River Union and the quadripartite meetings between the
Governments of Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia and the peacekeeping missions in those
two countries. The last quadripartite meeting was held in Monrovia in April 2013;
largely as a result of the outbreak of the Ebola virus disease, there has been no
meeting in 2014.
The Mano River Union has a long-term strategy of building cross-border
cooperation, in coordination with the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
United Nations Development Programme, through joint border security and
confidence-building units, which undertake cross-border activities. The core
function of these units is to enhance cross-border security cooperation and
information exchange and to promote cordial relations. While the activities of the
units tend to be quite successful in the short term, their sustainability is problematic
as they normally cease to operate once the seed money runs out. Activities
supported by the units include cultural exchanges, cross-border markets and sports
days involving several schools. The Ebola outbreak has led to the suspension of
these activities, and it may be difficult to rebuild the momentum later.
The establishment and operationalization of a transnational crime unit in
Liberia as part of the West Africa Coast Initiative to counter organized crime,
including drug trafficking, has been supported by the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, UNMIL,
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the International Criminal Police
Organization (INTERPOL). Notwithstanding institutional, operational and logistical
challenges to the conduct of stand-alone operations, the Liberian unit has engaged in
several joint operations with other law enforcement agencies, including the Drug
Enforcement Agency, the Bureau of Customs and Excise and the Bureau of
Immigration and Naturalization. The unit continues to analyse intelligence and to
plan and conduct operations with technical support from UNMIL and funding from
UNODC.
In its resolution 2162 (2014), the Security Council called upon the
Governments of Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia to continue reinforcing cooperation,
particularly with respect to the border area, including through increased monitoring,
information-sharing and coordinated actions, and to implement the shared border
strategy to, inter alia, support the disarmament and repatriation of foreign armed
elements on both sides of the border. In addition, the Council called upon all United
Nations entities in Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia, within their respective mandates,

12/14

14-61345

S/2014/707

capabilities and areas of deployment, to enhance their support for the stabilization
of the border area, including through increased inter-mission cooperation and the
development of a shared, strategic vision and plan, in support of the Ivoirian and
Liberian authorities, and to support the implementation of regional security
strategies, including those of the Manu River Union and ECOWAS.
To this end, UNMIL and the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
(UNOCI) continue to enhance inter-mission cooperation, including with regard to
the monitoring of the common border between Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire. The
principal mechanism for encouraging cross-border cooperation between UNOCI and
UNMIL, as well as involving the local civilian authorities and security agencies, has
been Operation Mayo, which facilitates cross-border security cooperation between
the authorities in both countries. In July 2014, the two missions adopted an
inter-mission cooperation framework for engagement for the development of a
shared strategy aimed at stabilizing the border in support of the efforts of both
national authorities. That framework sets out, inter alia, ways to enhance border
security and stabilization, including by curbing the illicit trafficking in drugs and
firearms and boosting the capacity of the two Governments to monitor and deter
possible activities by armed and illegal elements. With the drawdown of the United
Nations military presences in Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia, it is envisaged that the
responsibilities for Operation Mayo will increasingly be taken on by national
counterparts. It should be noted that the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation
and reintegration of Ivorian ex-combatants on both sides of the border continue to
require a framework of cooperation between the Governments of Liberia and Côte
d’Ivoire. That operation has also been suspended, however, owing to the Ebola
outbreak.
As currently planned, by the end of the third phase of the military drawdown
of UNMIL (mid-2015), there will be a reduction of a further 988 military personnel.
This will leave UNMIL with 3,631 troops, including three battalions deployed in
Monrovia and along the borders with Côte d’Ivoire and Guinea. Specifically, the
drawdown will include the repatriation of the quick-reaction battalion (650 troops)
and military enabling units. 6 Meanwhile, further to resolution 2162 (2014), in the
event of a serious deterioration in the security situation on the ground, the UNOCI
quick-reaction force could only deploy temporarily to reinforce UNMIL with the
sole purpose of implementing its mandate.
The planned drawdown of UNMIL will require the Government of Liberia to
increase its security agencies’ capacity to take over the security role played by
UNMIL in the counties. After drawdown, the Government will have sole
responsibility for monitoring and patrolling the Liberian side of the border. Liberian
security agencies currently suffer from many operational and logistical issues and it
is evident that they severely lack equipment, vehicles, financial support, human
resources and planning capacity. This situation means that there is a limited security
presence in key border areas.

__________________
6 A decision on this matter has been deferred by the Security Council for three months until

31 December 2014 (see resolution 2176 (2014)).

14-61345

13/14

S/2014/707

Recommendations on United Nations assistance and other technical assistance to
the Government of Liberia
In relation to the monitoring and management of the border region, the
following recommendations should be considered:
(a) Should the Security Council decide to further adjust the current
arrangements for monitoring sanctions on Liberia, it should consider enlarging the
Group of Experts on Côte d’Ivoire and expanding its mandate to include crossborder issues;
(b) The Government, with the assistance of international partners,
should expand the capacity of the Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization
and continue to prioritize the deployment of the national police to the border
region in line with the present transition arrangements;
(c) The Governments of Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire should continue to
strengthen coordination and information-sharing for border security and
stabilization. A framework for cooperation between the two Governments would be
required to address the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and reintegration
of Ivorian ex-combatants on both sides of the border, which has to date been
supported by UNMIL and UNOCI together with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees.

14/14

14-61345
