TWENTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW

18 MAY

1973

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/

Adoption

of the agenda

17 IS)

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . +. . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . ,. . . . . . .. . . . . . ,. . . , . . , . , . . . . . . . . . .

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
(al Letter dated 8 May 1973 from the representatives of Guinea and Kenya to
the President of the Security Council (S/10925);
(bl Second special report of the Committee
established in pursuance of Security
Council resolution 253 (1968) concerning the question of Southern Rhodesia
(S/10920 and Corr.1) . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . .

S/PV.1715

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearIy volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 196.5, became fully operative on that date.

UNDREDANDFIFTEENT
eld in New York on Friday,
President: Mr. Rahmatalla ABDULLA

(Sudan).

Puesent: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l715)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
(a) Letter dated 8 May 1973 from the representatives
of Guinea and Kenya to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 0925);
(bj Second specialreport of the Committeeestablished
in pursuance of Security Council resolution
253 (1968) concerning the question of Southern
Rhodesia(S/l 0920 and Corr.1).
?%emeetingwascalledto order nt 3.55 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agendawasadopted.
Questionconcerningthe situation in SouthernRhodesia:
(a) Letter dated 8 May 1973 from the representativesof
Guinea and Kenya to the Presidentof the Security
Council (S/10925);
(bl Second specialreport of the Committeeestablishedin
pursuanceof Security Council resolution 253 (1968)
concerning the question of Southern Rhodesia
(S/10920 and Corr.1)
1. The PRESIDENT: I wish to recall at this juncture the
decisiontaken earlierby the Council [1713th meeting/ to
invite the representative of Somalia, at his request, to
participate in the discussionunder the terms of Article 31
of the Charter. A place has been reserved for that
representativein the Council chamber.
2. I wish to draw attention to the two draft resolutions
which were introduced yesterday by the representativeof
Kenya (1714th meeting]. Those draft resolutionshave
been circulated in documents S/10927 and S/l 0928.
Further, I wish to inform membersof the Councilthat both
draft resolutionshaveadditional sponsors.The draft resolution in document S/l0927 is now sponsoredby the
delegationsof Australia, Guinea, India, Indbnesia,Kenya,

18 May 1973, at 3 p.m.
Panama, Peru, the Sudan and Yugoslavia. The draft
resolution in document S/30928 is now sponsoredby the
delegations of Guinea, Indonesia, Kenya, Panama, the
Sudan and Yugoslavia.
3. Mr. PEREZ DE CUELLAR (Peru) (interpretation jkom
Spanish): Mr. President, I wish to expressto you my best
wishes and the promise of cordial co-operation in your
duties as President of the Council, in which post you are
giving us additional evidence of your diplomatic skill and
experience and of your particular serenity and sound
judgement.
4. My delegation wishesto expressits appreciation to the
representative of Guinea, Mrs. JeanneMartin Cisse,for the
clear and measured manner in which she introduced
/1712th meeting] the secondspecialreport of the Committee establishedin pursuanceof resolution 253 (I 968).
5. The delegationof Peru in the Committee expressedits
support of the proposals originally submitted by the
delegations of Guinea, Kenya and the Sudan, becauseit
considered that those proposalswere in accord with the
terms of reference set out in resolution 320 (1972),
particularly in so far as they referred to certain specific
situations which constitute the most frequent violation of
sanctions, such as, among others, trade and export with
Southern Rhodesia through South Africa and the Territories under Portugueseadministration, and becausethey
gave the sanctions more effectiveness through clauses
applicable to salescontracts with Rhodesia,as well as to
insurance companies which cover goods coming from
Rhodesia, But my delegation hashad to be satisfiedwith
the lesssatisfactory proposalswhich were the subjectof the
consensusand appear in sectionIII of the report-proposals
which, in our opinion, would be the very minimum which
could be adopted within the mandatecontained in resolution 320 (I 972).
6. Five years after the adoption of resolution 253 (1968),
we note that the sanctionsimposed by it, which were
supplementedby resolution 277 (1970), have so far failed
because, apart from constituting a legal and moral condemnation by the Council of the Smith regime,they have
not attained the specific objective, which was to force the
usurper government to desistfrom its rebellion. This failure
can be attributed precisely to the weakness,slownessand
piecemealway in which the sanctionswere applied.
7. For all these reasons,and with the sole purpose of
increasingthe effectivenessof the sanctionsimposedby the
Council and attaining the objective, which is the recogni-

desia, South Africa and Portugal, some big Powers are
abetting and supporting them on the one hand, and on the
other hand are blatantly violating the relevant Council
resolutions and openly undermining sanctions against
Southern Rhodesia. Ample evidence can be found in he
fact that the United States Government has openly in+
ported chrome and nickel from Southern Rhodesia under
the pretext of importing strategic material. After the
Council had adopted the resolution on strengthening
sanctions against Southern Rhodesia, there occurred the
recent incident in which Southern Rhodesian authorities
imported three Boeing 707 jet aircraft from a so.called
“unidentified source”. This is all the more a gross mockery
of the Council resolution.

tion of the rights of the people of Zimbabwe, my
delegation will support the draft resolutions submitted by
Guinea, Kenya and the Sudan, which are contained in
documents S/10927 and S/10928. At this time I wish to
announce my delegation’s sponsorship of the draft resolution contained in document S/ 10928.
8. My delegation could not let this opportunity pass
without
expressing in the most forceful manner the
solidarity of the Government and people of Peru with the
valient struggle of the Zimbabwe people against the regime
that usurps its rights, rebels against the authority of the
United Nations and defies the condemnation of the
international community.

11. Last year, in response to the initiative of African
countries, the Security Council adopted resolution
320 (1972), which requests the Security Council Committee established in pursuance of resolution 253 (1968)
concerning the question of Southern Rhodesia

9. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translation from Chinese):
The Chinese delegation has pointed out on many occasions
that the white racist r&me in Southern Rhodesia is a direct
product of the British colonialist policy and a criminal tool
of imperialism, colonialism and neo-colonialism in suppressing the Zimbabwe people and opposing independent
African countries and peoples. The only solution to the
question of Rhodesia is to respect the Zimbabwe people’s
right to self-determination and to let them achieve complete national independence free from any outside interference. The daily-awakening Zimbabwe people are uniting
with other African peoples in waging unremitting heroic
struggles. Confronted with ever greater internal and external contradictions and difficulties, the racist rCgime in
Southern Rhodesia is tottering on its last legs. The
Southern Rhodesian racist regime can eke out a precarious
existence, cling to its perverse course, frantically repress the
Zimbabwe people and even brazenly carry out provocations
against neighbouring independent African countries, such as
its recent grave provocation against Zambia, precisely
because it has the connivance and support of imperialism,
colonialism and neo-colonialism. However, the frantic
repression and provocation by the reactionaries can only
arouse still more vigorous resistance on the part of the
Zimbabwe and other African people. Consequently, they
will end up by dropping on their own feet the rock they
have lifted. The Zimbabwe people who have already taken
up arms in their struggle will surely finish the Southern
Rhodesian racist r&ime with their own hands and mete out
due punishment to it,

“to undertake, as a matter of urgency, consideration of
the type of action which could be taken in view of the
open and persistent refusal of South Africa and Portugal
to implement sanctions against the illegal regime in
Southern Rhodesia”.
Thereafter, three African Member States, the Sudan,
Guinea and Kenya, put forward a series of concrete
proposals in the spirit of the aforementioned resolution in
that Committee. The Chinese delegation supported the
initiatives of the African countries, although it considered
at the same time that the proposals were only the minimum
and preliminary measures to strengthen sanctions against
Southern Rhodesia, which were not completely satisfactory. Regrettably, however, in the course of the discussion
in the Committee, certain big Powers still refused to accept
certain reasonable proposals by the three African countries
under this or that pretext.
12. The second special report of the Committee submitted
to the Security Council reflects this actual situation. It is
not difficult for people to see from an abundance of facts
that although some countries ceaselessly talk about their
being in favour of strengthening sanctions against Soufhcr~~
Rhodesia their actual deeds have proven contrary to their
pious statements.

30. The Chinese Government has consistently stood for
strict sanctions against the Southern Rhodesian authorities,
for we consider it the least the Security Council should do.
Nevertheless, we have to point out that the previous
Council resolutions on sanctions against Southern Rhodesia
have not been earnestly implemented. A document of
statistical data on the Southern Rhodesian economy prepared by the Secretariat not long ago indicates that the
imports and exports of Southern Rhodesia have shown a
yearly increase and that the total volume of foreign trade of
Southern Rhodesia in 197 1 was 15 per cent bigger than in
1970, amounting to $749 million. It is known to all that
the South African and Portuguese authorities not only have
refused to implement the relevant Security Council resolutions on sanctions against Southern Rhodesia but have even
worked hand in glove with the Southern Rhodesian authorities in undermining sanctions against Southern Rhodesia
by every means. In covert collusion with Southern Rho-

13. The Chinese delegation holds: first, apart from tile
recommendations unanimously adopted by the Committee *
the Security Council should also accept certain reasonable
proposals put forward by the three African countries as
preliminary and minimum measures to strengthen the
sanctions against Southern Rhodesia and urge those concerned earnestly to carry them out; secondly, in view of the
fact that over a long period of time the South African and
Portuguese authorities have made every effort to undermine
the sanctions against Southern Rhodesia by various means,
the Council should adopt a resolution sternly condemning
them and extend these sanctions to cover South Africa and
Portugal; thirdly, in view of the continued flagrant impwrtantion of chromeand nickel aswell asother products from
Southern Rhodesiaby certain big Powersin violation of the
relevant resolutions on sanctions against Southern Rho2

desia, the Council should sternly condemn them and enjoin
them to cease forthwith such acts of violation.

enough to bring it to contemplate a settlement which is
acceptable to the Rhodesian people as a whole. We have to
consider why this has been so.

14. The Chinese Government has never had any diplomatic contact with the white racist regime of Southern
Rhodesia, and has long since severed all direct and indirect
economic and trade relations with it. The Chinese Government will, as always, give resolute support to the Zimbabwe
people in their just struggle to oppose colonial rule and
racial discrimination and to win national independence.

20. The existing sanctions in themselves are comprehensive in scope. My delegation has no doubt at all that if they
had been fully and conscientiously applied by all States
professing to support sanctions, the trade conducted
through South Africa and the Portuguese Territories would
have been drastically reduced, and the effect on the
regime’s willingness to come to a just and acceptable
settlement would have been that much greater.

15. Southern Rhodesia has entered into a reactionary
military alliance with the colonialist authorities of South
Africa and Portugal in their joint repression of the national
liberation movements of the people in southern Africa, thus
menacing the independence and security of the countries in
southern Africa. As a result, the national liberation movements of the entire southern African people have been
linked together even more closely, and the flames of the
southern African people’s armed struggle have raged with
increasing vigour. At present, an excellent situation prevails
in Zimbabwe and the whole of southern Africa. No force
on earth can turn back the wheel of history and prevent the
people in this region from attaining complete national
independence, so long as the people in this region get
further mobilized and organized and wage unremitting
struggles. “He who plays with fire gets burned.” The
colonialist authorities of Southern Rhodesia, South Africa
and Portugal as well as all those colonialists and neocolonialists who are abetting and supporting them in their
perverse course from behind the scenes are sitting on a
volcano; the more energetically they try to suppress the
national liberation struggles in southern Africa, the more
will
they hasten their own total destruction. Southern
Africa will give new evidence to the working of the
inexorable law of history.

21, In considering what should be done now, therefore, the
touchstone-the
criterion-must
be the effectiveness of
what is proposed as a means towards stopping the illegal
trade which continues and, therefore, towards promoting
the chances of a just and acceptable settlement in Southern
Rhodesia. Paper sanctions are useless; political gestures do
not get us anywhere. What is required, rather than a paper
extension which amounts to a declaration of economic
warfare against the whole of southern Africa and which my
Government, for one, could not countenance, is the proper
application of the existing comprehensive sanctions.
22. I join with pthers in paying tribute to the three
African delegations that drafted the original proposals on
which the sanctions Committee worked. Their purpose is
one which we fully share, The plain fact is that, as the
statistics reveal, far too much trade in Rhodesian products
is continuing under the guise of exports from Rhodesia’s
neighbours. The essential is to ensure that all countries’
imports from, as well as exports to, Rhodesia’s neighbours
are confined to what is legitimate trade and are not
disguised trade with Rhodesia.
23. But this is easier said than done. International commerce is a complex affair. Two things flow from this. The
first-and here I have to part company with those who
complain that the sanctions Committee has become too
technical-is that those who are responsible for the development of illegal trade with Rhodesia have resorted to
complex technical means of evasion of sanctions. To take
one aspect of this, trade with Rhodesia is not just amatter
of whether or not a country trades with any southern
African country or Territory. The illegal deals which are set
up seldom if ever involve direct trade of this sort, but
involve indirect trade. Indeed, a good deal of the world’s
legitimate trade is of -the indirect nature. These illegal deals
are nearly all arranged by a middleman who may be a
national of virtually any country in the world. He buys the
Rhodesian goods and-sometimes not until they are on the
high seas-arranges a contract with a buyer, declaring the
goods, of course, as being of any origin other than Southern
Rhodesian.

16. The Chinese delegation will vote in favour of the two
draft resolutions before us as preliminary measures to
strengthen and expand the sanctions against Southern
Rhodesia.
17. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): Before I begin,
Sir, may I just congratulate you upon your elevation to the
office of President and say how pleased we are that YOU
should be occupying it, express our confidence in your
ability, devotion and fairness and assure you of our
co-operation.
18. I should like also to extend our congratulations to our
President for last month, the Ambassador of Peru, for the
skilful and extremely patient and devoted manner in which
he conducted our proceedings last month.
19. It is perhaps unnecessary to remind ourselves that
sanctions against Southern Rhodesia are not an end in
themselves: they are a means to an end. Their purpose is to
help to bring about a just and acceptable settlement of the
problem of Southern Rhodesia and the end of the illegal
rebellion. I agree with other speakers that we should not
underestimate the effects of sanctions so far. Even with the
present defects in their application, they have had some
effect on the economy of Rhodesia and on the thinking of
the illegal regime. But they have not yet pinched hard

24. It is perhaps this belief-a belief that all that is
involved is direct trade with southern Africa-that
leads
some Governments which have no trade with that area to
think that they have no problems as far as sanctions are
concerned. This is just not so. In my own efforts to
understand how the trade is arranged I have found it useful
to examine some of the cases which figure in the annual
reports of the sanctions Committee; and one in particular,
3

has taken place. But in fact if these proposals were adopted,
the sufferer would be the bona fide trader. Unless there
were a marked improvement in the detection of breaches
-and these proposals do not help on this-the man who is
determined to evade sanctions would be able to rely on not
being found out; and unless he were found out the
measures would be inoperative. Such proposals would
indeed be paper sanctions, and my delegation could not
endorse them. To give one example, all those who have
participated in the work of the sanctions Committee know
well that time out of number the Committee receives
replies from Governments stating that the contract or the
bill of lading or some other document they had examined
had been specifically endorsed to the effect that the goods
must not be or were not of Southern Rhodesian origin. I am
not saying that in all these cases an evasion had in fact
taken place. But one must have one’s doubts about the
efficacity of such a proviso when the odds are strongly
against the perpetrator of an evasion being found out. I
must repeat, therefore, that it is at the point of arrival of
goods that action has to be taken; and there are effective
methods which, provided they are properly applied, can
help the authorities in their detection of falsifications.

No. 1 12, is relevant. This is particularly relevant because in
it the Government of Malawi assured the Committee that
the sugar involved in the deal, which had been described as
Malawi sugar, was definitely not of Malawi origin. We can
therefore be pretty certain that a breach of sanctions had
taken place, albeit perhaps unwittingly
as far as the
importer was concerned, Now, in this case the sugar, which
was shipped from Lourenqo Marques, was at some stage
bought by a firm in Swjtzerland. The only contract which
the end-buyer had-the buyer, incidentally, was a firm in a
country in the Gulf-was with this Swiss fiml, not with any
firm in southern Africa. The Swiss intermediary of course
never saw the sugar; it was shipped direct to the buyer.
And, incidentally, in view of what has been said about
actions which “facilitate” illegal transactions, it is perhaps
worth pointing out that. the payment for the sugar by the
importer to the Swiss firm was by means of a letter of
credit issued by a branch of the MOSCOWNarodny Bank:
not, I hasten to add, that I am suggesting that the bank, in
issuing the letter of credit, was itself a party to the breach
of sanctions.
25. 1 make no apology for referring to a concrete case,
because cases-concrete cases-are what the sanctions Committee’s work is all about. We have to understand how the
business is carried out, and the case I have quoted provides
a partial illustration of that.

29. The view of my delegation, therefore, is that the
proposals in section III of the report provide a workmanlike
and effective programme of action. The Chairman of the
Committee, the Ambassador of Guinea, in introducing the
report [I 712th meeting] analysed these proposals in an
admirable manner. I should like for my part to draw
attention to what I think are three essential elements. First,
there is what one might call publicity for the problem: the
bringing to the notice of Governments and of world
opinion the considerable discrepancies which emerge from
the statistics and the request to Governments to comment
on the discrepancies and on the precautions they are taking.
Secondly, there is the clear call to Governments to institute
the proper checking procedures at the time of arrival of
goods; and to back up this request there is, in particular,
the proposal for the preparation by the Committee of a
manual of guidance. Thirdly, there is the proposal in
paragraph 19 for the improvement of the Committee’s own
working methods. I share the view of the representative of
Kenya [I 714th meeting] that it is right to take stock of the
way the Committee has worked; and I believe that the
proposal in paragraph 19 for the appointment within the
Secretariat of an expert would be the most effective means
of helping the Committee to discharge its tasks more
satisfactorily. In saying this I in no way wish to criticize the
existing secretariat of the Committee-indeed all concerned
have done an excellent job. But the fact is that, as I have
said, this is a complex business that the Committee has to
deal with. When the Committee receives reports, when it
receives comments and replies from Governments, my
delegation has the feeling that, for lack of expertise, the
Committee does not always take the right follow-up action
or indeed take it fast enough. 1 think it is highly probable
that one of the reasons for the Committee’s lack of SUCCESS
is simply that it has not asked the right questions of
Governments, The recommendation for the appointment of
an individual with personal experience of trade, and
particularly of trade conducted through third parties,
would provide the necessary expertise. My delegation hopes
that if this recommendation is adopted, the Secretary-

26. And this brings me to the second consequence of the
complexity of international commerce, something which
also has a bearing on what has been called the “technicalization” of the sanctions Committee. Very briefly it is this:
given the methods to which sanctions busters resort, if the
Committee is to succeed in its task of detecting sanctions
evasions and of assisting Governments which profess to
support sanctions in their task of detecting evasions, the
Committee cannot ignore the technicalities. There is indeed
a lot of hard, down-to-earth technical work to be done.
Despite the complexities, however, one thing which is clear
is that as far as goods imported from Southern Rhodesia are
concerned there is one place where an evasion of sanctions
can be firmly and definitively established and that is at
their port of final destination. The same principle is true of
goods exported to Southern Rhodesia; it is in their country
of origin that the investigations have to be made.
27. The representative of Somalia referred to the 143
cases of what he called violations as being only the tip of
the iceberg. But though there are undoubtedly many more
cases which go unreported and undetected, and even
unsuspected, not even all the 143 cases are proved. This,
incidentally, is why figures showing the number of times a
country has been mentioned in a report are in themselves
meaningless, They are only reports of suspected breaches.
And the plain fact is that with few exceptions neither the
Government of the importing or exporting country nor the
sanctions Committee has, on the basis of the information
supplied, been able to establish definitively that a breach
had taken place, whether knowingly or unknowingly.
28. This is the crucial problem to which we as the
international community have to address ourselves. Some
of the proposals which figure in section IV of the report
assume that it is an easy matter to establish that an evasion

4

General will be able to find an individual with the necessary
qU alifications.

put an end to a prohibited trade that only increases the
export earnings of Rhodesia, which last year reached the
record figure of &138 million. Among those States one
cannot gloss over the attitude of the Government of the
United States of America which, by resuming the import of
chrome and other strategic minerals, opens the way for
other States to practise, with the racists of Southern
Rhodesia, a trade disapproved of by the international
community. It is inconceivable that the Government of the
UnitBd States, one of those mainly responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, should
claim the right of the strongest to breach a principle
unanimously approved by the Security Council.

30. In short, my delegation fully supports the proposals in
section III of the report. Since, after exhaustive discussion
extending over several months, the Committee was able to
agree on these proposals, it has come as some surprise to
my delegation that the draft resolution in document
S/10927 goes beyond them and incorporates proposals on
which there has not been agreement. This almost makes the
work of the Committee seem wasted since the position of
my delegation and of others wasmade fully clear during the
Committee’s discussions. One would have hoped that there
would be a draft resolution, confined to the agreed
proposals, which this Council could adopt unanimously. To
the extent that the draft resolution incorporates the agreed
proposals my delegation warmly supports it; to the extent,
however, that it goes beyond these agreed proposals and
beyond We position taken by my delegation in other parts
of the report we are unable to support it. Since the United
Kingdom would not think it right to vote for a draft
resolution which incorporated proposals which we regard as
inappropriate and are not prepared to put into effect, my
delegation will have with regret to abstain on that draft
resolution.

34. The colonial Power, on the other hand, in addition to
proposing the palliative of economic sanctions against the
Salisbury rebels, should have urged and must still urge
Washington to abrogate this outrageous decision. Great
Britain has been able, in other places, to resort to
repression. If has the responsibility of using that same force
in its colony of Southern Rhodesia and to restore, through
universal suffrage, the rule of the African majority. But,
from Cecil Rhodes to Ian Smith, the British tactic of
duplicity has not changed in Rhodesia. Whilst on the one
hand it appeases the Africans and the international community, it also, on the other hand, strengthens the power of
the whites. Thus, in 196 I, the Under-Secretary of State for
Commonwealth Affairs declared to Mr. Joshua Nkomo that
there were too many investments in Rhodesia for its
economy to be placed in inexperienced hands.

31. Mr. TOURE (Guinea) (interpretation from French):
The introduction of the draft resolution in document
S/10928 on behalf of the African members of the Council
by the representative of Kenya during our meeting yesterday /I 714th meeting] requires, in our view, that we make
some remarks about the value and practical effectiveness of
sanctions imposed pursuant to Security Council resolution
253 (1968) against the rebel colony of Ian Smith resulting
from the initiative of the administering Power, which is and
remains the United Kingdom.

35. This is the very foundation of British policy in
Rhodesia, where British colonialism, allied with the white
minorities of southern Africa, hypocritically strives to
perpetuate an imaginary hegemony in Africa. It goes
without saying that the initiative of engaging the United
Nations in this blockade is nothing but subterfuge, whilst,
on the very eve of the unilateral declaration of independence in Rhodesia in 1965, the same British Government
had given firm assurances to Ian Smith that it would never
resort to force in Rhodesia against British businessmen.

32. It has become apparent with time, and because of the
behaviour of a number of States which deliberately chose
to violate the economic blockade, that it has become
necessary to strengthen the provisions of resolution
2.53 (I 968), which would remain inoperative if sanctions
were not extended to South Africa and Portugal. It is
therefore essential that those who affirm their support for
the principles of self-determination of the Zimbabwe
people should ceaseto practise a two-faced policy consisting of affirming their adherence to the principles of
self-determination of peoples-which in Rhodesia implies
the overthrow of the racist minority-and, on the other
hand, to foster the maintenance in power of this minority
racist rebel regime by systematically opposing the application of Chapter VII of the Charter to Portugal and South
Africa. This is nothing but the policy of the ostrich. As long
as sanctions are not extended to Pretoria and Lisbon, de
facto allies of Salisbury, the provisions of resolution
253 (1968) will be a mere illusion. We must impose upon
the advocates of racism and apartheid in southern Africa, in
addition to the weapons embargo, the compulsory sanctions provided for in the draft resolution in document
Sf 10928.

37. Great Britain, like its rebel protegbs, should now
confront the popular struggle which has replaced the
apparent calm of which Mr. Smith was so proud. The
liberation struggle, waged under a unified military command of the liberation movements of Zimbabwe, which has
started and which the Organization of African Unity will
support until final victory, will burn not only in Rhodesia
but in the whole of southern Africa, and in the Portuguese
Territories of Africa, to shatter the unholy alliance of
racism and imperialism.

33. In the light of repeated violations of sanctions since
their institution in 1968, States Members of the United
Nations must take every necessary legislative measure to

38. This action of the Zimbabwe people, which will
inevitably lead to victory, was reaffirmed when Ian Smith,
in a suicidal act of economic blackmail, closed the borders

36. This is how the Pearce Commission was conceived to
give legitimacy to the rebellion of the British settlers.
Against all predictions, the test of the proposals for an
alleged settlement in Rhodesia paradoxically led to the
categorical expression by the Zimbabwe people of its will
to determine its fate by rejecting, through an historical
“no”, the proposed referendum.

S

between Rhodesia and Zimbabwe. But such a decision will
very soon lead him to shorten the days of the white settlers
in Rhodesia. The courageous decision of President Kaunda,
approved by the Security Council through the assistance
rendered by a peace mission sent to Zambia, is the best
proof of the support which the Council and the international community give to Zambia.
39. I would not wish to conclude without expressing the
satisfaction my delegation feels in conveying to Mrs. Jeanne
Martin Cisse, Chairman of the Committee, the words of
praise expressed here about the work done by the
Committee as reflected in the proposals contained in
document S/10920 and Corr.1. I shall transmit to her the
feelings of all those who have congratulated our delegation,
and I am sure Mrs. Jeanne Martin Ciss& will not be surprised
to hear those compliments.
40. Mr, MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian): 1 shall be brief. I am moved to
reply by the mention the United Kingdom representative
made in his statement of the Moscow Narodny Bank. I can
only regard his reference to the MOSCOWNarodny Bank in
connexion with the violation of Security Council sanctions
against Rhodesia by one of the Western European countries
as an example of the tactic and practice, usual in British
diplomacy, of obscuring clear issues with a cloud of
anti-Sovietism.
41 I Moreover, Sir Colin Crowe cannot fail to be aware of
two very important and vital facts. In the first place,
despite the fact that it is called the “Moscow” Bank, the
Moscow Narodny Bank cannot export a single pound
sterling, even to the Soviet Union, without the sanction and
approval of the British authorities. Thus, even if the
Moscow Narodny Bank, which is located in London and
subject to English law with which it complies fully, firmly
and unswervingly, had financed a violation of sanctions, the
basic guilt would in that event lie with the British
Government, since its laws and regulations are complied
with by all banks in England, including the MOSCOW
Narodny Bank in London. In the second place, Sir Colin
Crowe is perfectly well aware that when this question was
raised in the Security Council Committee on Southern
Rhodesia, that Committee officially established that there
was absolutely no suspicion of a violation of sanctions by
this bank. In the light of these two facts, I am at a loss to
understand why Sir Colin Crowe found it necessary to
mention the Moscow Narodny Bank in this connexion. I
can only assume that he simply wished to shift the blame
from the guilty to the innocent. But the facts are not on his
side, and to distort facts never reflected credit on anyone.

43. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian): I wish only to add to what 1
said that the United Kingdom delegation in the Security
Council and Sir Colin Crowe know perfectly well that the
Security Council Committee on Southern Rhodesia con.
sidered this question and firmly rejected the idea that any
suspicion attached to the Moscow Narodny Bank. In the
light of that decision by the Committee, Sir Colin Crewe
had absolutely no justification for bringing the subject up.
44. Mr. ODERO-JOWI (Kenya): I would add one or two
thoughts by way of comment on what has been said during
the debate this afternoon.
45. I should like to point out that in some parts of the
world, in some countries and some circles, the situation in
southern Africa is perhaps still regarded as a joke. In some
parts of the world, the situation in southern Africa is still
being debated in the way the slave trade was debated during
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, when there were
interests and people in high places supporting the slave
trade. But those who spoke against the slave trade had ail
virtue and right on their side, and in the end their proposals
and the stand they took triumphed. It looks as though in
some countries there are still influential people in govcrnmerit, commerce and industry who benefit from the
suppression of the African people in southern Africa, and
that is why they are opposedto the extension of sanctions
to cover those countries of southernAfrica that areopenly
aiding and abetting the violation of Security Council
sanctionsagainstRhodesia.We know who these peopleare.
Weknow their motives. But the Security Council wassetup
for a purposeand it works on principles which we cannot
sacrificebecauseof the selfishinterestsof certain countries
and certain individuals. Wemust stick by the principlesand
support the sanctionswhich have already been approvedby
this Council. There is no going back on the question of
sanctionsagainstSouthern Rhodesia.
46. That is why I wished to speakin order to thank those
countries which have courageously spoken out in vindication of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and in support of decisionsalready taken by this Council.
We are grateful for the support they are lending to tile
cause of the freedom of our brothers and sisters in
Zimbabweand in other parts of southern Africa. One thing
is clear-that, come what may, our brothers and sistersin
Zimbabwe will be free. It is only a matter of time. And
those who are currently trying to belittle the rights of the
people of Zimbabwe are only doing it now, but they will
not be able to do it for all time because in the long run
freedom andjustice will triumph.
47. The PRESIDENT: I have no further speakersat this
time andI shall,therefore, with the Council’s consent,speak
in my capacity asthe representativeof the SUDAN for the
purpose of stating the position of my delegation on the
item before the Council.

42. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): If I may quote
myself, I simply said that I was not suggesting that the
bank-and incidentally, it was the Beirut branch-was itself
a party to the breach of sanctions, I was just trying to show
that these matters are extremely complicated and that they
cover a very, very large area. I even suspect that the
payment may have been in Swiss francs and not in sterling.
I was merely trying to show how complicated these
transactions are.

48. Last Monday [1712th meeting], Mrs. Jeanne Martin
CissCof Guinea, in her capacity as Chairman of the
Committee establishedin pursuance of Security Couned
resolution 253 (1968) concerning the question of Southern
Rhodesia,so ably introduced the second special report of
G

the Committee which is now the subject of our deliberations. She, and her two Vice-Chairmen and the Secretariat,
deserve our gratitude for such a comprehensive report. Our
thanks also go to the members of those delegations who
shared the views of the African members and whose
suggestions have positively improved on the original working paper. It is most regrettable, however, that those
genuine efforts have been frustrated by views which provide
additional loop-holes for flouting sanctions against the
illegal regime of Ian Smith instead of attempting to tighten
the existing measures as directed by the Council in
paragraphs 4 and 5 of resolution 320 (1972). As was rightly
pointed out by the Soviet delegation [I 714th meeting/, the
Committee has failed to comply with the key directive of
the Council in paragraph 4 of that resolution, by failing to
agree on

23, 31 and 34 of section IV and paragraph 37 of section V.
Complementary to those measures are the practical and
feasible measures in section IV: paragraphs 24 and 25 on
contracts, paragraph 26 on denial of landing rights to the
national carriers of countries which grant landing rights to
aircraft from Southern Rhodesia or operate air services to
Southern Rhodesia, and paragraph 27 demanding legislation
to forbid insurance companies from covering air flights,
and indeed, any other suspect carriers of goods to and from
Southern Rhodesia. My delegation, among others, is fully
convinced that such legislation is a vital deterrent to evasion
of sanctions and that it should be immediately applied.
Year after year we used to hear voices saying with authority
that it was not practicable to do so, that it was technically
impossible, and that any attempt in that direction should
be forsaken. Not only so, but every attempt in that
direction was obstructed and defeated in the Committee.
Yet, when finally the expert opinion in this matter was
sought by the Committee, it became abundantly clear, and
beyond doubt, that all previous pleas for inaction had no
justification whatsoever, other than to keep the insurance
industry away from the hand-reach of sanctions.

“the type of action which could be taken in view of the
open and persistent refusal of South Africa and Portugal
to implement sanctions against the illegal regime in
Southern Rhodesia”.
49. It is true that unanimous agreement has been reached
on section III of the report, but this is no more than a
minor improvement on the routine and the closed-door
procedure of the Committee.

54. Let me reiterate, therefore, that the African proposals
on insurance remain, in the opinion of my delegation,
especially after the appearance of the insurance experts
before the Committee at its 135th meeting, realistic and
necessary, and that the action envisaged therein should
constitute an important contribution to the effectiveness of
sanctions. The regrettable failure of the Committee to
adopt them unanimously, for reasons we all know, should
never deter this Council from the discharge of its duty in
this respect.

50. The African suggestions, as improved by those delegations which share their views as enumerated in sections IV
and V, would have provided all the necessary elements
required by paragraphs 4 and 5 of resolution 320 (1972)
had the Committee reached full agreement during those
Iong and laborious discussions. Unfortunately, this was not
the case,

5.5. My delegation will, therefore, fully support the two
draft resolutions so ably and clearly introduced by my
friend and colleague, Mr. Odero-Jowi of Kenya [ibid./,
which between them attempt to comply with the requirements of paragraphs 4 and 5 of resolution 320 (I 972), and
make up for the Committee’s failure to reach total
agreement on what we consider to be necessary action and
measures aiming at improving the effectiveness of sanctions
against Southern Rhodesia.

51. The Committee should have been aware of the
numerous suspect cases where South Africa and Portugal,
overtly and covertly, helped unscrupulous dealers to
smuggle goods to and from Southern Rhodesia. It should
have been aware of the fact that the British naval patrol, at
Beira Port, has not only been relaxed but that Lourenqo
Marques and Durban Ports have extended their port
facilities in the service of contraband trade from and to
Southern Rhodesia. Petrol is now piped in sufficient
quantities from LourenGo Marques to Southern Rhodesia.

56. Having said all this, my delegation maintains its firm
conviction that sanctions-which
hitherto have remained
with little effect, for reasons we are all aware of-neither
are an end in themselves nor can by themselves expedite the
result which they are intended to serve, namely, the end of
the illegal racist regime of Ian Smith.

52. The Committee should have taken into serious consideration the fact that the United States is now in a
position to sell part of its over-stocked chrome to other
countries, and to extend its purchases of minerals, other
than nickel and chrome, from the illegal regime. The case of
the purchase by Southern Rhodesia of Boeings is still very
fresh in the news. We are disturbed by certain information
that the office of Air Rhodesia in New York is conducting
secret negotiations with an American company to buy more
Boeing aircraft.

57. We have consistently maintained, as we maintain now,
that the United Kingdom Government, which is the
administering Power of Southern Rhodesia, cannot be
absolved, despite the lapse of time, of its moral and
political duty to end the rebel regime of the racist minority
in Zimbabwe and to lead the country to self-determination
and majority rule. The general will of the people of
Zimbabwe has been long established by no less than the
findings of the Pearce Commission appointed by the United
Kingdom Government itself. In our view, the application of
sanctions can be meaningful only when the Government of
the United Kingdom decides to carry out its obligations
towards the majority of the people of Zimbabwe.

53. Because of so many examples of flagrant irregularities
which keep the illegal regime going, and indeed make it
more than ever oppressive towards the millions of Africans
in Zimbabwe
and more than ever aggressive towards
sovereign neighbouring countries, the Committee should
have agreed to recommend the expansion of sanctions to
South Africa and Portuguese Territories, as in paragraphs
7

58. Taking advantage of the reluctance of the United
Kiugdml~ Gavcrnment
to act and with the military and
llllltt?~id
ilSSiSt~~ICX
Of the racist regimes of South Africa and
hrtlgd,
htl
Smith
has proved
to be not only reckless but
surely
to bc leading the country to a blood bath. Because of
his blind obstinacy in refusing to acknowledge the African
dcmatld for peaceful constitutional settlement, and by the
application OF ~IOIT discriminatory
laws and mass rcprcssions, 1~1 Smith has forced the Zimbabwe
liberation
movement tc) meet force with force.

importance. It is a matter of life and death for our brothers
and sisters in Zimbabwe, and in southern Africa generally. I
would appreciate an opportunity to exchange views oa
these two draft resolutions with my colleagues in the
Council behind closed doors, because we would like to
make our feelings on them quite clear. I think a veto can bc
avoided. These two draft resolutions contain matters of
vital principle, matters on which this Council has pro.
nounced itself, and we see no room for unnecessary
differences over them. We would appreciate an opportunity
to consult further with our colleagues before they arc put
to the vote.

50. The Crovcrnment of the United Kingdom, as administering Power, is duty bound to interfere by all means
available to it-and it has them if it wishes to use them-to
set the country on the path of majority rule before any
further deterioration takes place in the situation, a situation
which has already rcnched a very dangerous stage.

6.5. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Kenya has
suggested that WC should suspend the meeting briefly to
permit consultations. If I hear no objection. I shall take
it that the Council agrees to that course.

60. The Security Council, facing this situation created by
the alliance of the rebel r6girne of Ian Smith, the racist
rCgime uf South Africa and the colonial domination of
Portugal, must also act in arder to break this dangerous ring
and assist in the establishment of peace in that part of the

The meeting was suspended at 5.05 p.m. and resumednt
5.55 p.m.
66. Mr. ODEROJOWI (Kenya): I should like to ask the
Council, through you, Mr. President, to agree to the
adjournment of this meeting and to the postponement of
the voting on the two draft resolutions until Tuesday
morning.

Wdd.

61, In our view, the two draft resolutions now before the
Council would
provide practical steps in the right direction
with respect to the application of sanctions, but the
ultimate goal of self-determination
for Zimbabwe can only
be achieved peacefully, and before it is too late, if the
Govcrnmcnt of the LJnited Kingdom decides forthwith to
carry out its responsibility
towards all the people of
Zimbabwe. In the prevailing situation in Zimbabwe, any
delay of such nction would lead to unnecessary bloodshed
and misery, and neither the United Kingdom Government
nor the Security Council could be justifiably acquitted of
the responsibility for that. In this conviction and with the
full rCidiZ,~ltiOll
of the ineffectiveness Of the measures SO far
adopted and deliberately evaded by Member States and
non-Member States, my delegation appeals to all members
of the Council (0 adopt unanimously
the two draft
rcsolu tions under consideration.

67, Earlier this afternoon I made clear our anxiety over
the fate of the two draft resolutions. We have been given a
firm indication that at least one of the two draft resolutions
will be vetoed. I also made clear our strong feelings over the
manner in which this Council has handled the affairs
pertaining to enforcement of sanctions against the rebel
regime of; Southern Rhodesia. Arising out of this anxiety,
my delegation and other delegations have decided that it
will be necessary for us to prepare ourselves fully to
challenge the impending veto against one of the draft
resolutions. We feel this is necessary because, as I pointed
out earlier, these two draft resolutions contain matters of
principle which cannot be sacrificed in silence. We therefore
need time to prepare ourselves to answer the violations of
&se principles by resort to the veto. We think that if we
allow ourselves to be pushed around when principles of the
Charter and decisions of the Council are being set aside, we
will bc sacrificing the purposes and principles for which this
Organization was set up. We are therefore asking for time to
enable us to prepare for a full-scale debate in challenge of
the impending veto and the sacrifice and violation of
&&ions
of the Council and the principles of the Chatter.

62. Speaking now OS PRESIDENT,
I should like to say
that I have no further speakers on my list. If no delegation
wishes to speak at this stage, I would suggest that the
Council now proceed to vote on the two draft resolutions
bcforc it in accordance with rule 32, first paragraph, of the
provisional rules of procedure, that is, in the order of their
submission.

68, The PRESIDENT: The representative of Kenya has
formally moved that we adjourn this meeting and resume
our work on Tuesday morning, 22 May. AS 1 Ilear no
objection,
I declare the Council adjourned until Tuesday
morning next.

63. Mr. ODERO-.TOWI (Kenya): 1 should like to seek the
pcnnjssiorl of the Coumil for a suspension of the meeting
to enable us to discuss these two draft resolutions With a
view to avoiding the veto which is hanging like a bomb over
our heads.
64. 1 have explained the feelings of my delegation in detail
011this subject.
It is one to which WC attach a great deal of

The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.

8

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNlTED

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
your bookstore
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Ales publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et Ies agences
depositsires
du mondo entier. Informez-vous
auprks de votre libraire ou adressez-voua
A : Nations Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
HAK

HOJIYUHTb

W3AAHEIJI

OPFAHU3AlUUi

OB-BEflHHEHHBIX

HAIWR

N3saHKR
OpraHwaaqwn
05be~ssenwbrx
HaqXR YOH(H0 *ynsl%
B KHNXHLIX
MaraJUHILX I arewrcmmx
BO scex paRmax
mfpa. Ha~onme
cnpasxw
06 ss~anarrx
a
mm.ueM KHIMIZOI
M&E%~HH~ nns nHmHTe no anpecy : Oprannsauw%
06’beAHHeHHblX
HasaB,
Cexqw
no npoAa%te H~,&sBsR, HLM-FIOPK
HJW Seseaa.
COMO

CONSEGUiR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de 18s Naciones Unidas e&An en venta en librerfas
y casas distribuidoras
en todas pa&s
de1 mundo. Consulte a au librero o dirfjaae
a: Naciones
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

---.
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S. 1.00 (or equivalent

in other currencies)

73-32156-November

19764d:p
