A/64/PV.71

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

71

st plenary meeting
Tuesday, 23 February 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

In the absence of the President, Mrs. Aitimova
(Kazakhstan), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.25 p.m.
Agenda item 136 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/64/631/Add.1,
A/64/631/Add.2 and A/64/631/Add.3)
The Acting President: In keeping with the
established practice, I should like to draw the attention
of the General Assembly to documents A/64/631/Add.1
to Add.3, in which the Secretary-General informs the
President of the General Assembly that, since the
issuance of his communication contained in document
A/64/631, Kyrgyzstan, Paraguay, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Swaziland and Timor-Leste have made the
necessary payments to reduce their arrears below the
amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in those
documents?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 49 (continued)
Culture of peace
Draft resolution (A/64/L.30/Rev.2)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly held the debate on this agenda item at it

41st and 42nd plenary meetings, on 9 and
10 November 2009. Members will also recall that the
Assembly took action on draft resolutions A/64/L.13
and A/64/L.14 under the same agenda item at the 42nd
plenary meeting, on 10 November 2009, and draft
resolutions A/64/L.5 and A/64/L.15/Rev.1 at the 60th
plenary meeting, on 7 December 2009.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Azerbaijan
to
introduce
draft
resolution
A/64/L.30/Rev.2.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): On behalf of the
main sponsors — Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan,
Turkey and Turkmenistan — I would like to introduce
draft resolution A/64/L.30/Rev.2, entitled “International
Day of Nowruz”.
For over 3,000 years, Nowruz has been
celebrated on 21 March as the beginning of the new
year by over 300 million people around the world,
including in the Balkans, the Black Sea basin, the
Caucasus, Central Asia, the Middle East and other
regions. As the embodiment of the unity of cultural
heritage and centuries-long traditions, Nowruz plays a
significant role in strengthening ties among peoples on
the basis of mutual respect and the ideals of peace and
good-neighbourliness. It also reflects features of
cultural and ancient customs and is centred on the
affirmation of life in harmony with nature. All
civilizations celebrate the unity and diversity of
humankind, which are enriched and evolve through

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-24867 (E)

*1024867*

A/64/PV.71

dialogue with others. Throughout history, there has
been interaction among various civilizations.
Nowruz also contributes to the enrichment of
humankind, which is fully in compliance with the
objectives of the 2005 World Summit Outcome
(resolution 60/1). In that Document, heads of State and
Government acknowledged the importance of respect
for cultural diversity throughout the world and the need
for dialogue and cooperation among different cultures,
civilizations and peoples. In facilitating the process of
mutual cultural enrichment and in promoting
civilizational
exchanges,
Nowruz
develops
international cooperation and strengthens the cultural
identity of interested States. At the same time, Nowruz
promotes the culture of peace and solidarity between
generations and within families, thus contributing to
cultural diversity and friendship among peoples and
various communities.

In order to further encourage intercultural and
intracultural dialogue and mutual respect among
cultures, while at the same time strengthening their
transmission to future generations, Nowruz was
included in the Representative List of the Intangible
Cultural Heritage of Humanity by the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization on
30 September 2009.
As part of the common heritage that belongs to
all humankind, all cultures have values that must be
respected and preserved. We attach particular
importance to international cultural cooperation for the
development of peaceful relations and friendship
among peoples and to promoting better understanding
of each other’s way of life. We believe that this
cooperation will promote the enrichment of all cultures
and contribute to the establishment of stable and longterm relations between peoples.

Cultural diversity and tolerance, a healthy
lifestyle and the renewal of the living environment are
promoted and transmitted from generation to
generation during this cultural event. One of the main
objectives of Nowruz is to encourage a transformation
of behavioural attitudes towards sustainability. That is
reflected in activities focused on the preservation of
nature, including the planting of trees, respecting water
resources and cleaning houses.

Azerbaijan believes that Nowruz deserves to be
recognized as an international day by the General
Assembly. That is why we initiated this draft
resolution. Together with the main sponsors, we now
call upon all Member States to support the draft
resolution as an expression of solidarity and a
recognition of efforts aimed at preserving and
developing cultures and traditions that have existed for
more than 3,000 years.

Nowruz is a celebration that consists of various
ceremonies, rituals, cultural events and customs,
including traditional games, culinary traditions, music
and dance. It forms a fundamental part of the cultural
identity of the communities concerned. From antiquity,
Nowruz has embraced a variety of different features of
intangible cultural heritage, with a very vast
geographical scope.

The text of the draft resolution was extensively
discussed and negotiated with Member States in an
open and transparent manner. We look forward to its
adoption by consensus.

Women play an important and major role in
cultural events at Nowruz by managing ceremonies and
disseminating traditional knowledge to youth.
Nowruz encourages intercultural dialogue and
understanding and reciprocal knowledge for the
purpose of peace and reconciliation. As different
people celebrate it in different ways, Nowruz promotes
the manifestation of a peaceful and unifying form of
cultural diversity. It also contributes to the
dissemination of the values of social justice and
solidarity, equality and equity, and charity and poverty
alleviation.

2

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft resolution A/64/L.30/Rev.2,
entitled “International Day of Nowruz”.
I would like to announce that, since its
publication, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/64/L.30/Rev.2: Albania,
India and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/64/L.30/Rev.2?
Draft resolution A/64/L.30/Rev.2 was adopted
(resolution 64/253).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran, who
wishes to make a statement following the adoption of
the resolution.

10-24867

A/64/PV.71

Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): After
such a harsh and cold winter, let me talk about our
longing for a joyous spring. Let me talk about Nowruz,
the new day, the festival of revival and rebirth on our
planet and in our souls.
In the words of Jalaluddin Rumi, the great
Persian poet,
“Nowruz has arrived and the beloved’s message
has come. We are drunk with love and intoxicated
and cannot be still. You may say that it is
resurrection that has raised from the Earth the
heads of those who rotted in December and
January, the dead of yesterday. After all, the trees
of the spirit will become even so, the tree of
excellent boughs and the fortunate will be
manifest”.
I would like to express my gratitude for the
unanimous support of all Member States for resolution
64/253.
Nowruz marks the first day of the Persian New
Year. In harmony with the rebirth of nature, Nowruz is
celebrated on 21 March, the very first day of spring
each year. But Nowruz, with all its customs and rites,
is much more than a date marked on our calendars. It
conveys a deeply rooted culture that brings hope, peace
and prosperity to millions of people around the world,
regardless of their ethnicity or political and religious
views.
From the time that Nowruz was established in the
land of Persia and thereafter, throughout all the long
centuries that Persia has been a melting pot for
civilizations and ethnicities and until today, Nowruz
has served as the common language for millions of
people all around the world, including for over 3,000
years in the Balkans, the Black Sea basin, the
Caucasus, Central Asia, the Indian subcontinent, the
Middle East and many other regions. It is
representative of the intangible cultural heritage of
humankind, as recognized by the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in
September 2009.
Nowruz plays a significant role in strengthening
ties among peoples on the basis of mutual respect and

10-24867

the ideals of peace and good-neighbourliness. The
traditions and rituals of Nowruz reflect the ancient
cultural customs of the civilizations of East and West
alike, influencing those civilizations through the
interchange of human values. To commemorate
Nowruz means to respect the origins, history, values
and legacy of magnificent civilizations.
In conclusion, to commemorate Nowruz also
means to promote life in harmony with nature, natural
cycles and sources of life. In that regard, this resolution
complements resolution 63/278, entitled “International
Mother Earth Day”, which the General Assembly
adopted on 22 April 2009.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 49.
Agenda item 52 (continued)
Follow-up to and implementation of the outcome of
the 2002 International Conference on Financing for
Development and the 2008 Review Conference
Draft decision (A/64/L.47)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft decision A/64/L.47, entitled
“Fourth High-level Dialogue on Financing for
Development”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft decision A/64/L.47?
Draft decision A/64/L.47 was adopted.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 52.
Programme of work
The Acting President: I wish to inform members
that the consideration of sub-item (j) of agenda item
112, “Appointment of three ad litem judges of the
United Nations Dispute Tribunal”, which was
scheduled for today, has been postponed to a later date
to be announced.
The meeting rose at 3.45 p.m.

3
