United Nations

asdf

Security Council

S/PV.6982 (Resumption 1)
Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6982nd meeting

Wednesday, 19 June 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Parham . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Oyarzábal
Mr. Stojanovski
Mr. Sharifov
Mr. Hong Ming
Ms. Jaraud-Darnault
Ms. Leiva Roesch
Mr. Flies
Mr. Taib
Mr. Farooq
Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon
Mr. Piminov
Mr. Nibishaka
Mr. M’Beou
Ms. Orbach

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Conflict prevention and natural resources
Letter dated 6 June 2013 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General (S/2013/334)

13-36790 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1336790*

S/PV.6982 (Resumption 1)

The meeting was resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing and
to deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of New
Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand joins
those who have expressed outrage and sorrow at this
morning’s attack on the United Nations compound in
Mogadishu, and offers its condolences to all who have
been affected. It seems yet again that we are faced with a
situation where, in determining their targets, Al-Qaida
and Al-Shabaab have no scruples and recognize no
boundaries.
In its April presidential statement adopted under
the Rwandan presidency (S/2013/PRST/4), the Council
identified the risk of natural resources becoming a root
cause of conflict in Africa. New Zealand considers this
to be a global issue. Even in our own Pacific region,
competition for resources has been a driver of conflict,
so we believe that the Council must consider this issue
in a wider context. We welcome the United Kingdom’s
initiative to convene this meeting, and regret that it was
not possible for the Council to issue a formal statement
on the issue.
Extractive industries are often the last to cease
operations during hostilities and among the first to
return, and they are particularly tempting targets for
non-State actors. Natural resources can incentivize
peace spoilers. The natural resource dimension is a
major challenge for international policymakers, but also
presents opportunities to develop better Council tools
for conflict prevention, and to improve its mandates to
assist States emerging from conflict.
We agree others who have stressed that the Council
should not assume exclusive competence to deal with
these issues. In our view, the combined effort of the whole
United Nations system is required, so it is especially
important that the Council adapt its methods to enable
engagement with other appropriate organs. Similarly,
interaction between the Council and relevant regional
and subregional organizations must be improved to
ensure better management of resource-driven conflicts.

2

Supply chains and intraregional trade are often a key
element of resource-fuelled conflicts, which makes
meaningful interaction with the relevant regional and
subregional organizations of crucial importance.
But the fact remains that only the Security
Council has the competence and the essential and
effective tools to deal with resource dimensions
of conflict — specifically, targeted sanctions and
peacekeeping missions. Well-targeted sanctions are very
effective instruments for restricting the exploitation of
natural resources, which are often used to fund armed
conflict, and can be a useful tool to restrict funding
for resource-related conflicts. Asset freezes and travel
bans can deter spoilers. Sanctions can also support
efforts to seek the post-conflict recovery of funds from
illegal asset exploitation. And we support the call to
improve information-sharing between sanctions panels
and groups of experts, which, whenever applicable,
should include cooperation with relevant peacekeeping
missions.
Peacekeeping missions and special political
missions in conflict situations with a resource
dimension should be specifically mandated to assist
national efforts and boost institutions that can reduce
the risk of future resource-driven conflict, which
means that particular attention to resource regulation
and the rule of law.
New Zealand also draws attention to the potential
for civil society and resource firms to play a positive
role. In recent times, civil society has successfully
highlighted the link between resource exploitation and
conflict, and we are encouraged by voluntary, industry
efforts to self-regulate through mechanisms such as the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative.
We also believe that the Council must pay more
attention to the need for national ownership. The work
of panels of experts and other United Nations activities
in affected states must support and enhance national
capacities. In short, New Zealand supports effective
action by the Council, in partnership with others,
and the use of its undoubted powers to address this
important issue.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada): Let me start by
adding Canada’s voice in deploring the events today in
Somalia. Terrorism has once again struck, seeking to
deny Somalis the right to move forward in their future
and making the United Nations a target for the work that
it undertakes on behalf of its members and all Somalis.

13-36790

S/PV.6982 (Resumption 1)

I would like to commend you, Sir, for refocusing
the Security Council’s attention on conflict prevention
and natural resources by organizing this debate.
Canada welcomes a fulsome discussion of the role of
effective natural resources management in conflict
prevention. Without sound management, extractive
sector development can lead to increased corruption,
poor development outcomes, illicit trafficking and, in
certain circumstances, the fuelling of armed conflict
and human rights violations. There is an increased
international acknowledgement that economic growth
is fundamental to long-term stability in fragile and
conflict-affected States. Benefits from extractive sector
activities have the potential to transform economies
and can be important drivers of sustainable economic
growth and job creation.
(spoke in French)
Supporting mechanisms that ensure responsible
resource development is a priority for the Government
of Canada. We understand the potential benefits of
natural resources for a country. One important element
of sustainable resource development, highlighted by the
United Kingdom at this year’s Lough Erne Summit of
the Group of Eight, is transparency and accountability
in the extractive sector.
In recognition of the importance of that issue,
on June 12 Canada’s Prime Minister announced that
Canada will be establish new mandatory reporting
standards for Canadian extractive companies. The new
reporting regime will improve transparency, ensure
that Canada’s framework is consistent with existing
international standards, ensure a level playing field
for companies, enhance investment certainty, and help
reinforce the integrity of extractive companies.
While we recognize the need for transparency
initiatives, we also want to ensure that the debate
today and discussions that follow also identify other
tools available to strengthen the links between natural
resource development and conflict-prevention. As an
example, by encouraging conflict-sensitive business
practices in fragile and conflict-affected situations,
donor Governments can sensitize their extractive
companies to local conflict dynamics, and help them
find ways to structure their operations to contribute to
positive peacebuilding and development outcomes.
To advance such tools, it is essential that all the
right actors be at the table, including communities, civil
society and the private sector. It is also important to

address core sources of instability, such as by providing
employment opportunities for youth and bolstering
Government finances for basic service provision.
Canada’s commitment to promoting responsible
natural resource governance features prominently in
our efforts abroad. To cite several examples, we are
continuing to implement Canada’s corporate social
responsibility strategy and support many international
initiatives, such as the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative, the United Nations Guiding Principles on
Business and Human Rights, the Kimberley Process
certification scheme, the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development multi-stakeholder
forum on implementing due diligence, and others. The
recent establishment of the new Canadian International
Institute for Extractive Industries and Development
will encourage policy innovation on how Governments,
companies and others can contribute to improving
development outcomes in the future.
The evidence is clear that responsible governance
practices ensure that natural resources contribute
to lasting, positive impact on economic growth and
poverty reduction. As such, Canada welcomes the
inclusion of these issues in relevant mission mandates.
United Nations missions can play an important role by
helping to build national institutions, manage related
conflict risks, and ensure inclusive participation.
(spoke in English)
For that reason, we are very pleased that the
Security Council is renewing its consideration of this
very timely subject, and we are committed to working
with the international community and all partners to
encourage responsible natural resource development.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Turkey.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): I too would like to begin my
statement by strongly condemning the heinous and
cowardly terrorist on the United Nations compound in
Mogadishu. We extend our heartfelt condolences to the
families of the victims, and wish a speedy recovery to
the wounded.
I would also like to express our appreciation to the
United Kingdom for bringing this important issue to
the Security Council’s agenda six years after it was
last discussed. I would also like to thank the Deputy
Secretary General, Mr. Eliasson and Africa Progress
Panel Chair Mr. Annan, as well as the representatives

13-367903

S/PV.6982 (Resumption 1)

of the World Bank and the United Nations Development
Programme for their briefings and the important
information they have provided us.
The blessing-and-curse dichotomy of natural
resources is evident. Some countries are among the
richest in the world due to their natural resources, while
many others that are rich in such resources are the
poorest in the world. In fact, four of the five countries
that are considered to be the poorest in the world possess
a wealth of natural resources, including oil, gas, gold,
uranium, titanium, diamonds, copper, silver and coltan.
There is an undeniable link between natural
resources and conflicts. In some conflicts, parties fight
to gain control over such resources; in others, they use
the profits gained from these resources to continue
fighting. There is even a correlation between the
illegal extraction of natural resources and incidences
of sexual violence, which is very concerning. Turkey
also strongly condemns the recruitment of children in
the exploitation and extraction of natural resources in
armed conflict.
In order to combat this scourge, all measures
should be taken to prevent the illicit trade and illegal
exploitation of these resources. Their effective and
transparent management would contribute to this end.
Therefore, all initiatives that promote transparency and
encourage stability play an important role. In addition,
effective cooperation between source, transit and
destination countries is needed to combat illicit trade.
However, the transparent and effective management
of such resources is not enough on its own. Good
governance, development and stability are equally
important, and all of these elements are mutually
reinforcing.
The private sector can also make important
contributions to our work by helping to develop the
extractive industries and generate the resources needed
for the development of the countries in question. But
in this process they must act with corporate and social
responsibility. National Governments should hold their
private sector firms accountable for their practices and
role in the stability in the host country. Commercial
interests should never supersede the interest of the
host countries, or especially of its people. Civil society
also has an important role to play, which can range
from collecting data and assisting countries with their
expertise, to monitoring the practices of domestic and
foreign actors.

4

As a key actor in post-conflict settings, the United
Nations also has an important role to play in the matters
taken up in today’s open debate. It can assist postconflict countries in need in building their capacities in
the management of natural resources. Such assistance
can take different forms, including helping them to
design or strengthen their regulatory structures and
relevant national legislation.
However, the institutional capacity of the United
Nations also needs to be further developed in this area.
Furthermore, the United Nations’ entities and their
efforts must be well coordinated, and take an integrated
and multi-dimensional approach. In this context, the
Peacebuilding Commission is well placed not only to
coordinate efforts, but also to provide the necessary
guidance and resources at its disposal.
We believe that during the Council’s future
deliberations on conflict and post-conflict situations,
the natural resource dimension should also be taken
into account, where necessary. We should never lose
sight of the fact that the resources below the ground
belong to those who live over that ground. No party
should attempt to unjustly exploit or illegally seize the
resources of another. In addition, as is often stated,
natural resources alone are not the source for conflict.
In this regard, confronting the root causes of conflict,
addressing the other factors that fuel conflict, and
preventing and peacefully resolving conflicts with such
instruments as mediation is of paramount importance.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I wish to congratulate you,
Sir, on having organized this open debate on a very
important issue. Naturally, we express our indignation
at what happened in Mogadishu today.
The concept paper on the theme of the debate
(S/2013/334, annex) is, in general, both comprehensive
and very helpful. Of course, we approach the theme from
an African perspective, among others, because it has
been primary Africa that has been on the receiving end
of so much greed and shenanigans often, but not always,
associated with the exploitation of natural resources,
most particularly evident in extractive industries.
The British Government should be commended for its
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative.
The concept paper rightly indicates that extractive
industries are never the sole source of conflict. In fact,

13-36790

S/PV.6982 (Resumption 1)

one can go further and argue that extractive resources
are not or may not be the major source of conflict. The
concept paper makes two very apt assumptions. One
relates to the many examples of countries that have
enjoyed security and stability and, as the concept paper
says, impressive economic growth through the effective
management of their extractive industries. The second
assertion is that countries dependent on extractive
industries are vulnerable and susceptible to conflict
when they have weak governance and State institutions.
It may not be fair for Africa to always blame others
for problems that are at time of its own making, but
on the other hand no region of the world has been the
subject of so much abuse and all sorts of destabilizing
activities because of greed focusing on the continent’s
natural resources. Is there a better illustration of this
than what has befallen the Democratic Republic of the
Congo since the time of Patrice Lumumba?
I am proposing that, while all of the suggestions
made in the concept paper to ensure transparency and
accountability in this domain are valid and very helpful,
what would be yet more effective at the end of the day
would be what is done at the country level to strengthen
State institutions and democratic governance, as the
concept paper indicates. It is only by such actions that
the ownership by the people concerned can be realized,
without which no amount of work by the outside world
can be fully effective in ensuring that extractive
industries are not a cause of conflict. Even then, given
the fact that natural resources generate income, the
possibility of corruption and officials or their foreign
partners being tempted to seek to underhandedly gain
undeserved advantage may not be entirely avoided.
But there is perhaps no better solution than
appropriate internal democratic mechanisms for
ensuring vigilance and monitoring. In other words,
what is critical is what is done at the country level
in connection with good and democratic governance,
which allows space for grass-roots participation and
control. In fact, external initiatives that are too intrusive
may be seen as seeking to deprive rightful ownership
by resorting to a variety of methods.
Before I conclude, I should mention the fact that
this debate in our view would have been far more
useful if the theme had been broadened and not limited
to the extractive sector because the lack of careful,
balanced, fair and just use of natural resources also has
implications for peace and stability, not only within

countries but also in inter-State relations. This is
perhaps a theme which will have to be tackled in the
not-so-distant future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): My delegation joins in
extending our heartfelt condolences to the Government
and people of Somalia and to the bereaved families
following the terrorist attack on the United Nations
compound in Mogadishu this morning.
My delegation sincerely commends the United
Kingdom presidency for convening this open debate,
which provides us with a unique opportunity to continue
to exchange views on this important agenda item. We
welcome in particular the concept paper (S/2013/334,
annex), which clearly outlines the correlation between
conflict and natural resources.
We also thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Mr. Jan Eliasson; the Chair of the Africa Progress
Panel, Mr. Kofi Annan; the World Bank Managing
Director, Ms. Carolyn Anstey; and the United Nations
Development Programme representative, Ms. Rebeca
Grynspan, for their very insightful contributions.
I wish to begin by reaffirming the importance that
Botswana attaches to the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. In this regard, we fully support
the primary responsibility of the Security Council to
maintain international peace and security.
The issue under discussion today is not new to the
Security Council. We all know why natural resources
often cause conflicts. While there are various forms
of natural resource conflicts, there are also a few
underlying common causes. Greed and corruption
driven by the self-interest of governing elites are in
most cases the primary motivation. There is ample
evidence that predatory governance leads to the
chronic mismanagement of natural resources, which is
often accompanied by disproportionate investment in
military expenditures for the purposes of suppressing
the population.
The mismanagement of natural resources goes hand
in hand with societal warfare. Every society that feels
neglected by governing elites is susceptible to violent
conflict. That is because poor economic performance
constitutes the breeding ground for rebellion. There
are also instances where spoilers promote the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, despite the best

13-367905

S/PV.6982 (Resumption 1)

intentions of legitimate Governments to equitably share
economic resources, some of those spoilers going so far
as to promote secession in order to maintain control
over natural resource-endowed areas in their countries.
We believe that the Security Council is uniquely
placed to play a leading role in the prevention of
conflict. Just as we support the concept of doing more
with less in the United Nations system, we are also
in favour of a paradigm shift in the business of the
Security Council. Rather than being crisis-driven, the
Council should invest in the prevention of conflict by
aggressively pursuing the use of early-warning systems.
Any scan of the horizon that yields the suggestion of an
environment conducive to conflict should be met with
the Council’s unwavering resolve to deploy preventive
tools, such as fact-finding missions. Existing regional
structures can also come in handy in that regard.
Where there is evidence of a smouldering
situation, a panel of high-level mediators should be
deployed to stop the situation before it develops into
conflict. My delegation believes that prevention is
more cost-effective than peacekeeping. The cost of
human suffering resulting from conflicts rooted in
natural resources cannot be ignored, nor can resource
requirements for peacekeeping operations.
Botswana has avoided the so-called resource
curse thanks to the country’s prudent and visionary
leadership. We are in a position to offer valuable
lessons on the sound management of natural resources.
We are very humbled by the frequent mention of our
country by a number of the delegations that took the
floor before me.
Botswana graduated to middle-income status
from being a least developed country at the time of its
independence mainly because of the investment of the
revenue from natural resources in various sectors of the
economy, such as education, health and infrastructure
development, to mention but a few. That is because
mineral rights in Botswana were vested in the State.
That arrangement has guaranteed stability, openness
and transparency and promoted a responsible policy
regime for the management of natural resources, one
that is free of corruption and political interference.
Theat arrangement also ensures that there is an equitable
distribution of the proceeds from the exploitation of the
country’s natural resource base. Furthermore, to that
end, we remain firmly committed to the Kimberley

6

Process and the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative.
In conclusion, we call on the international
community to scale up its cooperation assistance to
strengthen institutions that promote good governance
and the rule of law. We believe that such an approach
can go a long way towards impeding the development
of breeding grounds for conflict.
Lastly, there should be periodic review of existing
multilateral mechanisms that facilitate the prevention
of conflict associated with natural resources, which
is necessary for the required flexibility to adapt to
evolving challenges.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): First of all, Bolivia wishes to express
its condolences to the families of the victims of today’s
attack in Mogadishu. We regret that the international
community has still not been able to halt the vicious
cycle of violence that we see in various areas of the
globe.
While I was on my way to the United Nations to
attend this debate convened by the President of the
Security Council, I was chatting with a Latin American
colleague on the Chaco War, an armed conflict that
played out in the past century between two of the
poorest countries in South America. That war was
promoted by two multinational oil companies that
were fighting over the natural resources in that part of
the world. That very painful example from my region
goes straight to the heart of what must be stated very
clearly in today’s debate, namely, that the history of the
majority of armed conflicts is the history of invasions
and the appropriation of natural resources.
The approach that we have heard about today and
read about in the President’s concept note (S/2013/334,
annex) cannot, from our point of view, be described
as anything other than interventionist, meddling
and a violation of the sovereignty of States. Matters
concerning the regulation, use, control over and access
to natural resources, whether they be renewable or not,
are subjects that fall exclusively within the prerogative
of States. Furthermore, issues pertaining to sustainable
development, transparency and the fight against
corruption are subjects within the purview of the

13-36790

S/PV.6982 (Resumption 1)

General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and other agencies and bodies of the United Nations.
We are concerned at what is concealed under certain
words. In connection with the topic, we hear such terms
and phrases as “good governance”, “transparency”,
“conflict prevention”, “effective management of natural
resources” and “sound regulation of the extractive
sectors”. We are concerned because many of the warlike
interventions promoted by some permanent members of
the Security Council have been carried out using such
lofty language.
For some time now, we have been aware that
wars orchestrated under the slogan of freedom have
meant that raw materials were at stake; when we hear
“democracy”, that means oil; and when we hear “human
rights”, that means consumer markets and cheap labour.
If there is any doubt, let us ask ourselves what happened
and what were the reasons, or excuses, for the wars in
Iraq and, more recently, in Libya.
We are witnessing a process that seeks to refine
argumentative structures and intervention mechanisms.
What other explanation is there for claims regarding the
degree of “susceptibility to conflict” of countries that
are “dependent on extractive industries”? On the basis
of that so-called susceptibility, an attempt is being
made to intervene in the design or the redesign of the
architecture of our institutions and legal systems on the
pretext of preventing conflicts, including the supposed
establishment of sanctions through committees and
groups of experts.
In truth, that is all an inadmissible form of
interventionism; it is in fact a more refined form of
colonialism that violates, as I have said, the sovereignty
of States, and distorts the concept of international
cooperation and jeopardizes peace.
We therefore ask whether we are going to be
considered “susceptible to conflicts” when we exert
our sovereign right to recover our strategic resources
from the hands of multinational companies. Will we
be considered “susceptible” when we nationalize our
strategic resources? If we are talking about conflict
prevention, I trust that the Council will for once be able
to look at the role of multinationals in armed conflict.
There is an essential and urgent need — I say it again in
this Chamber — for reforming the very structure of the
Security Council, just as the United Nations itself must
be reformed. Its structure, as we have said thousands
of times, does not meet the needs of today’s world,

and control is still in the hands of a few, violating the
principles of democracy and equality among States. In
more general terms, as my colleague from Argentina
has said, what we need is a new world order, a new
United Nations, a new economic and financial order
that will change production patterns and consumption
paradigms, because what we have now is unsustainable.
We must combat poverty, malnutrition and hunger, and
bring transparency to tax havens. Another issue that
merits serious analysis is the concentration of wealth
and knowledge in the hands of a few, as well as the lack
of technology transfer. Again, they are all sources of
poverty and, of course, exclusion.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): Let me begin by
expressing my condolences to the Government and
people of Somalia and to the families of the victims of
this morning’s terrible terrorist attack.
I would also like to align myself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union (EU).
In 2025, two-thirds of the world’s population will
face water scarcity, and 2.4 billion will face absolute
water scarcity, to the extent that it may impede, or
even reverse, economic and social progress. There
are numerous examples where transboundary waters
have proved to be a source of cooperation rather than
conflict, as is the case in my own country, for instance.
However, greater scarcity in the future, owing to
economic and population growth, combined with crossborder pollution and climate change, may well alter that
dynamic.
The increasing scarcity of water is just one aspect
of the relationship between conflict prevention and
natural resources. I would therefore like to thank the
United Kingdom for putting the relationship between
conflict prevention and natural resources on today’s
agenda. Let me start by briefly reviewing three events
of the past week, which I believe are all relevant to our
debate today.
Last Monday, the International Energy Agency
presented its latest report, entitled “Redrawing the
Energy-Climate Map”, which shows that the path we are
currently on is likely to result in a temperature increase
of between 3.6 and 5.3°C, far above the maximum of
2°C we had agreed on.

13-367907

S/PV.6982 (Resumption 1)

The second relevant event was last Wednesday. The
European Parliament approved the new EU Accounting
and Transparency Obligations Directives, which include
financial transparency requirements for the extractive
and forestry sector.
Thirdly, Friday saw the publication of the United
Nations report World Population Prospects, the 2012
Revision. The report projects that the current world
population of 7.2 billion will reach 9.6 billion by 2050.
The resulting increase in consumption will put even
greater pressure on natural resources.
In October, the World Resources Forum organized
a conference in Beijing that focused on the need for
better international resource governance, which leads
to greater stability and lower prices. The Netherlands
was among those countries that proposed considering
the establishment of a neutral international forum on
resources, particularly metals and minerals, comparable
to the already existing International Energy Forum.
Such a forum should involve countries that produce,
trade or consume resources.
In March, the Netherlands hosted the annual
meeting of the participants in the Voluntary Principles
on Security and Human Rights initiative in the
extractive industries. In that multi-stakeholder initiative
we engaged in a dialogue on security and human
rights. Together we have developed a set of voluntary
principles to guide companies in maintaining the safety
and security of their operations within an operating
framework that ensures respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms. As stated by the United
Kingdom in its concept note for this debate (S/2013/334,
annex), the Ruggie Guiding Principles on Business and
Human Rights have provided a common framework
since their endorsement by the Human Rights Council
in 2011. The Netherlands is fully committed to their
integral implementation.
Let me end by citing a practical example of a
contribution the Netherlands has made to preventing
conflicts related to natural resources. The armed
conflicts in the mineral-rich eastern provinces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have often been
described in their relation to income from the illicit
trade in minerals. To contribute to the shared goal of
regulating the flow of conflict minerals, with the aim
of preventing further armed conflict, the Netherlands
has created a conflict-free tin-supply chain. That pilot
initiative was launched in October and has already

8

resulted in the first exports of conflict-free tin. The
Netherlands Development Cooperation financed a local
non-governmental organization (NGO), Pact, which
tags and traces the tin ore. Dutch diplomats served
as neutral brokers to bring the whole international
supply chain together, from mining cooperatives in a
validated conflict-free mine in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, to exporters, to a
Malaysian smelter — because there are no tin smelters
in Africa — and to companies such as Philips, Tata
Steel, Motorola Solutions, Nokia and FairPhone. Those
exports have led to the first certified conflict-free
earnings from tin exports in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
That initiative builds on the expertise and skills
of many organizations. It involves a multi-stakeholder
approach in which the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, NGOs, the Tin Research
Institute in London, Germany’s Geological Service
and the United States Agency for International
Development were also involved. It is just one example
of what is possible, and more is needed. The debate
here today will help us to build on such initiatives. It
should promote further cooperation, resulting in an
all-inclusive process at all stages of the value chain of
natural resources, thereby contributing to preventing
conflicts and improving livelihoods in resource-rich
countries.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): We condemn unequivocally
the attack on the United Nations compound in
Mogadishu this morning and offer our condolences to
the families of the victims.
We appreciate your initiative, Mr. President, in
organizing this seminal debate designed to establish the
link between the transparent and effective management
of extractive industries and conflict prevention. I thank
you very much for the concept note, which has provided
a compass for our discussion today (S/2013/334, annex).
I would like to express my appreciation to Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson, World Bank Managing
Director Caroline Anstey, Under-Secretary-General
Rebeca Grynspan and the Chair of the Africa Progress
Panel, Mr. Kofi Annan, for their informative briefings.
There is no doubt that natural resources and their
exploitation have been a contributing factor to tensions

13-36790

S/PV.6982 (Resumption 1)

and conflicts both within and between States. In recent
years, while inter-State conflict over natural resources
has been managed relatively well through appropriate
mediation and adjudication, the struggle over domestic
natural resources has been the source of brutal conflicts
and civil wars in some parts of the world.
In discharging its remit to maintain international
peace and security, it is only appropriate that the Security
Council should focus on the exploitation of natural
resources as one of the root causes of conflict. While
such resources can present opportunities for enhanced
economic growth and sustainable development, in many
cases they have provided the fuel for conflict instead.
It is therefore imperative that natural resources be
managed responsibly, for the benefit of the population,
in order to prevent conflict. Such a good-governance
approach should be aimed at promoting human security
and economic development. It should also establish a
nexus between human security and development. It is
the inherent responsibility of Government to ensure the
protection and survival of the constitutional order by
creating the conditions necessary for human security.
This implies that the equitable distribution of the returns
from natural resources would provide health care and
education, promote poverty alleviation and reinforce
efforts towards development, as well as eliminate
sources of tension and disaffection from society.
We believe that States facing difficulty in
the management of their natural resources should
invest greater effort in strengthening the rule of law,
especially in its enforcement, in order to contain the
illicit exploitation of natural resources. In Nigeria, the
tensions in the oil-rich Niger delta were exacerbated
by the illicit foreign-driven exploitation of the
region’s natural resources, oil theft, illegal bunkers,
illegal fishing and the attendant degradation of the
environment. That anomalous situation could have
plunged the region into crisis if the Federal Government
had not taken major steps to ameliorate the problem.
Though the Government has taken steps to ease the
tension, the situation has been exacerbated by illicit
domestic and external activities, leading to the loss of
about 150,000 barrels of crude oil per day.
A more significant and no less devastating aspect of
the illegal exploitation of natural resources in conflict
situations is its impact on the environment and its
distortion of the livelihoods of the people in the affected
communities. Good governance must establish linkages
between natural-resource exploitation, environmental

degradation and poverty, and in so doing take the steps
necessary to ensure compliance with international
safety and environmental standards.
Today, we are not unmindful of the multifaceted
nature of conflicts. The natural-resource dimension
that we are addressing in this forum appears to be the
touchstone. I believe that we must take a long-term
strategic view of this dimension of conflict in order to
secure a more peaceful future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council during this busy
month. We are confident that you are up to this task
and will lead the work of the Council towards useful
results.
Allow me at the outset to extend, on behalf of the
Government of the State of Qatar, condolences to the
victims of the attack on the United Nations compound
in Mogadishu today, while expressing the solidarity of
the Government of the State of Qatar with the Federal
Government of Somalia and stressing the importance
of ensuring the safety of United Nations personnel and
missions.
When the Council held the previous meeting
on the issue of natural resources and conflict in
2007 (see S/PV.5705), the State of Qatar — which
was then a member of the Council — joined the
consensus on holding an open debate on this topic
and on the presidential statement adopted at that
time (S/PRST/2007/22). However, at that meeting we
affirmed a number of principles that we would like to
reaffirm today.
International conventions emphasize the right of
States to permanent sovereignty over and exploitation
of their natural resources, and that one of the pillars
of the economic and political independence of any
State is the full enjoyment of the right to exercise full
sovereignty over its natural wealth and resources and to
dispose of them according to its national interests. This
is consistent with the Charter of the United Nations
and is provided for in the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights of 1966; the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights of
1966; varfious General Assembly resolutions, including
resolution 1803 (XVII), of 14 December 1962, entitled

13-367909

S/PV.6982 (Resumption 1)

“Permanent sovereignty over natural resources”;
and in the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of
States annexed to General Assembly resolution 3281
(XXIX), of 12 December 1974. We also underline
that international law obliges occupying Powers not
to exploit or harm the natural resources in occupied
territories.
Ambiguity about the link between natural resources
and conflicts must be clarified. The presence of natural
resources such as extractive materials is not per se a
source or cause of, or an environment conducive to, the
outbreak of conflict, threats to international peace and
security, or the spread of corruption and human rights
violations. It is true that various studies and reports on
the causes of conflict in Africa and elsewhere describe
a wide range of causes of conflict, where mentions of
natural resources often recur. But that does not mean
that natural resources are the cause. On the contrary,
there are various reasons for corruption and conflicts
that feed on natural resources: from social and political
injustice to the accumulated results of the colonialism
era, to the illegal exploitation of natural resources of the
countries under occupation, to foreign ambitions and
regional variables, to the lack of exploitation of natural
resources for development, as well as other factors that
must be recognized and addressed.
We agree that addressing the root causes of conflict
is important and that the good management of natural
resources is important too. It is clear from our concrete
experience that natural resources can be a boon to the
countries that enjoy them if they are harnessed the right
way to drive economic growth, progress, development
and job creation, to develop indicators of social,
cultural and human development and human rights, to
support good governance, reinforce the rule of law and
the fight against corruption, to strengthen political and
economic stability, and to improve the livelihoods and
well-being of citizens.
Because of the importance of the issue of
non-renewable natural resources, we feel that a debate on
it should be undertaken in the appropriate international
forums, such as the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council and the Peacebuilding Commission,
as part of the development and peacebuilding agenda
of the United Nations, in order to assist countries,
particularly those affected by conflict, in the
establishment of effective and transparent institutions
and the optimal management of their natural resources
for their benefit. Here we would note that any assistance

10

provided in that regard must be at the request of the
legitimate concerned Government.
In our view, the way the Security Council should
address this issue must naturally be in accordance
with its mandate and authority, that is, within the
context of its country-specific work and on a case-bycase basis in countries experiencing armed conflict
and in post-conflict situations that pose a threat to
international peace and security. The Security Council
is undoubtedly taking important measures to prevent
the escalation of conflicts linked to natural resources,
such as through the sanctions imposed in many cases
on the illegal exploitation of some of those resources to
fund conflicts. Those measures should continue to be
studied so as to increase their effectiveness and impact
and to avoid any shortcomings.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): We would like to join
previous speakers in offering our condolences on the
tragedy that took place in Somalia today. Armenia
condemns the massive attack on the United Nations
compound in Mogadishu, which resulted in dozens
of casualties among the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia staff and security personnel. Our
prayers go out to the families of the victims, the United
Nations and the Government of Somalia.
I wish to express my appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for having convened this open debate
and thank the Deputy Secretary-General, as well as the
World Bank Managing Director and the Chair of the
Africa Progress Panel, for their contributions.
United Nations bodies and the Security Council in
particular are uniquely placed to promote global policy
development so as to address the linkages between
natural resources and conflict. Along with other
development partners, including the Bretton Woods
institutions, the Council can effectively contribute to
the post-conflict peacebuilding efforts to integrate the
peace and development agenda in the context of the
governance and management of natural resources.
The role of natural resources in fuelling conflicts
and prolonging their political resolution is being
increasingly recognized in strategies for conflict
prevention and peacebuilding. International experience
shows that a multidimensional approach is required to
reduce the linkages between instability and conflict

13-36790

S/PV.6982 (Resumption 1)

in mineral-rich countries and regions through the
deployment of a wide range of security and development
initiatives. In the volatile region of the South Caucasus,
we have yet to fully employ an essential resource that
could bring us closer to peace, sustainable economic
development and the creation of regional opportunities
for trade and investment in jobs that could lead to
the engagement in solutions on the political front. A
good starting point is to take current policy tools
and analyse how the countries in our region address
natural resources. A coordinated effort to mainstream
transparent, efficient and equitable Governments and
the management of natural resources to develop policies
and conflict-prevention strategies is rather essential.
The mechanisms whereby natural resources induce
or prolong conflicts are often deeply rooted in economic
and social structures and call for integrated approaches
in addressing peace and development. Good governance
and management of natural resources are the core tools
for conflict prevention.
The high dependency on natural resources without
proper and fair management and appropriate policies
is creating social tensions, weakening Government
institutions and prolonging the resolution of conflicts,
thereby increasing the risk of conflict resumption.
Corruption, State weakness and reduced accountability
tend to be associated with large revenues from natural
resources. It is a well-known fact that corruption
emerges as a problem due to the sheer volume of
revenue from natural resources.
It is also true that a rich natural-resources base does
not necessarily lead to poor economic performance.
There are several examples of stable democracies
where natural resources have contributed to long-term
economic growth and equitable income distribution.
Natural resources can significantly contribute to
economic development in an appropriate, diversified
economic framework.
Today, as Member States are focused on the
implementation of the Millennium Development Goals
and other internationally agreed development goals, we
all have a unique opportunity to develop an inclusive
approach to natural resources and development,
conflict prevention and peacebuilding, thus integrating
the management of natural resources into national
sustainable development policies. The successful
implementation of this agenda requires a basic level
of political will and determination on the part of all

stakeholders as a precondition for peacebuilding and
supporting peace. With that political condition in
place, the ability of the United Nations and any other
intergovernmental or regional actor will be enhanced
and supported.
Armenia therefore welcomes the United Kingdom
initiative to hold this thematic discussion. It is an
opportunity to recap and reflect on our experiences
in dealing with the issue of conflict prevention and
natural resources.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Abdullah (Malaysia): I wish to express my
sincere congratulations to the United Kingdom on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. My delegation is also of the view that this
debate is timely and will contribute to the development
of a better understanding of this important question.
At this juncture, Malaysia joins other nations in
condemning the outrageous attacks on the United
Nations compound in Somalia today. We extend our
deepest condolences in connection with the losses
suffered by both Somalia and the United Nations.
The correlation between conflicts and natural
resources is not a myth, it is a reality. While some
countries have progressed tremendously thanks to
natural resources, others are cursed with an abundance
of strategic commodities. History has proven that wars
have emerged where natural resources are at stake.
Malaysia has always been critical of the violence
and carnage that have been caused by conflict due to
natural resources. Our world is rich in resources, from
the lush plain fields that produce crops to the precious
minerals that have helped countries develop. It is us
who determine if those resources are a boon or a bane.
My delegation believes that the key to the successful
mitigation of conflicts caused by natural resources lies
in good governance and the responsible management
of these resources. Governments are key actors and
must be responsible and accountable. In managing
resources, Governments are the regulators of mining
licences. They are therefore in a position to determine
the distribution of wealth from natural resources, which
generates the growth of a country.
Malaysia is not oblivious to such challenges.
Striking a balance between good governance and
maximizing yields, the managing of Malaysia’s oil

13-3679011

S/PV.6982 (Resumption 1)

reserves has been of the utmost importance to its
Government. In 1974, we established Petronas as our
national oil company. Much of its current success can
be attributed to the relevant laws and to the fact that
it is an entity that is run as a full-fledged commercial
organization. As a State-owned entity, Petronas is
responsible for the effective management of Malaysia’s
oil and gas resources and for ensuring the orderly and
sustainable development of the nation’s petroleum
industry. Governed by its code of conduct and business
ethics, Petronas has continued to accommodate
developments in local and international laws and
practices, as well as technological developments and
benchmarks in international standards. The code not
only promotes legal and procedural compliance, but
also provides a moral compass in guiding its work in
the international arena.
There is no doubt that the United Nations has a
role to play in providing neutral and impartial advice
to countries in need. My delegation is of the view that
there are many mechanisms already in place to support
such an endeavour. The Peacebuilding Commission
is one such instrument. The Commission has been
active in supporting countries on its agenda. It has
continued to provide the Security Council with advice
on pertinent developments in Sierra Leone, Liberia,
the Central African Republic, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau
and Burundi. Through the Commission, Member States
have been able to interact in the field to support national
Governments in prioritizing strategies and plans of
action, which may include the management of natural
resources to prevent a relapse into conflict.
Malaysia also shares the view that the Commission
and United Nations country teams have a role to play
in developing synergies on conflict prevention. Such
synergies can be realized in peacebuilding programmes
and the capacity-building of Governments, therefore
making them important mechanisms in the monitoring
of adherence to commodity schemes. That will serve
to support efforts in the prevention of conflict in the
relevant countries.
Malaysia also holds the view that the United
Nations can play a critical part in the prevention of
conflict. However, my delegation would also stress
the importance of reaffirming the inherent sovereign
rights of States in the exploitation of their resources.
Such precepts are deeply seated in the principles of
international law and the sovereign rights of Member
States in maintaining their territorial integrity.

12

Malaysia does not dispute the inherent connection
between natural resources and the fuelling of conflicts.
While good governance and the responsibility and
accountability of Governments play the key role
in preventing strategic commodities from fuelling
conflicts, we, the international community, must also
do our part in providing countries with the necessary
support to ensure that they do not relapse into conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Timor-Leste.
Mrs. Mesquita Borges (Timor-Leste): I would like
to join other delegations in condemning the terrible
attack on the United Nations compound in Mogadishu.
We convey our sympathies to the Government and
people of Somalia and the families of the victims.
Allow me also thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate and for the opportunity
to share my country’s experience. We agree with you,
Sir, that the effective and transparent management of a
country’s natural resources can be critical to preventing
conflict.
Timor-Leste is a very young nation, and we are
proud to be at the forefront of the world’s best practices
in relation to the management of our natural resources.
Much effort has gone into the building of institutional
and legal capacity to transparently and effectively
manage our extractive industries. Last month, we
celebrated the eleventh anniversary of the restoration
of independence. The path towards stability and
development has been difficult, especially considering
the daunting challenge of building a nation from ashes.
Now with a solid foundation of security and stability,
there is a strong sense of hope and confidence in TimorLeste, confidence and aspirations that are stipulated
in the strategic development plan for the period 2011
to 2030, which aims to transform the country from a
low-income nation to a country with upper-middle
income levels by 2030, with a population that is secure,
educated and healthy. An important part of the plan
includes economic progress and the development of
industries that will diversify the economy and drive our
prosperity.
Our petroleum industry is critical to economic
growth, prosperity and capacity development.
Petroleum revenue belongs to the Timorese people.
The Government is determined to ensure that any
income generated from those resources benefits all the

13-36790

S/PV.6982 (Resumption 1)

people, including future generations. That is why the
Constitution states that the resources of the soil, the
subsoil, the territorial waters and the continental shelf
and the exclusive economic zone, which are essential to
the economy, shall be owned by the State and shall be
used in a fair and equitable manner in accordance with
national interests. It is why our Parliament adopted a
petroleum fund law that requires taht all petroleum
income to be invested in a sovereign wealth fund in
accordance with the principle of good governance, for
the benefit of current and future generations.
A small portion of the fund is used for the State
budget, pursuant to approval by Parliament. That
transfer is guided by estimated sustainable income. At
this time, that is estimated at 3 per cent, which is the
amount that over time can be spent without depleting
the petroleum wealth. The governance of the petroleum
fund is based on a high degree of transparency and the
disclosure of information to help build public support
for the wise management of petroleum revenues and to
reduce the risk of misappropriation and corruption.
Timor-Leste is very proud to be the first country
in Asia, and third country in the world, to comply with
the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative. That
means that every dollar of the petroleum revenue is
publicly disclosed and matched with the records of the
resource companies. The Government has embraced
the principles underpinning the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative and has gone on to develop the
world’s most successful, comprehensive and transparent
online database of publicly available information on
budget expenditure, tenders, development partners’
contributions and programme implementation.
Timor-Leste’s management of its extractive
industries resources has been endorsed by the Revenue
Watch Institute. This year, we have been ranked 13
out of 58 countries surveyed and ranked above some
of our development partners for safeguards and quality
control. We are mindful of the resource curves and the
need to diversify our economy, and we are aware of the
potential for conflict if people feel that they are missing
out on the benefits of our petroleum wealth. That is
why the petroleum fund is used in such a transparent
manner in the budget on infrastructure spending and on
the delivery of education and health services.
Timor-Leste is now at a stage where we can give
back to the international community, in particular by
sharing our experiences and lessons learned. Timor-

Leste is the current Chair of the Group of Seven Plus
(g7+) fragile post-conflict and conflict-affected nations.
The aim of the Group is to provide a united voice for the
g7+ countries and to advocate for a different approach
to peacebuilding and state-building, anchored in
national priorities and ownership of the peacebuilding
and development agenda. The g7+ knows from bitter
experience that without peace and stability there can
be no development and that conflict is development in
reverse. As such, a comprehensive approach is needed
that addresses the specific challenges and root causes
in each particular conflict setting.
I take this opportunity to highlight that no fragile
conflict-affected country has achieved a single
Millennium Development Goal (MDG) and that,
according to the World Bank’s 2011 World Development
Report, conflict can set a country back 30 years in lost
domestic product growth.
Insecurity and violence, weak institutions and
poverty are interlinked factors that create serious
obstacles to peace, development and the attainment of
the MDGs. Progress requires an approach that links
security, political and development actors. That is why
the g7+ nations have been promoting the New Deal
and its peacebuilding and state-building goals, which
address economic foundations along with revenues,
services and security, to ensure that development is
country-owned and country-led. Underpinning all
that is the need for strong institutions, governance and
capacity to ensure accountable and fair social-service
delivery. As our Prime Minister stated at the General
Assembly last September, we are not fragile because
we are poor; we are fragile because we have weak
institutions.
A critical aspect in moving beyond conflict and
in building strong, resilient, effective and efficient
institutions is the need for strong partnerships,
specifically partnerships built on mutual trust, with
respect for national ownership. That is why Timor-Leste
is pleased to co-chair with Denmark the International
Dialogue on Peacebuilding and State-building. The
Dialogue brings together fragile and conflict-affected
countries and international partners and exemplifies
the importance of sharing knowledge and experience.
National ownership and the building of resilience
require concerted efforts, and effective and transparent
resource management can contribute greatly to both.
The g7+ advocates efforts to manage risks, increase the

13-3679013

S/PV.6982 (Resumption 1)

use of country systems and support for the building of
national capacities. Those can all add to the long-term
process of peacebuilding and state-building and assist
in breaking the cycles of conflict and build resilience.
The President: I would like to again remind all
speakers to limit their statements to no more than
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate the text
in writing and to deliver a condensed version while
speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of Gabon.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): Allow me to begin by joining the delegations
that have preceded me in resolutely condemning the
heinous terrorist attack that took place at the United
Nation compound in Mogadishu and to express Gabon’s
condolences to the bereaved families of the victims.
I would also like to thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Kofi Annan, Ms. Caroline Anstey and
Ms. Rebeca Grynspan for their informative briefings.
I would also like to thank the President of the Security
Council for organizing this debate and for the work he
does in leading the Council. I also appreciate the work
of Ambassador Kodjo Menan and the entire Togolese
delegation during the month of May.
For several years now, natural resources have played
a leading role and are at the heart of developments in
Africa. In particular, while they should contribute to the
development of the countries in which they are found
and the well-being of the country’s people, natural
resources, including animals and plants, have become a
source of conflict and disasters, to the point that we now
speak of the curse of natural resources. While natural
resources are not the direct cause of conflict, they
constitute an aggravating factor and, by consequence,
prolong conflicts and make efforts for peace difficult.
Without a doubt, in addition to insecurity and violations
of human rights, which conflicts tied to natural
resources can lead to, the State’s loss in revenue when
it is subjected to such anarchical use of those natural
resources is enormous. It often exacerbates poverty and
contributes to unemployment. The tragedies in Angola,
Sierra Leone, Liberia and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo are striking examples of that.
International as well as regional initiatives by
countries affected by the illegal exploitation of natural

14

resources are certainly not lacking. Given the direct
link between the legal trade in rough diamonds and
the funding of armed conflicts, the international
community, at the initiative of Canada and under
the auspices of the United Nations, has implemented
a system for diamond certification so as to halt
international trafficking in that resource to benefit of
wars. Launched in 2003, the Kimberley Process has
the merit of being practical while seeking to protect
the economies of numerous countries where the
national revenue depends essentially upon the diamond
industry. More widespread accession to the initiative is
necessary to ensure its universality and better control
of the diamond trade.
Gabon also equally supports the African strategic
vision for dealing with the matter of mines. The six
tools implemented by the Great Lake region countries
include the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative, which merits our support. Better monitoring
of the application of targeted sanctions imposed by the
Security Council against the perpetrators of war, or
those profiting from such wars, should be accompanied
with weapons embargoes applied in areas impacted by
the illicit trade of natural resources. Such sanctions
proved effective in Angola, Sierra Leone and Liberia,
as have the investigations under way in the Democratic
Republic of Congo and Liberia.
The countries, companies and industrial sectors
profiting from the illicit trade in natural resources
must impose more stringent norms and standards. The
international community must help countries in need to
improve nationwide governance and assist in security
sector reform, as well as in establishing legal norms,
including a mining code. Domestically, States should
promote good governance, in particular by ensuring
fair, transparent and sustainable management of natural
resources, and by reinforcing institutional capacities so
that such frameworks are effective.
The Security Council must also include and enhance
technical support to natural resource management
in peacekeeping and peacebuilding mandates. This
could help to prevent natural resources from being a
contributory factor to instability and conflicts and
maximize them as peacebuilding tools. Gabon supports
a new path for peacekeeping missions that would take
climate change and shrinking natural resources into
account.

13-36790

S/PV.6982 (Resumption 1)

My delegation hopes that this debate will bring
added value to existing initiatives to reduce the risks
of conflict, insecurity and instability arising from the
fight over natural resources. Gabon will continue to
support such initiatives. In that regard, my country,
together with Belgium, will be submit a draft resolution
in the framework of the informal working group known
as the Friends of Natural Resources. The document
seeks, inter alia, to improve the responsibility of States
in managing their natural resources so as to ensure
that they contribute fully to their own growth and
development. I hope that the document will enjoy broad
support.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): My delegation
thanks you, Sir, for convening today’s open debate. I
would also like to thank your delegation for preparing a
concept paper on the topic under discussion (S/2013/334,
annex). I would also like to take this opportunity to
thank the Deputy Secretary-General for his statement
earlier in the day.
The intrinsic link between the effective management
of natural resources and development is a time-tested
reality. Conflict holds back development. It is a fact
that, in several countries on the agenda of the Security
Council, including those in Africa, problems of control
over natural resources and their exploitation are serious
exacerbating factors fanning conflict, and also remain
a major impediment to post-conflict nation-building.
If one looks into the history of these conflicts, both
the control and exploitation of natural resources have
been driven largely by factors outside the control of the
affected countries. External interference with the aim
of controlling and exploiting natural resources, when
combined with political objectives and ethnic rivalries,
has been a particularly combustive mix for conflicts.
As a result, several countries in Africa have remained
mired in conflicts for decades. It is therefore necessary
to tackle the issue holistically.
It is imperative that we fully respect the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of all United
Nations Member States, including when the Council
considers situations on its agenda. The international
community, including the Council, must respect States’
right to control and manage their affairs, including
natural resources. No attempt should be made to be

prescriptive about the control, management and use of
natural resources by the States concerned.
Even while some countries in Africa are involved
in conflicts related to natural resources, we note that
the continent has been the second fastest growing
region in the world in the past decade. From 2000 to
2010, six of the 10 fastest growing economies were in
Africa. Africa’s collective gross domestic product is
expected to grow to $2.6 trillion by 2025. Clearly, with
greater assistance from the international community,
conflict-affected countries in Africa can achieve faster
progress.
In that regard, it is important for the international
community, particularly the United Nations, to play
a seminal role in capacity-building of the Member
States concerned. Conflict-affected countries do need
assistance to fulfil their international commitments
and strengthen their internal institutions, including
those dealing with security and border control. The role
of the international community, including the relevant
United Nations agencies, should include enhancing
development partnerships with countries in conflict
situations. This should include higher allocations of
financial, technical and human resources by donors and
United Nations agencies, and coincide with the national
priorities of the countries concerned.
We commend the efforts and commitment of the
relevant United Nations agencies in developing the
capacities of countries in conflict and post-conflict
situations. We hope that their commitment to national
capacity-building, including in the control and
management of natural resources, will be matched by
adequate resources and that support will be provided
based on the requests of national Governments and on
mutual agreement.
Before I conclude, let me state that a concerted push
has been made to include several normative issues into
the Council’s agenda under the pretext that they affect
international peace and security. Such a move should be
avoided to ensure the effective functioning of the United
Nations system. The Charter provides clear a division
of responsibilities between the General Assembly, the
Security Council, the Economic and Social Council and
other specialized bodies created by the Member States.
All United Nations bodies, including this Council, must
respect this division of roles and responsibilities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sudan.

13-3679015

S/PV.6982 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like express our condolences to the
peacekeepers in Mogadishu and to the families of the
victims of the wanton attack that took place there today.
My delegation congratulates the United Kingdom
on its assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month and for its concept paper on conflictprevention and the effective, transparent management
of natural resources in conflict-affected States
(S/2013/334, annex).
Natural resources such as water, oil, natural gas
and minerals can be causes of conflict if not managed
wisely and in a manner that avoids rivalries and
competition that lead to conflict. The first presidential
statement (S/PRST/2007/22) on the relationship
between natural resources and conflicts, particularly
the assistance provided by the United Nations through
its peacekeeping operations or field offices, clearly
affirmed that this should be done at the request of
the States concerned while fully respecting their
sovereignty and their strategic policies for managing
natural resources.
I have mentioned before that conflicts may arise
over grazing rights and water sources. A case in point
is the Darfur conflict. Waves of extreme drought and
desertification in Africa in the 1980s led to a scarcity of
natural resources and to further conflicts and rivalries
among different tribes in Darfur. These conflicts
acquired political dimensions as they deteriorated. In
some areas, such as Darfur, for example, conflict erupted
over gold-mining rights — a development we do not
wish to see recur in the region. The Government of the
Sudan has therefore set out strategies and established
laws to govern mining activities in a manner that avoids
conflict between the various tribes in those areas.
In conclusion, we would like to endorse the
concept paper’s emphasis on the need for sound and
transparent management of natural resources. I stress
the important role of the United Nations in this field,
in particular in providing neutral and honest advice to
national Governments at their request. We also reiterate
the importance of supporting the efforts of national
Governments to establish peace and stability as the
core foundation on which all national institutions can
manage natural resources in the most effective way.
We look forward to the Council’s support for the
efforts to achieve peace and stability in the Sudan by
sending a strong message to the rebel groups under the

16

banner of the so-called Sudan Revolutionary Front,
which are seeking to topple the Sudanese Government
and have committed several military assaults against
cities and villages in Northern and Southern Kordofan,
as well as against the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei, killing one peacekeeper and wounding
two others. Those rebel movement would not have dared
commit such flagrant crimes had the Security Council
dealt with them more firmly. They would not have dared
to continue such attacks. The time has therefore come
for the Council to take effective punitive measures
against those movements that target infrastructure,
resources and development efforts in the country.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Eritrea.
Mr. Desta (Eritrea): I would like to thank the
delegation of the United Kingdom for organizing this
open thematic debate on the prevention of conflicts and
natural resources. I would also like to commend today’s
briefers for their informative introductory remarks.
Today’s attack against the United Nations
compound in Mogadishu was appalling. My delegation
wishes to extend its deep condolences to the victims
and their families and expresses its solidarity with the
people and Government of Somalia.
My delegation views endowments in natural
resources as an asset to lift millions of people out of
poverty. However, fierce and aggressive competition
over access, illegal exploitation and mismanagement of
natural resources are among the most important factors
that are linked to several situations of civil strife in
African States, both causing and perpetuating conflicts.
Ensuring good governance in the control, management
and trade of natural resources and equitable access to
natural resources is therefore imperative in ensuring
the inclusive economic and social well-being of all
the people in a given country. That would in itself be
critical to maintaining and creating a cohesive and
harmonious society.
It is equally important to underscore the negative
impact of exploitative interference by external Powers
and transnational companies, which undermine the
sovereign rights of many Member States over the use
and management of their natural resources. More often
than not, this has become a recipe for international
conflicts, with grave consequences for international
peace and security.

13-36790

S/PV.6982 (Resumption 1)

While we agree with some of the remarks regarding
intra-State conflicts, including measures to prevent the
illicit exploitation of natural resources by non-State
actors, I would like to stress the following. First,
States have the primary responsibility to develop and
exploit their natural resources for the benefit of their
respective societies. This is an inalienable right and is
also unambiguously reflected in the landmark General
Assembly resolution 1803 (XXVII) of 1962.
Secondly, in recent years, the Security Council
has acted on several occasions to curb the negative
consequences of the illicit trade in natural resources by
targeting non-State actors. It must, however, be stressed
that, when such actions are taken, it is important for
there to be full consent of the State concerned. More
importantly, no resolution of the Council should
undermine a State’s right to exploit its natural resources
or be used as a tool for political pressure. In that
connection, it is important to underscore that United
Nations organs dealing with social and economic
development are best suited to discuss the issue of
international cooperation on natural resources.
As a country that has emerged from the ashes of
war and is endowed with natural resources, Eritrea
has recently reached a stage where it is able to develop
and exploit its mineral resources in close cooperation
with its international partners. In Eritrea, all mineral
resources are designated as public property and the
conservation and development of such resources must
be ensured for Eritrea’s present and future generations.
Let me conclude by stressing that Eritrea is of the
view that natural resources should promote cooperation,
not conflicts. We are firmly convinced that pursuing
policies for the sustainable use of resources with the
aim of creating a win-win solution is critical within and
between countries and corporations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Lasso Mendoza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
Like almost all other speakers, I would like to begin by
expressing our condemnation of the attack on the United
Nations facilities in Mogadishu, our solidarity with the
families of the victims whose lives it claimed, and our
certainty that the attack will not deter the efforts of the
United Nations and African Union to support Somalia
on its path to stability and development.

My delegation welcomes the opportunity to set
out its position on this topic because, for Ecuador, it
is important to discuss different approaches to and
visions of conflict prevention and natural resources.
I must, however, reiterate my country’s steadfast
rejection of ongoing attempts to bring matters linked
to development and all that it entails, including the
responsible and sustainable use of natural resources,
into the field of security and thus under the jurisdiction
of the Council, because we believe that the appropriate
forums in which to address such topics of universal
interest are the General Assembly and Economic and
Social Council.
The Constitution of Ecuador establishes the right
to a decent life, towards which the use and responsible
management of natural resources is oriented, respecting
their limits and vital cycles. This mandate is reflected
in the National Plan for Good Living, which seeks to
achieve the sustainable and comprehensive development
of the human being.
In this regard, Ecuador emphasizes the following
points, which we believe should guide this debate:
respect for the principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations, especially those of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States and of non-intervention;
and people-centred objectives to promote human and
economic and social rights and sustainable development.
Such objectives do not restrict or limit the leading role
of the State on its national territory; to the contrary,
they strengthen it.
On the basis of those principles, my delegation
believes that it is important to bear in mind two crosscutting aspects of the prevention of conflicts linked to
natural resources. There is a common but differentiated
global responsibility, given that the wealthy countries
are the largest polluters, whereas the countries of the
South possess the greatest natural heritage and supply
society with environmental resources to the benefit of
all humankind.
The redistribution of global income in an effort to
achieve equitable sharing of global wealth would help
to prevent conflicts over natural resources, including
ongoing conflicts and those that have occurred in
the past in various regions worldwide. In that sense,
we believe that unrestrained economic growth is
impossible; therefore, this unbridled trend must be
limited by authentic paths to sustainability.

13-3679017

S/PV.6982 (Resumption 1)

The gross injustice manifested by the current
international economic system does not guarantee
equitable access to natural resources; it generates high
levels of underdevelopment and social exclusion in
many regions. Clearly, such injustice lies at the root
of the violence that continues to overwhelm many
societies.
Finally, my delegation cannot fail to recall the
many victims of armed conflict caused by the unbridled
ambition of certain countries seeking access to the
natural resources of other sovereign States. Those
conflicts are even more painful when they occur under
the cover of humanitarian intervention. Our efforts
should seek to guarantee the access of all humankind
to the resources necessary for life and development,
within the framework of respect for the rights of nature.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Ahmadein Khalil (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me to begin by expressing my delegation’s
condemnation of and sadness about the attack against
the United Nations office in Somalia. We offer the
condolences of the people and the Government of Egypt
to the United Nations and to the people and Government
of Somalia.
(spoke in English)
I would like to express our appreciation to the
United Kingdom presidency of the Security Council
for organizing today’s debate on conflict prevention
and natural resources, a subject of great interest to all
Members of the United Nations, particularly countries
in conflict and post-conflict situations, including in
Africa.
I would like also to thank, through you, Sir, Mr. Jan
Eliasson, Deputy Secretary-General, the representative
of the World Bank, Mr. Kofi Annan and Ms. Grynspan
for their valuable participation and introductory
statements.
Our debate today raises a very serious question on
how to ensure that non-renewable natural resources
are a means for growth and development rather than
a source of instability and conflict. Conflicts are the
product of multiple and complex factors. However,
many conflict situations are linked to competition over
natural resources. Countries in post-conflict situations
are doing their best to develop efficient and accountable
national structures and to build national capacity to

18

manage their natural resources. Those efforts should
be fully supported by the international community,
including through technical and financial assistance
when needed.
The international community’s response to the
question of cutting the link between natural resources
and armed conflict, particularly through initiatives such
as the Kimberley Process and the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative, reflects the importance of
curbing the illegal exploitation of natural resources
in order to support efforts to achieve peace, stability
and sustainable development. As a member of the
Group of Friends of Natural Resources, Egypt lends its
unequivocal support to those initiatives and their goals.
The United Nations is contributing to those
efforts through its conflict prevention, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts. Supporting national
capacity-building in the management of natural
resources is becoming an integral part of the mandate
of peacekeeping operations. The efforts of the
Peacebuilding Commission to ensure that extractive
industries located in countries in post-conflict
situations contribute to stability and socioeconomic
development cannot be over emphasized.
Our efforts to ensure that extractive industries
in countries in post-conflict situations contribute to
stability and socioeconomic development cannot enjoy
full success without the collaboration of all stakeholders,
including the international financial institutions and
the private sector. The World Development Report
2011 — “Conflict, security and development”, prepared
by the World Bank Group, emphasized that building
capable and legitimate institutions is the key to breaking
the cycle of violence and avoiding a relapse into conflict
in fragile and conflict-affected countries. Egypt also
commends, in that regard, the African Mining Vision
2050, adopted by the African Union in 2008, as well as
the Protocol against the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources in the Great Lakes Region.
Finally, Egypt underlines the importance of regional
approaches to address the exploitation of shared natural
resources in order to transform these resources into a
force for regional peace and mutual cooperation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Papua New Guinea.
Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): In July 2008, the
Council wound up its successful mandate on the

13-36790

S/PV.6982 (Resumption 1)

oversight and resolution of the bloody civil conflict on the
island of Bougainville in Papua New Guinea. Initiated
by the good offices of then Secretary-General Kofi
Annan — one of today’s speakers — the decade-long
mandate enabled the resolution of the conflict, which
in its essence resulted from disagreements related to
the massive Bougainville copper mine, which at the
time was the largest open cut mine in world, after the
Escondida copper mine in Chile. At its operational
peak and prior to the start of the conflict in 1989, the
Bougainville mine contributed about 20 per cent of
Papua New Guinea’s national budget.
Since the conclusion of the Security Council mandate
in 2005, the Autonomous Region of Bougainville has
been created under the Bougainville Peace Agreement,
along with several elections for the Autonomous
Government led by a President. In real terms,
Bougainville’s post-conflict peacebuilding continues
as a work in progress, with numerous milestones
and institutional strengthening still to be achieved.
The Papua New Guinea Government continues to be
involved at the highest levels throughout this critical
phase as we jointly continue the peacebuilding process.
I emphasize the word “jointly” here because it is the
operative word.
As a nation on the cusp of enormous economic
growth, underpinned by the past decade of positive
sustained economic growth of over 5 per cent per
annum, the Papua New Guinea Government continues
to plan and engage in many different ways to ensure that
the wealth that will flow from the massive multi-billion
dollar LNG project, funded by Exxon, alongside other
mining and multinational corporations and other
natural resources ventures, will benefit all of the people
of Papua New Guinea.
In light of its infrastructure and its attempts to deal
with social inequities, our Government is determined
to ensure that the distribution of wealth throughout
the country is balanced and effective. As noted in
our country’s statement made at the opening of the
session of the General Assembly in September 2012
(see A/67/PV.18), the Government proposed to share its
wealth with other Pacific countries, and that is already
happening in a very small way.
The Papua New Guinea Government is aware
of the huge responsibility emanating from the great
opportunity that has emerged from the exploitation
of our vast natural resources, including copper, gold

and other base metals, along with gas and petroleum.
Our unique land tenure system lends itself to creating
a picture that anywhere else would be tantamount to
distraught confusion. With a population of just over
7 million people, our diversity, based on more than
800 languages and tribes, provides an elaborate mosaic
from which to address our massive wealth in natural
resources, which also include our marine resources, of
which many are jointly shared with our Pacific island
neighbours.
The question of whether we have learned any
lessons from the Bougainville conflict, along with the
reasons as to why that conflict arose, remains seared
in our collective minds, and provides an important
yardstick by which we as a nation must properly address
the exploitation of our natural resources.
The bedrock of all natural resource exploitation
in Papua New Guinea is underpinned by specific
prerequisites, framed through legally sanctioned and
compulsory natural resource development forums,
whereby the Papua New Guinea Government must
consult all landowners and groups within the resource
areas, often including those on the periphery, in order
to obtain their approval for developing those resources.
What seems — and is — a very cumbersome process
works because our Constitution guarantees traditional
ownership of land by our peoples, wherever they come
from in Papua New Guinea. That is a sacrosanct part of
our nationhood’s ethos and continues to serve us well,
notwithstanding the conflict on Bougainville.
Finally, working with development partners,
along with our participation in the recent Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative Conference in
Sydney and recently in the United Nations Office for
South-South Cooperation Energy Initiative, has, in
our view, allowed Papua New Guinea to participate
meaningfully in many of the processes that have been
described by other delegations in this debate today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Ms. Okai (Japan): At the outset, let me say that
Japan also strongly condemns the violent attack on the
United Nations compound in Mogadishu today, and
expresses its heartfelt condolences to the families of
the victims.
I would like to thank the presidency of the United
Kingdom for its timely initiative today.

13-3679019

S/PV.6982 (Resumption 1)

If managed correctly, natural resources can serve
as a growth engine by increasing investment, State
revenue and employment opportunities. However,
weak management of such resources, particularly if it
permits the illegal exploitation and trading of extractive
resources, may trigger and perpetuate conflicts. The
international community must therefore engage with
the issue in a coherent and coordinated manner so as
to build the management capacity of resource-rich
countries that are affected by conflict.
Japan, as Chair of the Working Group on Lessons
Learned of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), has
addressed this topic. The meeting of the Working Group
on 8 July 2011 devoted to economic revitalization and
youth employment for peacebuilding generated some
useful lessons on natural-resource management that I
wish to share with the Council today.
First, resource management is handled by multiple
actors and has multiple aspects, including sanctions,
peace negotiations, law enforcement, regulatory
and transparency regimes and human rights and
environmental concerns. The international community
must do more in order to respond to the problem in a
coordinated fashion. In that regard, the PBC is capable
of taking the initiative in the area of peacebuilding
and helping to bring together all stakeholders in order
to develop a coherent approach. For example, it could
facilitate the integration of natural resource issues into
peacebuilding strategies, as well as in the context of
security and justice sector reforms.
Secondly, post-conflict populations should be
able to benefit from the peace dividends derived from
resources extracted from their own soil. Efforts aimed at
conflict prevention and effective resource management
should always include that perspective. Helping
industries to diversify can also serve this purpose. We
intend to explore that theme further in the meeting of
the Working Group on Lessons Learned scheduled for
10 July. As part of our discussion of domestic-resource
mobilization, we intend to shed light on the important
links between revenue raised and actual service
delivery on the ground and the impact that can have on
helping to avoid the recurrence of conflict.
Third, voluntary initiatives such as the Extractive
Industry Transparency Initiative (EITI) and the
Kimberly Process certification scheme are vital.
Compliance with them can help to enhance the

20

governance of resource-rich countries and the corporate
values of the private sector. In addition, the Working
Group meeting highlighted the role of civil society and
the Internet in improving transparency.
Japan has also contributed to improving
management of natural resources in its national
capacity. First, considering that improving the
effectiveness of sanctions regimes is critical to
restricting the flow of illicit resources, the Japanese
Permanent Mission has been co-hosting a series of
round tables aimed at enhancing understanding of such
regimes and strengthening non-proliferation efforts.
Secondly, Japan has been supporting the improvement
of people’s livelihoods and welfare in conflict-affected
mining areas, including through a project for peace
consolidation in North Kivu, in the eastern region
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, based on
the concept of human security. A fair and balanced
distribution of peace dividends in conflict-torn areas
can enhance national reconciliation efforts.
Thirdly, Japan has supported the expansion of
various international initiatives such as the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development’s Due
Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains of
Minerals from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas
and the EITI, through contributions to the latter’s
multi-donor trust fund. A wider acceptance of such
initiatives is needed in order for them to take genuine
effect.
Lastly, the stated aim of the outcome document of
the Fifth Tokyo International Conference on African
Development is to promote the sustainable management
of all Africa’s natural resources and conservation
of its biodiversity. Japan is committed to promoting
sustainable and resilient growth in Africa while helping
to maintain peace and stability.
In closing, I would like to emphasize Japan’s
strong interest in this topic. We will continue to
remain engaged bilaterally as well as through different
multilateral forums.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

13-36790
