A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/133
1 March 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 108
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/53/623)]
53/133. Measures to combat contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 52/109 of 12 December 1997, and taking note of Commission on Human Rights
resolution 1998/26 of 17 April 1998,1
Bearing in mind the outcome of the World Conference on Human Rights, held at Vienna from 14 to 25
June 1993, in particular the attention given in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action2 to the
elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and other forms of intolerance,
Aware that racism, as one of the exclusionist phenomena plaguing many societies, requires resolute
action and cooperation for its eradication,
Having examined the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance,3 including its
conclusions and recommendations,

1

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1998, Supplement No. 3 (E/1998/23), chap. II, sect.
A.
2

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

3

See A/53/269.

99-77059

/...

A/RES/53/133
Page 2

Deeply concerned that, despite continued efforts, racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance, as well as acts of violence, persist and even grow in magnitude, incessantly adopting new forms,
including tendencies to establish policies based on racial, religious, ethnic, cultural and national superiority or
exclusivity,
Deeply concerned also that those advocating racism and racial discrimination misuse new
communication technologies, including the Internet, to disseminate their repugnant views,
Noting that the use of such technologies can also contribute to combating racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance,
Conscious of the fundamental difference between, on the one hand, racism and racial discrimination as
governmental policy or resulting from official doctrines of racial superiority or exclusivity and, on the other
hand, other manifestations of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance that are
increasingly visible in segments of many societies and are perpetrated by individuals or groups, some of
which manifestations are directed against migrant workers and members of their families,
Reaffirming, in this regard, the responsibility of Governments for safeguarding and protecting the rights
of individuals residing in their territory against racist or xenophobic crimes perpetrated by individuals or
groups,
Noting that the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, in its general recommendation
XV (42) of 17 March 19934 on article 4 of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination,5 holds that the prohibition of the dissemination of ideas based on racial superiority or
racial hatred is compatible with the right to freedom of opinion and expression as outlined in article 19 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights6 and in article 5 of the Convention,
Noting also that the reports that the States parties submit under the Convention contain, inter alia,
information about the causes of, as well as measures to combat, contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance,
Conscious that impunity for crimes motivated by racist and xenophobic attitudes plays a role in
weakening the rule of law and tends to encourage the recurrence of such crimes,
Particularly alarmed at the rise of racist and xenophobic ideas in political circles, in the sphere of
public opinion and in society at large,
Noting that the Special Rapporteur will continue to pay attention to the rise of racist and xenophobic
ideas in political circles, in the sphere of public opinion and in society at large,
Emphasizing the importance of creating conditions that foster greater harmony and tolerance within
societies,

4

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/48/18), chap. VIII,
sect. B.
5

Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.

6

Resolution 217 A (III).
/...

A/RES/53/133
Page 3

1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on
Human Rights on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance,3
and expresses its support for the continuation of his work;
2. Requests the Special Rapporteur to continue his exchange of views with Member States, relevant
mechanisms, related United Nations organs and the specialized agencies in order to further their effectiveness
and mutual cooperation;
3. Commends the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination for its contribution to the
effective implementation of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination,5 which contributes to the fight against contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance;
4. Affirms that acts of racist violence against others stemming from racism do not constitute
expressions of opinion but rather offences;
5. Declares that racism and racial discrimination are among the most serious violations of human
rights in the contemporary world and must be combated by all available means;
6. Expresses its profound concern about and unequivocal condemnation of all forms of racism and
racial discrimination, in particular all racist violence, and related acts of random and indiscriminate violence;
7. Also expresses its profound concern about and unequivocal condemnation of all forms of racism
and racial discrimination, including propaganda, activities and organizations based on doctrines of superiority
of one race or group of persons that attempt to justify or promote racism and racial discrimination in any
form;
8. Expresses its profound concern about and condemnation of manifestations of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance against migrant workers and members of their families,
persons belonging to minorities and members of vulnerable groups in many societies;
9. Encourages all States to include in their educational curricula and social programmes at all levels,
as appropriate, knowledge of and tolerance and respect for foreign cultures, peoples and countries;
10. Recognizes that the increasing gravity of different manifestations of racism, racial discrimination
and xenophobia in various parts of the world requires a more integrated and effective approach on the part of
the relevant mechanisms of United Nations human rights machinery;
11. Encourages Governments to take appropriate measures to eradicate all forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
12. Calls upon all States to review and, where necessary, revise their immigration policies with a view
to eliminating all discriminatory policies and practices against migrants which are inconsistent with relevant
international human rights instruments;
13. Categorically deplores the misuse of print, audio-visual and electronic media and new
communication technologies, including the Internet, to incite violence motivated by racial hatred;
14. Recognizes that Governments should implement and enforce appropriate and effective legislation
to prevent acts of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;

A/RES/53/133
Page 4

15. Calls upon all Governments and intergovernmental organizations, with the assistance of nongovernmental organizations, as appropriate, to supply relevant information to the Special Rapporteur to
enable him to fulfil his mandate;
16. Commends non-governmental organizations for the action that they have taken against racism and
racial discrimination and for the continuous support and assistance that they have provided to the victims of
racism and racial discrimination;
17. Urges all Governments to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur with a view to enabling him
to fulfil his mandate, including the examination of incidents of contemporary forms of racism and racial
discrimination, inter alia, against blacks, Arabs and Muslims, xenophobia, Negrophobia, anti-Semitism and
related intolerance;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Special Rapporteur with all the necessary human and
financial assistance to carry out his mandate efficiently, effectively and expeditiously and to enable him to
submit an interim report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session.
85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998
