_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ,_'_._R_eso_lu_ti_·o_n_s_ad_o_p_ted_o_n_t~e_re_po_rt_s ()_f !~e Second Committee_·_ _ _ _ _ __

(b) To keep the question of assistance for the reconstruction and rehabilitation of Madagascar under constant
review;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General to apprise
the Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of 1986, of the progress made in the implementation
of the present resolution and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-first session.
120th plenary meeting
17 December /985

40/231. Long-term and effective solution of the problems caused by natural disasters in Bangladesh
The General Assembly,
Aware of the grave devastation and substantial loss of
life and property caused by the cyclone that struck large
areas of Bangladesh on 25 May 1985,
Having heard the statement made on 12 November
1985 by the representative of Bangladesh, 165 in which he
enumerated the enormous losses suffered by Bangladesh in
the cyclone as well as the adverse consequences of recurring natural disasters, particularly cyclones, tidal waves
and floods, for the economic development of that country,
Concerned about the serious damage to infrastructure
caused by such natural disasters, which has a far-reaching
impact on the implementation of the national development plan in that country,
Considering that Bangladesh is one of the least
developed countries, and that its situation has been worsened by the frequent recurrence of natural disasters having
devastating consequences,
Aware that the coastal areas of Bangladesh are particularly vulnerable to natural calamity resulting in
widespread human and material loss,
Recognizing the relief and rehabilitation efforts of the
Government of Bangladesh to alleviate the sufferings of
disaster victims, and its programmes for a more permanent solution,
Noting with appreciation the support and solidarity displayed by the countries of the South Asian region in assisting Bangladesh in the immediate aftermath of the cyclone
of 25 May 1985,
Recognizing that natural disasters constitute a development problem of great magnitude, the solution of which
calls for substantial resources, requiring national efforts to
be supplemented by international financial and technical
assistance,
Aware that considerable expertise and technical capabilities are available within the organizations of the United
Nations system and other multilateral organizations to
strengthen the preparedness and prevention capability of
disaster-prone countries through the promotion of a longterm and effective solution of the problems caused by natural disasters,
l. Expresses its appreciation to the international community for its interest in and support to Bangladesh in its
relief, rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts following
the natural disaster;
2. Also expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for the support provided by him, particularly through
the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordi165 Official Records of the General Assemblv, Fort1e1h Sessum. Second
•
Committee, 32nd meeting, paras. 14-16.

166 A/39/382.

185

nator and other operational agencies of the United Nations
system in Bangladesh;
3. Appeals to all Member States, specialized agencies,
and other organs and bodies of the United Nations system,
as well as international economic and financial institutions, to respond urgently and generously to assist Bangladesh in its plans and programmes to secure a long-term
and effective solution of the problems caused by natural
disasters;
4. Requests the relevant organs, organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system and other multilateral organizations to take appropriate measures to provide
assistance to Bangladesh for disaster preparedness and prevention programmes, taking into account the existing coordinated efforts of Member States;
5. Requests the Office of the United Nations Disaster
Relief Co-ordinator to assist, in co-operation with other
relevant agencies, the Government of Bangladesh in preparing a time-bound plan in this regard;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its forty-first session on the progress
made in the implementation of the present resolution.
120th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/232. Assistance to Mozambique
The General Assembly,
Recalling Security Council resolution 386 (1976) of 17
March 1976, in which the Council appealed to all States to
provide financial, technical and material assistance to
enable Mozambique to carry out its economic development programme, and requested the Secretary-General, in
collaboration with the appropriate organizations of the
United Nations system, to organize, with immediate
effect, such assistance,
Recalling further its resolution 39/ l 99 of 17 December
1984 and its earlier resolutions, in which it urged the international community to respond effectively and generously
with assistance to Mozambique,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 166 submitted pursuant to its resolution 38/208, to
which was annexed the report of the mission to
Mozambique,
Deeply concerned at the loss of life and the destruction of
essential infrastructures such as roads, railways, bridges,
petroleum facilities, electricity supply, schools and hospitals, as identified in the reports of the Secretary-General, 167
Further concerned about the present difficult economic
situation of Mozambique, as illustrated in the summary
report of the Secretary-General, submitted pursuant to its
resolution 39/199, 168
Noting with deep concern that Mozambique has continued to suffer from a prolonged drought causing heavy
losses in human lives, food production and livestock and
resulting in dislocation of its affected people,
Also noting with deep concern the extensive damage
caused by the cyclone "Demoina" at the end of January
1984,
Noting that Mozambique faces an emergency food situation of an exceptional scale and needs imports of 638,000
tonnes of cereals in 1985/1986 to meet its food requirements, according to government estimates,
167 A/38!201-E/1983/69 and

sect. XIII: A/19/382.
108 A 401•+41, sect. Xl

orr I and 2. annex I, sect. E: A1Jg ~II•
