27

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

---------------------------------- -------------the urgent problems {lf international trade and develop3. Urges Governments that have pledged. contribument, in particular those of developing countries,
tions of commodities or services for the penod 19661968 to make every possible effort to carry over ~nd
1. Takes note u.rith satisfaction of the report of the
make available for the period 1969-1970 any portion
Trade and Development Board for the period from
of such pledges that may remain unused at the end
25 September 1<J()(J to 9 September 1967 and, in p:irof 1968, and to indicate their readiness to effect such
ticular, of the agree11,<:nt re<lched at the fifth session
carry-over when announcing pledges at the 1968 pledgof the Board on the various aspects of the preparatory
ing conference;
work for the second session of the United Nations
4. Decides that the following pledging conference,
Cnnfrrence on Tracie and Development;
subject to the review provided for in General Assembly
2. Invites the Governments of the States members
resolution 2095 (XX), should be convened, at the
of the Conference to give serious consideration, in their
latest, early in 1970, at which time Governments would
preparations for the second session of the Conference,
be invited to pledge contributions for I 971 and 1972,
to
the Charter of .\lgiers, in particular to part two
with a view to reaching whatever target may be recomentitled "Programme oi action'', bearing in mind that
mended by the General Assembly _an1 the Confe,re_ncr
special measures are to be worked out for the less
of the Food and Agriculture Orga111zat10n of the lJmted
developed of the developing countries, as suggested in
Nations.
that Charter;
1623rd plenary meeting,
3. I )rau.•s the attention of the Conference to the state8 December 1967.
ment made bv the President of the Trade and Development Board at its fifth session, 20 which was com2296 (XXII). Second session of the United Nations
mended by the spokesmen for the groups of member
Conference on Trade and Development
States as a valuable guidt' to the work of the ConferThe General Assembly,
ence, in particular the following part:
Recalling its resolutions 2085 (XX) of 20 December
"( Jur discussions have above all enabled us to
1965 on the United Nations Conference on Trade and
clarify the objectives of the Conference. These have
Development, 2206 (XXI) of 17 December 1966 on
been ·defined with certain shades of meaning. I think,
the second session of the Conference and 2209 (XXI)
however, that a consensus has emerged on three basic
of 17 December 1966 on the implementation of the
objectives that can be stated thus:
recommendations made by the Conference at its first
" (a) To re-e\·aluate the economic situation and
session,
its irnplications for the implementation of the recomTaking note of Economic and Social Council resomendations of the first session of the United Nations
lutions 1266 (XLIII) of 3 August 1967 and 1282
Conference on Trade and Development;
(XLIII) of 1 November 1967,
" ( b) To achieve, through appropriate forms of
Having considered the annual report of the Trade
negotiation, specific results that ensure real progress
and Development Board for the period from 25 Sepin international co-operation for development;
tember 1966 to 9 September 1967, 18
" ( r) To explore and investigate matters requiring
Noting with great interest the Charter of Algiers
more th~;ough study before agreements can be
adopted by the ministerial mee~ing of t~e group of
envisaged ;
seventy-seven developing countries, submitted to the
4.
N.enews its appeal to the Governments of the
19
General Assembly at its twenty-second session, in
States
1m:mbers of the Conference to make the maxiparticular part two entitled "Programme of action",
mum efforts. both in their preparations for the second
regarded by the developing countries as the most urgent
session and during the deliberations of the Conference,
and immediate step to be taken by the Conference,
to ensure its success with a view to the fulfilment of its
Expressing serious concern at the lack of progress
basic objectives;
in solving, in the light of the Final Act adopted by
5. Decides to consider at its twenty-third session,
the Conference at its first session, substantive problems
as a matter of high priority, the results of the second
of international trade and development with which the
session of the Conference.
Conference was faced and at the adverse economic
1626th plenary meeting,
trends, which have contributed to the continuing unsatis12 December 1967.
factory economic situation of the developing countries.
Recognizing the urgent need for improvi_ng the eco-nomic situation of the developing countne~ through
2297 (XXII). International Trade Centre
the adoption of appropriate measures on the part of
The General Assembly,
both developed and developing c~untries,_ thus contributing to the elaboration of an mternat1onal. develConscious of the particular needs of the developing
opment strategy,
countries for international assistance in promoting their
Recognising further the need for the Conference at
exports,
its second session to concentrate on fundamental and
Considering that several recommendations of the
specific subjects with a view to achieving practical and
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
concrete results by means of negotiation aimed at securat its first session call for international action to help
ing the greatest measure of agreement in order to solve
the developing countries in marketing and promoting
their exports, in particular the recommendations con18 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-second
Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/6714).
•
19 /bid., Twenty-second Session, Annexes, agenda item 38,
document A/C.2/237.

20 !/>id.,

para. 31

Twenty-second Session, Supplement N~. 14 (K/67T4)
•

28

General AHembly-Twenty-second Session

tained in annexes A.II.4, A.II.5, A.III.3 and A.IIl.8 of
the Final Act, 21
Bearing in mind the need for a concentration of
efforts and for close collaboration between the international organizations concerned,
Having considered paragraphs 205 to 211 of the
report of the Trade and Development Board of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development22 and the report of the Secretary-General on a
proposed UNCTAD/GATT International Trade Centre,28 as well as the views expressed in the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination and in the Economic and Social Council,
Noting that the United Nations rules governing technical co-operation projects will apply in toto to those
activities of the Centre which are to be financed from
technical co-operation funds, 24
1. Approves the accord between the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade on the establishment of the International Trade Centre, effective from
1 January 1968, to be operated jointly by the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade on a continuing basis and in equal partnership;
2. Authorizes the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to come
to an agreement with the Director-General of the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade on the detailed
administrative arrangements for 1968;
3. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to report to the General Assembly at its twenty-third session, through the Trade and Development Board, on
the functioning of the International Trade Centre.
1626th plenary meeting,
12 December 1967.
2298 (XXII), Programme of technical aSBistance
in industrial development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2152 (XXI) of 17 November
1966, by which it decided that the United Nations. Industrial Development Organization would function as
an autonomous organization within the United Nations,
Recalling further resolution 2 (I) adopted by the
Industrial Development Board on 4 May 19672 G at its
first session,
1. Decides to endorse the recommendation of the
Industrial Development Board calling for the establishment of a separate section in part V of the budget of the
United Nations to provide for the programme of technical assistance in industrial development at an appropriate level commensurate with the expanding requirements of the developing countries ;
:n See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade altd Development, vol. I, Final Act and Report (United
Nations publication, Sales No.: 64.II.B.11), pp. 31, 36 and 41.
22 Official Records of lhe General Assembly, Twenty-second
Session, Suppll!fflent No. 14 (A/6714).
28 Ibid., Twenty-second Session, Annexes, agenda item 38,
document A/6879.
2, Ibid., para. 22.
211 Jbid., Twmt1-second Sesrion, Supplemtnl No. 15 (A/6715/
Rev.I), annex VIII.

2. Decides further that the provisions of paragraph
4 of its resolution 2029 (XX) of 22 November 1965
shall not apply to the programme of technical assistance
in industrial development provided for in paragraph
1 above;
3. Requests the Industrial Development Boa1'd to
consider and approve the projects and programmes in
the field of industrial development undertaken through
the utilization of the resources thus appropriated and
to provide general policy guidance and direction with
reference to the utilization of these resources.
1626th plenary meeting,

12 December 1967.
2299 (XXII). Report of the Industrial Development Board

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2152 (XXI) of 17 November
1966 establishing the United Nations Industrial Development Organization in order to promote industrial
development in accordance with Article 1, paragraph 3,
and Articles 55 and 56 of the Charter of the United
Nations and, by encouraging the mobilization of national and international resources, to assist in, promote
and accelerate the industrialization of the developing
countries,
Having considered the report of the Industrial Development Board on its first session, 28
Taking note of Industrial Development Board resolution 1 (I) of 4 May 1967, 27 by which the Board
decided that the United Nations Industrial Development Organization would carry out its functions essentially on the basis of meeting the urgent needs of
the developing countries in accelerating their industrial
development through promotional and operational activities supported by relevant research,
Recognizing the importance to all States Members
of the United Nations and members of the specialized
agencies, irrespective of their social and political systems
and their levels of development, of mutually beneficial
co-operation in all fields of economy, and particularly
in the field of industry,
Conscious of the fact that the acceleration of industrial development in the developing countries depends largely on the broadest international co-operation,
Convinced of the need for concerted efforts in order
to intensify international industrial co-operation in the
furtherance of the purpose and functions of the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization,
Recognizing that the dissemination and effective application of new technology, especially ·that suited to
the particular physical, social and economic conditions
of developing countri~s, can better be achieved through
broad international industrial co-operation,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Industrial Development Board on its first session;
2. Endorses Industrial Development Board resolution 1 (I) on the future programme of work and activities of the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization ;
3. Invites the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, in close co-operation with the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
26/bid., Supplement No. 15 (A/6715/Rev.1).
27 Ibid.,

annex VIII.
