S/PRST/2011/12

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 June 2011
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6544th meeting of the Security Council, held on 3 June 2011, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Reports of the
Secretary-General on the Sudan”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council expresses grave concern about the ongoing
violence and rapidly deteriorating situation in Abyei since the Council
addressed the issue in its May 22 Press Statement, in which the Council
condemned the attack by Southern forces against a United Nations Mission in
Sudan (UNMIS) convoy escorting Sudanese Armed Forces elements of Joint
Integrated Units on May 19 in Abyei, and also condemned the escalatory
military operations being undertaken by the Sudanese Armed Forces, which
have taken control of the area in and around Abyei town.
“The Security Council strongly condemns the Government of Sudan’s
taking and continued maintenance of military control over the Abyei Area and
the resulting displacement of tens of thousands of residents of Abyei. The
Council calls on the Sudanese Armed Forces to ensure an immediate halt to all
looting, burning, and illegal resettlement. The Council stresses that all those
responsible for violations of international law, including humanitarian and
human rights law, as well as those who ordered those acts, will be held
accountable. The Council expresses grave concern about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in the area and praises the efforts of the humanitarian
community to deliver emergency assistance, including food, health care,
shelter, and water, to those affected by the conflict, despite continued
insecurity in the region and despite severe limitations on access.
“The Security Council condemns the fact that two of the three main
supply routes from the North to the South have been blocked, and that the
Banton Bridge in Southern Abyei was destroyed by the Sudanese Armed
Forces, which impedes needed trade and makes the return of civilians to Abyei
more difficult. The Council calls for immediate measures to restore full access
through all routes.
“The Security Council calls on all parties to respect humanitarian
principles and allow all humanitarian personnel timely and unfettered access to
vulnerable individuals and communities affected by the fighting. The Council
further calls for conditions to be created that would allow the prompt and safe
return of those displaced from their homes.
11-36293 (E) 030611

*1136293*

S/PRST/2011/12

“The Security Council strongly condemns all attacks against UNMIS,
including those of May 24 and May 19, which are criminal acts against a UN
mission and its personnel and which threaten to undermine the commitment of
the parties to avoid a return to war.
“The Security Council recalls the commitments made by Vice President
Ali Osman Taha and First Vice President Salva Kiir that both parties shall
remove any unconditional claims to Abyei in their draft national constitutions
and urges the parties to avoid inflammatory rhetoric, especially from the
leadership, which undermines the mutual commitment of the parties to resolve
all remaining Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) and post-CPA issues
peacefully through negotiation. The Council again urges both parties to honor
these commitments.
“The Security Council expresses grave concern following the reports
about the unusual, sudden influx of thousands of Misseriya into Abyei town
and its environs that could force significant changes in the ethnic composition
of the area. The Council condemns all unilateral actions meant to create facts
on the ground that would prejudice the outcome of negotiations. The Council
expresses its determination that the future status of Abyei shall be resolved by
negotiations between the parties in a manner consistent with the CPA and not
by the unilateral actions of either party.
“The Security Council reiterates that the continued military operations of
the Government of Sudan and militia activities in Abyei constitute a serious
violation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the Kadugli agreements.
The Council demands that the Government of Sudan withdraw immediately
from the Abyei Area. The Council further demands the immediate withdrawal
of all military elements from Abyei. The Council demands that the
Government of Sudan and the Government of Southern Sudan cooperate fully
with the Special Representative of the Secretary General of UNMIS and the
African Union High Level Implementation Panel (AUHIP), led by President
Thabo Mbeki, to establish immediately a viable security arrangement for
Abyei, supported by UNMIS, in which all Sudanese Armed Forces, Sudan
People’s Liberation Army, and allied forces withdraw from the Abyei Area.
The Council notes that UNMIS remains ready to assist in the implementation
of all relevant agreements reached by the parties. The Council underscores that
failure by the Government of Sudan to comply with and to fulfill the CPA
jeopardizes the benefits that could flow from such compliance.
“Given the ongoing insecurity in Abyei, the Security Council believes
that the security and prosperity of both parties would benefit from a continuing
UN-mandated presence in Abyei after July 9, as well as from UN assistance
for the parties’ management of their border after the independence of South
Sudan. In this context, the Council urges the parties to reach agreement on a
continuing UN-mandated presence.
“The Security Council stresses that both parties will have much to gain if
they show restraint and choose the path of dialogue, including ongoing high
level negotiations between the parties and negotiations under the auspices of
the AUHIP and its chair President Thabo Mbeki, instead of resorting to
violence or provocations.

2

11-36293

S/PRST/2011/12

“The Security Council expresses deep concern about tensions in Blue
Nile and Southern Kordofan States. The Council calls for discussions about
post-CPA political and security arrangements for Blue Nile and Southern
Kordofan States to resume immediately and for all parties to refrain from
unilateral action pending the outcome of those negotiations. The Council
stresses that CPA structures intended to stabilize the security situation in Blue
Nile and Southern Kordofan States, specifically the deployment of Joint
Integrated Units, should continue until their expiration on July 9. The Council
calls on both parties to work to reduce tensions and promote calm in this
sensitive region. The Council further underscores the need for the parties to
respect the mandate of UNMIS.
“The Security Council underscores the responsibility of the parties to
protect civilians, and to respect UNMIS’s Chapter VII mandate for protection
of civilians under imminent threat of physical violence in Abyei. In this
regard, the Council condemns in the strongest terms ongoing threats and
intimidation against UNMIS elements. The Council expresses its strong
ongoing support for the UN Mission in Sudan, under the able leadership of
SRSG Haile Menkerios.
“The Security Council will remain seized of this matter and will meet to
review the implementation of this statement in the coming days.”

11-36293

3
