United Nations

S/PV.9283

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9283rd meeting
Thursday, 16 March 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Afonso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mozambique)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang
Mrs. Sanchez Izquierdo
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Bongo
Mr. Osei-Mensah
Mr. Ishikane
Mrs. Frazier
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Wood

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2023/151)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-07735 (E)
*2307735*

S/PV.9283

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2023/151)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Afghanistan to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
documents S/2023/196 and S/2023/197, which contain
the texts of two draft resolutions.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/151, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolutions before it.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I deliver this statement
on behalf of the United Arab Emirates and Japan, as
co-penholders on the issue of Afghanistan.
We thank Mozambique for convening this meeting
and all members of the Council for their constructive
engagement.
We have before us two draft resolutions on
Afghanistan today.
The first draft resolution (S/2023/196) is for a
renewal of the robust mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
allowing it to continue its work for another 12 months.
Afghanistan faces enormous challenges. The dire
humanitarian and economic situation is compounded
by the Taliban’s decisions that deny opportunities for
education, employment and freedom to women and
girls. The threat of terrorism also persists. All of these
have a devastating impact on the people of Afghanistan.
2/7

16/03/2023

The role of UNAMA is becoming more important
and indispensable at this time of crisis. All the
components in the mandate for UNAMA are crucial
in addressing the complex challenges faced by
Afghanistan, including promoting inclusive political
dialogue, monitoring and reporting on human rights,
facilitating humanitarian assistance and addressing
economic and social challenges, and countering
terrorism and narcotics. We sincerely hope that all
Council members will support the mandate renewal.
The second draft resolution calls for an
independent assessment on the international approach
in Afghanistan. This initiative would provide forwardlooking recommendations on how relevant political,
humanitarian and development actors could address the
existing challenges in an integrated and coherent way.
The adoption of the two draft resolutions would
send a strong signal to the international community
that the Security Council is united and unwavering in
its support for UNAMA, as well as in its commitment
to a secure, stable, prosperous and inclusive future for
Afghanistan and its people.
The President: I shall first put to the vote the
draft resolution contained in document S/2023/196,
submitted by Japan and the United Arab Emirates.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, China, Ecuador, France, Gabon,
Ghana, Japan, Malta, Mozambique, Russian
Federation, Switzerland, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2678 (2023).
I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/2023/197, also submitted by
Japan and the United Arab Emirates.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, China, Ecuador, France, Gabon,
Ghana, Japan, Malta, Mozambique, Russian
Federation, Switzerland, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
23-07735

16/03/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2679 (2023).
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I have
the honour of delivering this statement on behalf of
Japan and the United Arab Emirates in our capacity as
co-penholders on Afghanistan.
Today, the Security Council unanimously adopted
two resolutions concerning the situation in Afghanistan
(resolutions 2678 (2023) and 2679 (2023)). The first
extends the robust mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for another 12
months in an unequivocal show of support for the
Mission and the leadership of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Otunbayeva. At a time when the
Afghan people are facing a set of profoundly difficult
challenges, the Council has responded with a strong
and unified message: Afghanistan, and in particular its
women and its girls, will not be abandoned.
On the second resolution we voted on today, I
would like to express our deep appreciation for the
constructive and valuable engagement of Council
members on the proposal requesting an independent
assessment of the international approach to Afghanistan.
This proposal reflects our recognition that Afghanistan
faces an exceptional set of challenges, from the severe
deterioration of the rights of women and girls to the
rise in humanitarian needs and the escalating security
threat, as well as the unsustainable economic situation.
The scale of the crisis demands our departure from
business as usual.
In requesting this assessment, the Security
Council is not only demonstrating its deep concern
with the alarming trajectory in Afghanistan, but it is
choosing to do something about it. Without a persistent
and coordinated international effort, the status quo
that contributed to the worst women’s rights crisis
in the world is likely to continue. If we all share the
objective of a secure, stable, prosperous and inclusive
Afghanistan — and we believe that today we have
shown that we do — then we all must be working
towards the same objective in unity. For this, we must
prioritize integration and coherence between the efforts
of all the relevant actors within and outside the United
Nations System, including those from Member States
and regional and multilateral organizations.

S/PV.9283

We are grateful for the spirit of cooperation and
the sense of responsibility demonstrated throughout the
negotiation process, and we believe it will continue to
be necessary if we are to live up to our commitment to
Afghanistan and its people. The work truly begins now.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
Restrictions on the rights of Afghan women and girls
across political, economic and social spheres are
becoming increasingly acute. Women continue to be
erased from Afghan society, and girls are still barred
from secondary school. Today’s unanimous decision
to renew the robust mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) sends
a clear message: the international community will not
abandon women and girls.
The work of the Mission in protecting, promoting
and monitoring the rights of all Afghans, including
advocating inclusive and representative governance, is
more important than ever. And through it, we will work
to hold the Taliban to account on its commitments.
The Taliban’s recent decree barring Afghan women
from working for non-governmental organizations has
also affected humanitarian operations, and this at a time
when more than 28 million people — two thirds of the
population — are in humanitarian need. We commend
UNAMA’s ongoing work in leading and coordinating
efforts in challenging circumstances to get aid to those
who need it most.
In closing, I want to pay tribute to the tireless
work of UNAMA, United Nations agencies and
non-governmental-organization implementing partners
on the ground and to reaffirm the United Kingdom’s
solidarity with the Afghan people.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): Today,
the Security Council has acted to preserve the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
as a lifeline for the people of Afghanistan, and the
United States fully supports UNAMA and its mission.
We are therefore proud to support a one-year extension
of UNAMA’s mandate (resolution 2678 (2023)).
UNAMA is critical to working toward the peace and
stability that we all agree is so important for Afghanistan
and the world. With the extension of UNAMA’s
mandate, the United Nations will be able to continue its
important work to restore Afghans’ ability to exercise
their human rights, especially those of women and
girls and members of minority communities. It is more

23-077353/7

S/PV.9283

The situation in Afghanistan

important than ever that UNAMA emphasize this work.
UNAMA will also continue to address a widespread
humanitarian emergency and economic crisis, promote
peace and stability, and facilitate dialogue among all
relevant Afghan political actors and stakeholders.
The Council’s action today is timely, particularly
amid Women’s History Month, and, as we convene, the
sixty-seventh session of the Commission on the Status
of Women. The Council’s action directly supports the
empowerment of women and girls, their human rights
and fundamental freedoms and their full, equal and
meaningful participation at all levels and stages of
decision-making.
The United States commends the incredible work
done by UNAMA staff on the ground. UNAMA staff
operate in deteriorating security conditions throughout
the country. We remain deeply concerned about the
safety and security of UNAMA staff. We are committed
to ensuring that the United Nations is able to take steps
to protect them and their families.
Today and every day, the United States stands firmly
in support of the United Nations work to support peace,
security and stability in Afghanistan and to advance
respect for the human rights and fundamental freedoms
of all Afghans.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): Malta welcomes the adoption
of resolutions 2678 (2023) and 2679 (2023), and we
thank the co-penholders — Japan and the United Arab
Emirates — for their efforts and constructive engagement.
Malta fully supports the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan to promote
and protect the rights of Afghan women and girls,
monitor, report on and advocate for the protection of
civilians, and prevent and respond to all forms of sexual
and gender-based violence.
Turning to the independent assessment, we reaffirm
our position that the experts that will be appointed
to carry out that independent assessment must have
the necessary gender expertise and context-specific
knowledge and that women’s rights are central to the
terms of reference, as set out in resolution 2679 (2023).
In addition, we urge the establishment of a
mechanism to ensure continuous consultations with
Afghan women and civil society organizations in and
outside Afghanistan, including in the elaboration of the
terms of reference. We also encourage the engagement
of other relevant actors, including UN-Women, to help
4/7

16/03/2023

to facilitate and ensure that a gender perspective is fully
integrated into all aspects of the assessment.
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China welcomes the unanimous adoption by the Security
Council of resolutions 2678 (2023) and 2679 (2023),
on the extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and
the authorization of Secretary-General to conduct an
independent assessment, respectively.
At present, Afghanistan is at a critical stage of
peaceful reconstruction. Afghanistan faces many serious
challenges, including on the security, humanitarian and
economic fronts. The international community should
work together to help Afghanistan to achieve peace,
stability, development and prosperity. We support the
Afghan people in their efforts to overcome their current
difficulties and build a better future.
In that regard, we support the important role
of the United Nations and encourage the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to continue
her work. We also encourage UNAMA to continue to
implement the mandate, as set out in resolution 2626
(2022), in a comprehensive and balanced manner in
order to help Afghanistan to alleviate the humanitarian
situation, promote economic development and improve
its governance capacity.
The international community has common
expectations and realistic concerns regarding
Afghanistan. A genuine solution to the problem cannot
be achieved without maintaining patient and effective
engagement through mutual respect, rather than by
applying pressure or even sanctions.
The Security Council just decided to request
the Secretary-General to conduct an independent
assessment of the situation in Afghanistan on the basis
of full consultations with the Afghan authorities and
other relevant parties. Given the current situation, China
expects the assessment to focus on the most urgent
difficulties facing Afghanistan, prioritizing assisting
the country in alleviating the humanitarian crisis and
promoting its economic and social development, while
supporting engagement with the Afghan authorities. We
would appreciate the assessment making forward-looking
recommendations on promoting more coordinated and
comprehensive efforts by the international community.
It should also pay close attention to an assessment of
the humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan, which has been
exacerbated by unilateral sanctions.
23-07735

16/03/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

The successful adoption of the two resolutions could
not have been achieved without the key role played by
the United Arab Emirates, as co-penholder, throughout
the consultation process on the draft resolutions. Prior
to drafting the resolutions, the United Arab Emirates
communicated in advance with Council members and
the Secretariat to gain a wide range of views. After
listening to the views of all parties, the United Arab
Emirates circulated the draft resolutions promptly in
order to allow sufficient time for all parties to study and
discuss them.
During the consultations, we noted that the United
Arab Emirates communicated patiently with all
members, worked to build consensus, accommodated the
legitimate concerns of each member as far as possible
and put forward creative ideas to resolve differences. We
can say that the approach of the United Arab Emirates
set a good example for serving as a penholder. That
once again shows that a non-permanent member is
fully capable of playing the role of a penholder. There
are various disparities among Council members, but
there are always more solutions than obstacles. As long
as we persist in striving for consensus, we can find a
suitable settlement.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): Today the Russian Federation voted in
favour of resolutions 2678 (2023) and 2679 (2023), on
Afghanistan.
We are pleased that the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
as set out in resolution 2626 (2022), was extended by 12
months in a timely and technical way. We believe that
such parameters allow the Mission to fully carry out
its activities in Afghanistan during a critical period for
the country.
We commend the efforts of the United Arab Emirates
and Japan, as co-penholders on the Afghan dossier in
the Security Council, to find compromise solutions
while taking into account a wide range of positions.
We note the tireless work of United Nations personnel
in Afghanistan, in particular the Head of UNAMA,
Ms. Roza Otunbayeva, who are fulfilling their tasks
under difficult conditions.
We are convinced that the Security Council’s
unanimous support for the United Nations Mission will
demonstrate to the people of Afghanistan that the entire
international community is committed to establishing
long-awaited peace and stability in that long-suffering
country. Such a message is now more relevant than ever.

S/PV.9283

At the same time, it is essential to maintain
pragmatic engagement between UNAMA and the de
facto authorities so as to discuss all core issues, in
accordance with the new mandate. It is important not to
allow Afghanistan to be isolated. Everyone will benefit
from patient and constructive dialogue.
We believe that the Mission will continue to fully
discharge its duties, including the coordination of
international humanitarian assistance to the country,
in particular by providing assistance to the most
vulnerable groups of the population, including women,
children, the elderly and the disabled. Any attempt to
politicize the humanitarian aspect under any pretext is
unethical and unacceptable.
We are convinced that stabilizing Afghanistan and
resolving the complex tasks facing the country cannot
be achieved without the international community’s
comprehensive and unified approach to a settlement
in the country. We have repeatedly emphasized that
an important prerequisite for the success of our joint
activities should be taking decisions that are based
on careful analysis and take the current realities into
account. We believe that collective efforts on that path
will contribute to stability in the region and beyond.
In that regard, we trust that an independent
assessment of the situation in Afghanistan will be
conducted, including on the basis of consultations with
the de facto authorities. We expect the report to be
balanced and to reflect the real challenges regarding,
inter alia, the freezing of Afghan assets, the fostering
of development and economic reconstruction in the
country, as well as a review of the negative consequences
of the unilateral sanctions.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would first like to join other speakers in thanking the
co-penholders for their valuable work and all Council
members for their constructive engagement, which
led to the adoption of resolutions 2678 (2023) and
2679 (2023).
However, let us be clear: if the situation has become
very serious in Afghanistan today, it is clearly because
the actions of the Taliban obstruct the work of the
international community. In that regard, Switzerland
welcomes the unanimous decision of the Security
Council to extend the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) by 12
months, which sends an important message conveying
the international community’s continued support for

23-077355/7

S/PV.9283

The situation in Afghanistan

the United Nations presence in Afghanistan and its
confidence in the work of the Mission. We encourage
UNAMA to pursue its valuable work and collaborate
with all relevant stakeholders in the full implementation
of its mandate, whether at the political, humanitarian or
human rights levels.
In that regard, Switzerland places particular
emphasis on the situation of women and girls, who
are currently excluded from public life owing to the
repressive measures of the Taliban. I would also like to
echo my colleague from the United Arab Emirates in
saying that our work has only just begun and we must
work even harder.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): France welcomes the unanimous adoption
of resolutions 2678 (2023) and 2679 (2023)), which
sends an unambiguous signal of the Security Council’s
support for the mandate and work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I would
like to thank the United Arab Emirates and Japan
for having succeeded in preserving the unity of the
Council on such a crucial issue. We will continue to
support UNAMA, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan, all the relevant
United Nations agencies and their partners, especially
their humanitarian partners, who are courageously
doing outstanding and vital work on the ground for the
benefit of the Afghan population.
France remains particularly concerned about the
massive human rights violations in Afghanistan, in
particular the continued acute deterioration of the
situation of women and girls owing to the repressive
measures taken by the Taliban. That is why we will
continue to ensure that UNAMA is able to implement
a robust mandate, especially with regard to monitoring
human rights violations, and that the Mission contributes
to making the voices of Afghan women heard. France
will continue to work with its partners, including
those in the region and Afghanistan’s neighbours,
to ensure that the demands of the international
community pursuant to resolution 2593 (2021) are
heard and that the Taliban uphold their commitments,
which to date remain unfulfilled. France welcomes
the fact that the independent assessment referred to
in resolution 2679 (2023) is specifically intended to
make recommendations on addressing violations by the
Taliban of human rights, in particular the human rights
of women and girls.
6/7

16/03/2023

Mrs. Sanchez Izquierdo (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): Ecuador is grateful for the efforts of the
co-penholders, the United Arab Emirates and Japan, in
particular their efforts to incorporate the perspectives
of all delegations and to propose a balanced text that
responds to the situation with regard to the serious
human rights violations perpetrated by the authorities
of the Taliban regime.
My delegation voted in favour of resolution 2678
(2023) on the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
for 12 months, because we believe in the strength
and comprehensiveness of the mandate and that it
brings together the elements that can support the way
forward towards negotiations and an inclusive political
transition that is respectful of international law. We
also acknowledge the work of UNAMA to that end.
Similarly, as signatories of the statement of shared
commitments, we are grateful to the co-penholders for
the initiative to conduct and provide an independent
assessment that will enable the Security Council
to monitor the current situation and consider the
recommendations aimed at reversing the violations
that have been institutionalized by the policy of
discrimination against Afghan women and girls, and at
promoting dialogue in order to implement the principles
of the women and peace and security agenda, in
accordance with resolution 1325 (2000). The adoption
of resolutions 2678 (2023) and 2679 (2023) reflects the
concern of the members of the Security Council about
the situation faced by the Afghan population and sends
a message of unity.
Ecuador reiterates its commitment to peace
in Afghanistan. We will remain attentive to the
recommendations provided by the independent
assessment and will support all efforts required for
their effective and timely implementation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Faiq (Afghanistan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting and for leading the Security
Council’s efforts to ensure global peace and security at
this perilous time.
I would like to express our profound appreciation
to the members of the Security Council for coming
together in consensus and unanimously renewing the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission
23-07735

16/03/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We especially thank the
co-penholders, Japan and the United Arab Emirates, for
their outstanding efforts in facilitating and finalizing
resolutions 2678 (2023) and 2679 (2023).
This action comes at a critical time, as the people of
Afghanistan face a dire social, political, economic and
humanitarian crisis, owing to the Taliban’s failure to
address the current crisis, break the impasse and engage
constructively to respond to the national and international
calls for establishing a fair, responsible and inclusive
system of governance, policies that respect human
rights and the rightful inclusion of women in all aspects
of society, and counter-terrorism efforts — all of which
they promised the world and the people of Afghanistan.
We are pleased that resolutions 2678 (2023) and 2679
(2023) recognize that fact and that the extremely grave
situation that our people now face requires renewed
and more determined efforts by the United Nations,
the Council and the broader international community
to improve the situation and help set our country on
the path towards stability. We hope that in the coming
months, we will see sustained and parallel progress on
all aspects of the United Nations mandate, especially
with regard to establishing a political dialogue that
leads to the start of a meaningful political process for
inclusive and legitimate governance; addressing the
grave human rights situation, in particular with respect
to the rights of women and girls; and meeting the
humanitarian needs of our people.
Let me express our appreciation to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan
and the UNAMA team for their indefatigable and
continued efforts. Despite immense challenges and
adverse circumstances, they have stayed and have
delivered essential services to the people in need.

S/PV.9283

Today the Security Council also took an important
step in supporting a comprehensive assessment
of the overall situation in Afghanistan, including
recommendations for the adoption of an integrated and
coherent approach by the international community,
to be developed in consultation with the people
of Afghanistan, other relevant political actors and
representatives of the region and the international
community. We are grateful to the President of the
Council and to the co-penholders, in particular the
United Arab Emirates, for submitting resolution 2679
(2023) and for their vital support. It is an important step,
which reflects a new degree of unity and consensus
within the Security Council on ensuring a more effective
response by the United Nations in order to address the
many challenges on the ground that our people face.
Looking forward, the best and most effective way to
stabilize the situation in Afghanistan is by ensuring the
establishment of a legitimate and inclusive system of
governance that is able to respond to and deliver on the
needs of our people. We therefore hope that the United
Nations focus on political dialogue for a meaningful
political process will remain a priority, together with
the other important aspects of UNAMA’s mandate.
In conclusion, I thank all the members who spoke
today and expressed their support for the people of
Afghanistan, in particular its women and girls. We
once again thank all Council members for unanimously
renewing the UNAMA mandate, but more importantly
for demonstrating their renewed support to helping to
improve the plight of our people and achieve a genuine
peace in a stable and united Afghanistan.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

23-077357/7
