S/PV.8046

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8046th meeting

Wednesday, 13 September 2017, 10.05 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alemu. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ethiopia)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Aboulatta
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skau
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Allen
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia (S/2017/751)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-28489 (E)
*1728489*

S/PV.8046

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
(S/2017/751)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Somalia to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Michael
Keating, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Somalia and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia, and Mr. Francisco
Caetano Jose Madeira, Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in
Somalia.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Keating
and Mr. Madeira, who are joining this meeting via
video-teleconference from Mogadishu.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/751, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on Somalia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Keating.
Mr. Keating: The long-term and immediate
challenges facing Somalia remain formidable, be they
humanitarian, economic, security or political. The unity
of the Council and the solidarity of the international
community have been essential to the gradual if fragile
progress that is being made.
At my last briefing in March (see S/PV.7905), the
humanitarian crisis was deteriorating fast. Thanks to the
swift and generous contribution of more than $1 billion
for humanitarian action since the beginning of the year,
agencies have been able to mount a famine-prevention
response reaching over 3 million people per month. The
worst of the famine threat has been averted. However,
the damage to lives and livelihoods, particularly of
women, children and marginalized groups, has been
2/10

13/09/2017

extensive. Approximately 900,000 people have been
newly displaced over the past five months, and the
risk of famine remains. An imperative for Somalis is
to escape the vicious cycle of recurring weather-related
shocks. Humanitarian and development partners
are coming together to build institutional capacity,
strengthen resilience and boost productivity in line
with the Secretary-General’s new way of working.
The Federal Government, supported by the United
Nations and the World Bank, is developing plans for
a comprehensive post-disaster needs assessment of the
impact of the drought and a recovery and resilience
framework to reduce the risk of famine.
The peaceful transition of power earlier this year,
following the electoral process, generated a sense
of hope and a moment of opportunity. The Federal
Government remains determined to achieve core
objectives, including improving security, notably in
Mogadishu, creating jobs and adopting key legislation
that will make a difference, but its honeymoon period is
over. Somalia’s Government is not the first to experience
that phenomenon. Immediate political challenges
are complicated by ill-defined relationships between
the Federal Government and Federal member states,
between the executive and the legislative branches of
Government, between the newly formed Upper House
of the Federal Parliament and the House of the People.
Other challenges relate to politicians and power brokers
using opportunities to advance their own clan interests
or personal ambitions and using tools such as threats
of impeachment and motions of no confidence. The
key issue is whether the Federal Government will be
successful in managing those constituencies and in
preventing them from threatening progress on core
objectives on the stability of the State.
The strong working relationship between the
President and the Prime Minister and the determination
of the Federal Government to deliver tangible
economic and security benefits for the population
are very encouraging. The immediate issues that are
currently generating strains in relations between
State institutions include the controversy over the
transfer to Ethiopia of a well-known Ogaden National
Liberation Front figure and the reverberations of the
Government’s determination to maintain a neutral
posture in the dispute among important Gulf partners.
They also include simmering disputes around the
country, including in HirShabelle and the impeachment
of the state President there, the political standoff in
17-28489

13/09/2017

The situation in Somalia

Galmudug, where the state President has been unable
to advance power-sharing and reconciliation talks with
Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a, and tensions in the southern
part of HirShabelle.
If the are unresolved, those could undermine
the gains made so far in the state-formation process.
The United Nations is working closely with the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and other partners to play a constructive role, including
to support the HirShabelle elections. A resolution is
needed to key issues that will define the Federal State,
including the division of powers, and agreements on
revenue- and resource-sharing between Federal and
state Governments. They also include the structure of
the judiciary, the status of the Banadir region, in which
the national capital is located, and the formalization of
the status of civil Federal member states.
Advancing the review of the provisional Federal
Constitution is therefore a priority. Useful consultations
are taking place to ensure an inclusive review process,
although the respective roles and responsibilities of core
institutions still need to be clarified. The next step is a
national consultative conference, scheduled in October,
that should agree on a two-year master plan. Significant
progress has been made on preparing and adopting
priority laws, such as the telecommunications bill
and the human rights commission act. Completing the
constitutional review is also critical for the successful
holding of the 2020-2021 elections. The legislative
framework and agreement on the electoral model are
urgently needed. Those will help dispel scepticism as
to whether Somalia can move away from the so-called
4.5 model to universal suffrage.
The crisis in relations between Gulf countries has
had an impact on Somalia. Anticipated investments
and revenue streams have not been forthcoming, and
the Federal Government’s declaration of neutrality,
while receiving widespread support, has not gone
down well with certain constituencies. The Council’s
continued support is needed to protect Somalia from
the potentially destabilizing effects of geopolitical
rivalries. Current political turbulence in Somalia must
be taken seriously, but should not obscure the steady, if
uneven, progress that the country is making.
Somalia has great economic potential, whether
in agro-business, livestock, fisheries, trade or
renewable and other energy sources, as well as highly
entrepreneurial men and women, both in the country

S/PV. 8046

and among the diaspora. Unleashing that potential
depends upon the success of reaching a political
settlement between the Government and the private
sector, and upon Government policies and capacities
to implement them. A critical requirement will be
raising revenues, whether from domestic sources or
by accessing concessional finance. Advancing arrears
clearance and reaching a decision point on the Heavily
Indebted Poor Countries Initiative are essential and
will require both the strengthening of public financial
management and international action. The support of
the Council could make a decisive difference.
In the meantime, Somalia remains heavily
dependent upon aid. Both traditional and non-traditional
donors, including many serving on the Council, have
provided generous assistance. The Prime Minister is
appealing for immediate budget support to allow the
Government to deliver on jobs and security and to
strengthen relations with Federal member states by
means of fiscal transfers. The United Nations and the
World Bank have collaborated closely to devise a surge
support package for public works. I urge partners to
follow the European Union, Norway and Sweden’s lead
to use a recurrent cost and reform financing facility to
that end.
Security has improved in Mogadishu as a result of
the Federal Government’s Mogadishu stabilization plan.
That deserves more support. However, Al-Shabaab
remains a potent threat and the overall security situation
in the country remains volatile. Addressing insecurity
and the continuing threat from Al-Shabaab require
vigorous implementation of the national security
architecture agreement and of the comprehensive
approach to security. International partners have now
been identified and have begun work on each of the
four strands of the comprehensive approach to security,
namely, enabling the effective operations of the
African Union (AU) Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
and implementing the transition from AMISOM;
strengthening Somalia’s security sector, including
policing and maritime areas; stabilization; and, lastly,
preventing and countering violent extremism. Securing
predictable funding for AMISOM is a top priority. The
Council members’ own deliberations in Addis Ababa
last week illuminated the key issues. The SecretaryGeneral’s report on funding for AMISOM, due in
November, will provide an opportunity to explore and
propose funding options, while taking into account the
limitations of voluntary contributions.

17-284893/10

S/PV.8046

The situation in Somalia

That should be anchored in a common narrative on
Somalia’s security needs in the next five years — one
shared by the Federal Government, the African Union,
the United Nations and the main investors in Somalia’s
security, including the European Union (EU) and other
major bilateral partners. That needs to build upon
the recommendations of the joint AU-United Nations
review of AMISOM, the outcome of the operational
readiness assessment of the Somali National Army
currently under way, and progress in implementing the
national security architecture agreement. A successful
transition of responsibility for security from AMISOM
to Somali security institutions requires adequate and
coherent support for both AMISOM and Somalia’s
security forces, as well as clarity about the role of the
United Nations Support Office in Somalia, as transition
gets under way. Sustained transition requires that key
political and operational conditions be met. AMISOM
continues to play an indispensable role in protecting
Somalia’s progress and people. Somali security forces
are not yet ready to shoulder full responsibilities.
Funding for AMISOM and the Somali security forces
must complement one another.
Conflict resolution, local reconciliation and a
reduction in violence are essential to progress and to
reducing both human and financial costs. The United
Nations is working with IGAD, the African Union, the
EU and other partners to strengthen national conflictresolution capacities, as well as to facilitate agreements
in specific locations. An example of that has been in
Galkayo, where real progress is being made.
In conclusion, Somalia faces immediate crises, as
well as basic structural problems, some of which are
worrisome in terms of their ability to derail political
progress. Providing practical support and political
encouragement to the Somali leadership, both at the
Federal and state level, will continue to be essential.
Allow me to end by thanking Council members for
their united and steady commitment to Somalia and
continued support to the United Nations, me and
my team.
The President: I thank Mr. Keating for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Madeira.
Mr. Madeira: I thank you, Mr. President, for
inviting me to this briefing on the ongoing situation in
Somalia. I bring greetings to the Security Council from
the African Union (AU) Chairperson, His Excellency
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat.
4/10

13/09/2017

Since 17 May, when I last addressed the Council
(see S/PV.7942), there have been significant diplomatic,
political and security developments that have had a
significant and varying impact on Somalia. Thanks to
the combined efforts and proactive mobilization of the
Federal Government of Somalia, innovative fieldwork
by humanitarian actors and the generous contributions
of international partners, this year Somalia has been
able to avert what could have been a repeat of the 2011
catastrophic drought.
The African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
has worked closely with its partners, collaborating
under the umbrella of the Drought Operations
Coordination Centre, to identify challenges and provide
practical assistance for an effective humanitarian
response through information sharing, AMISOMuniformed personal escorts and protection for United
Nations humanitarian assessment missions in Adado,
the provision of security for World Food Programme
airdrops in Hudur and civic engagements in areas
under AMISOM deployments, food and non-food
item distribution to internationally displaced persons’
camps in Mogadishu and the coordinated airlift of 18
metric tons of nutritional food supplies to Bulo Burte.
However, the situation continues to require close
monitoring and adaptation, as problems still loom over
many places in Somalia. Any neglect might result in
a recurrence of a drought, with gloomy consequences.
The AU-United Nations joint review took place
in May. Each report that was adopted by the African
Union Peace and Security Council on 12 July presented
recommendations for key political and security
resourcing for the work of AMISOM so that the Mission
can complete its transition and start its drawdown.
Since June, Somalia has been affected by the Gulf
crisis between a Saudi Arabia-led coalition and Qatar. I
will not go into further detail, but I will say that we are
happy the anticipated disruptions of governance and
the economy, as a result of the crisis, have so far been
contained. We are not sure what is in store for tomorrow.
In order to deliver on its political agenda,
the Federal Government of Somalia aims to draft
19 pieces of legislation that will be forwarded to the
Federal Parliament for debate and approval as part of
its current session. That process may eventually face
challenges related to time constraints. After concluding
stakeholder consultations in preparation for a
nationwide constitutional review process, the Minister
17-28489

13/09/2017

The situation in Somalia

S/PV. 8046

for Constitutional Affairs is laying the foundations for
political and constitutional reforms in the country, to
take place ahead of the one-person, one-vote elections
in 2020.

contributed to a peaceful holy month of Ramadan. The
public appreciated the steps taken by the Government,
which was supported by AMISOM and partners.
Mogadishu is much safer today than it was yesterday.

A joint constitutional review parliamentary
committee has been established. AMISOM supports
the country’s political road map on a transfer of
power by 2021, which resonates well with the need
to meet requisite political conditions for an effective
implementation of the AMISOM exit strategy.

Meanwhile, Al-Shabaab is mobilizing efforts
to regain initiative through its Amniyat cell network
in Mogadishu. They must be effectively dissuaded
from continuing that endeavour — through a robust
intelligence-collection capability and action. Elsewhere
there are varying levels of insecurity, especially in the
country’s hotspots of Galmudug state and the Hiraan
and HirShabelle regions. On the other hand, the security
situation in Gaalkacyo is promising, following the
establishment of a 100-troop-strong stabilization and
law enforcement joint police force and after progress
in the political dialogue between the Galmudug and
Puntland states’ Presidents of May 2017, and AMISOM
and UNSOM police collaborative training efforts. The
operations in Juba corridor have witnessed the Somali
National Army and the Jubaland security forces taking
the lead, supported by AMISOM troops and partners to
implement their commitments to degrading Al-Shabaab
before AMISOM starts its drawdown.

In a related development, Somalia’s National
Independent Electoral Commission completed its
drafting of a strategic plan for the 2020-2021 election.
However, budgeting difficulties are already emerging
as a major challenge in the implementation of its priority
activities. The formation and consolidation of regional
institutional frameworks and the enactment of requisite
legislation at the regional and state levels will be key
in addressing issues related to regional and political
instability — what we are witnessing in HirShabelle,
the south-west and many other places — and in finding
a lasting solution to the protracted dialogue and ending
dialogue between the state Government and Ahlu Sunna
Wal Jama’a. A lasting solution to those challenges
would go a long way in facilitating the implementation
of the AMISOM mandate and fulfilling its conditionsbased exit strategy.
AMISOM continues to contribute to enhancing
security in Somalia, despite violent asymmetrical
Al-Shabaab activities. The prime targets of Al-Shabaab’s
indiscriminate attacks remain the Federal Government,
AMISOM and the Somalia national security forces
forward-operating bases in all sectors.
Improvised explosive devices (IED) remain
Al-Shabaab’s weapon of choice. In the period under
consideration, there were a total of 139 improvised
explosive device incidents in AMISOM areas of
operation alone. Thirty-two IED explosions were
averted as a result of action taken by AMISOM teams
to identify and neutralize those devices. Despite
the increase in attacks, AMISOM is responding
appropriately to IED threats, as the identification rate
of such explosive devices has increased considerably.
Nevertheless, Somali civilians remain the main
casualties of treacherous Al-Shabaab IED attacks.
From May to June, the Government implemented
the Mogadishu stabilization force, which was built using
joint Somali security forces, which, to a great extent,

In response to the presidential amnesty decision
with regard to Al-Shabaab militant elements who
renounce violence and extremist ideologies, AMISOM
and the Federal Government of Somalia saw a steady
increase in the number of defectors from Al-Shabaab
from May to August 2017. In that period, a total of 47
Al-Shabaab militants surrendered to various Somali
regional authorities. More Al-Shabaab elements have
expressed their intention to defect and hand themselves
over to the Government. There is therefore a need to
help create conducive conditions for that process to
continue and thrive. The fact that a prominent former
leader of Al-Shabaab, Mr. Mukhtar Robow, handed
himself over to the Federal Government on 13 August
is very telling.
In order to address the recruitment of children into
Al-Shabaab, AMISOM, along with other international
partners, participated in the development of the 20172018 work plan of the child protection unit at the
Minister of Defence. with a focus on children associated
with armed conflict.
AMISOM, working closely with the Federal
Government of Somalia and international partners,
is pressing ahead with the implementation of the
commitments made at the 11 May London Conference

17-284895/10

S/PV.8046

The situation in Somalia

on the national security architecture and the new
security pact, the recommendations of the AU-United
Nations joint review, the decision of the AU Peace and
Security Council of 12 July communiqué on AMISOM,
and resolution 2372 (2017) on the mandate of AMISOM
until elections are held.
On 2 July, on the margins of the AU Summit,
the a ministerial meetiong of AMISOM troop- and
police-contributing countries was held in Addis
Ababa to discuss the AU-United Nations joint review
recommendations, especially as they relate to the
AMISOM drawdown and further related tasks. Given the
unpredictable and unsustainable resource mobilization
for AMISOM after June 2018, and considering the
challenges at hand, the meeting agreed to commission
an AU technical expert team to come up with options
for the AU in the light of the recommendations by
the AU-United Nations joint review of AMISOM’s
exit strategy.
In order to identify the most effective ways of
implementing the recommendations of the AU-United
Nations joint review on AMISOM, a joint African
Union Mission in Somalia and the Federal Government
of Somalia conference on the transitioning of security
responsibilities from AMISOM to the Somali security
forces was held from 24 to 28 July in Mogadishu.
That conference of security experts from both sides
provided a platform where AMISOM and the Somali
Federal Government forces deliberated on the
transitioning imperatives. The conference discussed
the handover and takeover of AMISOM’s and Somali
security forces’ forward-operating bases in order to
release 1,000 AMISOM troops for expanded military
operations before the commencement of the drawdown
in December.
The Federal Government of Somalia outlined its
priorities, including the need to conduct an operational
readiness assessment of Somali national security forces
and forward-operating bases as a first step during
the transition, as well as no the need to empower the
Somali national security forces through training,
mentoring, infrastructure, equipment, sustainment
and mobility — if those forces are to gradually and
effectively fully take over security responsibilities of
the country from AMISOM.
Prime Minister Hassan Ali Kheyre launched the
Federal Government of Somalia’s operational readiness
assessment conference on 15 August in Mogadishu.
6/10

13/09/2017

The Federal Government of Somalia-led exercise,
with the active participation of AMISOM, the United
Nations, international partners and the Federal member
states, is aligned with resolution 2372 (2107) and the
aims and objectives of the comprehensive approach to
security. Once it is completed, it is expected to yield
a very credible picture of the current shape, size,
capacities and state of health of the Somali national
security forces — including their number — and to
provide key steps to be undertaken for a responsible
conditions-based transition of security responsibilities
from AMISOM to the Somali security forces. That
exercise is essential if we really want to undertake a
transition that can preserve the gains so far with our
joint material, financial and human effort.
AMISOM police has provided support to the
ongoing verification of Somali police force strength.
The exercises are still inconclusive. As a follow-up
to the Federal Government/AMISOM conference
on transitioning of security responsibilities from
AMISOM to the Federal Government of Somalia
in August, AMISOM and Somali national security
forces commanders held a planning session for joint
coordinated operations for the rest of 2017 and beyond
to disrupt, degrade and contain Al-Shabaab and other
armed groups, protect the population centres, open and
secure main supply routes and undertake a realistic
agreement on the handover of some forward-operating
bases in Somalia.
As the Security Council is aware, the University
of Mogadishu has already been handed over to the
Somalis. The Somalis are expected to take over the
Academy and four other operating bases. But, given the
resources, we will not hand over those positions unless
and until the Somalis themselves tell us that they are
ready to take them. Meanwhile, in Addis Ababa, a few
days ago, on 5 September, the Military Operations
Coordination Committee for the African Union
Mission in Somalia held its twenty-fourth meeting,
at which it agreed on a way forward to implementing
resolution 2372 (2017) in terms of an initial reduction,
by 1,000 troops, of AMISOM’s military personnel by
December, as well as on AMISOM’s new tasks. That
exercise has already begun. We have identified the
numbers of soldiers that will have to be cut from each
contingent. The Committee also agreed to establish a
team of experts to work on options, including a detailed
plan for AMISOM’s exit from Somalia in case the plan
agreed on both in London and through the Joint Review
17-28489

13/09/2017

The situation in Somalia

committee is not provided with the resources it needs
for effective implementation.
The Security Council has stressed the importance
of enhancing the predictability, sustainability and
flexibility of AMISOM’s financing. On 22 August,
the Head of the United Nations Support Office in
Somalia briefed potential donors on the status of the
United Nations Trust Fund for AMISOM and the
Somali National Army ahead of a donor conference
scheduled for September. Of the $94.6 million raised
for AMISOM through the Trust Fund, only $388,593 is
available as uncommitted funds. Of the $52.2 million
raised for the Somali National Army also through the
Trust Fund, a balance of $3.8 million is available for the
10,600 troops who are supposed to operating alongside
AMISOM.
Under the structures agreed on in London and
followed by the United Nations-AU Joint Review, the
role of strand 1 — of which AMISOM, with the Federal
Government of Somalia, is co-leader — is to identify,
organize, plan and execute activities aimed at mobilizing
a concrete, commensurate, predictable and sustainable
flow of material, technical and financial resources that
will enable AMISOM, in close cooperation, coordination
and complementarity with the Somali national security
forces and partners, to undertake effective operations
to further disrupt and destroy Al-Shabaab and other
armed groups; protect population centres and enable
reconciliation processes; open and secure main supply
routes; support the capacity-building of the Somali
national security forces, at various levels; facilitate
the delivery of humanitarian assistance; support the
speedy restoration and extension of State authority;
and implement a gradual, conditions-based transition
of security responsibilities from AMISOM to Somali
institutions in a manner that ensures that the gains
made against Al-Shabaab so far are not reversed.
In line with the comprehensive-approach security
provisions and the national security architecture, that
will entail a gradual strategic shift in AMISOM’s
operating methods from a leading to a supporting
role, through our transitional planning, so that the
Somalis can increasingly assume responsibility and
play a greater leadership role in the building, delivery
and sustainment of an environment of peace, security
and enhanced stability in Somalia. It will also entail
developing options and modalities through which
predictable and sustainable funding for AMISOM can
be effectively assured.

S/PV. 8046

In conclusion, I have to insist that such predictable
funding is central to AMISOM’s ability to remain in
Somalia and to the ability of both AMISOM and the
AU to honour their obligations under resolution 2372
(2017). It is essential for us to be able to undertake the
operations expected of us with responsibility, honour
and in full respect for human life. The alternative is
very gloomy. We may be forced to reconsider all our
commitments if that funding is not available.
The President: I thank Mr. Madeira for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay would like to thank Mr. Michael Keating,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia, and Mr. Francisco Caetano Jose
Madeira, Special Representative of the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission for Somalia and Head
of the African Union Mission in Somalia, for their
detailed briefings.
Uruguay welcomes the renewed momentum
generated by the London Conference on Somalia on
11 May, which will be key to various issues in the political
process. We particularly appreciate the significant
progress that has been made in the constitutional
review process, with the presentation by the Federal
Ministry of Constitutional Affairs to the international
community of a preliminary comprehensive master plan
aimed at completing the review within two years. Also
at the London Conference, the Federal Government of
Somalia committed to holding universal elections in
2021 and to establishing an electoral legal framework
by the end of 2018.
In relation to those commitments, Uruguay
commends the National Independent Electoral
Commission for finalizing its five-year strategic plan
for the period 2017 to 2021, which includes details of
the electoral operations to be undertaken as well as a
timeline for a constitutional referendum and universal
elections. We consider it essential to ensure that Somalia
moves towards positive change through reconciliation,
reaffirming support to its sovereignty, territorial
integrity, political independence and unity, so that it
can become democratic, stable and prosperous.
Despite some improvements that have resulted from
security measures taken by the Federal Government

17-284897/10

S/PV.8046

The situation in Somalia

of Somalia, and the continued efforts of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia and the African
Union Mission in Somalia, the security situation in
Mogadishu remains volatile. Uruguay condemns the
continuing problems posed by the terrorist group
Al-Shabaab, which is the main threat to peace and
security in Somalia and which remains latent in the
central and southern regions of the country despite
the steps that have taken to combat it. Uruguay is
particularly concerned about Al-Shabaab’s readiness
to resort to violence against civilians and humanitarian
workers to hinder relief efforts. Progress on securitysector reform is urgently needed, and it is vital that
the Federal Government of Somalia be the one to take
ownership and lead the process.
Uruguay recognizes that the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) remains essential
to guaranteeing security in Somalia in the medium
term. The transition of AMISOM must be organized
and supported in such a way as to mark the end of the
international security presence in Somalia, without
squandering the achievements of the past 10 years,
as the Secretary-General rightly states in his report
(S/2017/751).
Uruguay again emphasizes the need to protect
civilian populations, especially women, children and
the elderly. It encourages the Federal Government of
Somalia to seek mediation and stability, especially in
areas where access to supplies and humanitarian aid is
vital. We are also interested in seeing respect for the
civil rights of Somali women, with a view to ensuring
their full participation in the country’s political life.
Although all children associated with Al-Shabaab
captured in Puntland have been released, the prison
sentences of 40 of the children have not yet been
rescinded. Uruguay joins the call made by the SecretaryGeneral, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia and UNICEF and urges the authorities of
Puntland to facilitate the liberation of these children
and to continue working with the United Nations on
their reintegration.
Uruguay remains alarmed by cases of sexual
violence against internally displaced women and girls
living in settlements for internally displaced persons. It
is essential to improve the legal framework, the systems
for the protection of human rights and the capacity and
legitimacy of institutions to help combat impunity,
8/10

13/09/2017

improve accountability for human rights violations and
thereby encourage reconciliation.
The President: I thank Mr. Bermúdez for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the representative
of Somalia.
Mr. Osman (Somalia): It is a great honour to be
addressing the Security Council today on behalf of
Somalia. I am delighted to be sharing our experiences
with our key partners, all of whom have stood by our
nation and our people in our greatest period of need.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General and his team, both in New York and
in Somalia, for their committment to peace, stability
and prosperity in Somalia.
As the Council is aware, Somalia successfully
concluded a long and complicated election process on
8 February. That day, representatives of the Somali
people voted for change and a new direction for
our country when they elected President Mohamed
Abdullahi Farmajo. We are also aware of the enormous
public support received by the Federal Government
following the election. However, we should be very
aware of the high expectations of the Somali people
following the election of President Farmajo and the
subsequent appointment of Prime Minister Hassan
Ali Kheyre, in the areas of improving security and
providing basic services such as health and education.
Although the Federal Government is working tirelessly
to meet everyone’s expectations, the immediate hope is
to gradually improve the lives of our citizens.
Despite the enormous challenge we face, Somalia is
striving for lasting security to ensure that our country
may remain at peace with itself and with the global
community. We believe that the only way for Somalia to
fully recover is to strengthen its democratic institutions.
To that end, President Farmajo’s Government will spare
no effort in working towards the promise at the heart
of his election campaign to fight Somalia’s three major
enemies: terrorism, corruption and poverty.
The Federal Government focuses on getting
the politics right. We believe that good politics must
be inclusive, participatory, vibrant and practiced
on a level playing field. In that regard, the Federal
Government is committed to solidifying the federal
system of governance, which has only been in place
since 2004. Our overall vision is to achieve a strong
and cooperative union that works for all Somali people
17-28489

13/09/2017

The situation in Somalia

and enhances equity and good governance. Thankfully,
we are a step closer to that objective, as illustrated by
the historic formation of the new National Security
Council, which includes Federal member states. The
National Security Council is a platform for dialogue
not only on security issues, but on broader matters of
national importance too.
The Federal Government and Federal member
states, along with other stakeholders, are currently
engaged in an in-depth discussion on matters of national
importance, including a dialogue on the sharing of
natural and national resources. This and other issues
will be discussed in the context of the constitutional
review process. The leaders of Somalia recognize that
the Constitution is a document that binds them together
and serves as the foundational text upon which future
decisions are built.
Security remains paramount for the Federal
Government. The new national security architecture
and the security pact provide the tools we need to
strengthen the Somali National Army and introduce an
improved policing model. Together with the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), we are confident
that we can defeat Al-Shabaab in the next couple of
years. Once we recover the remaining territories and
secure supply routes, we will stabilize the country by
building local administrations in collaboration with the
Federal member states. We believe that communities
are best placed to collaborate with the local, state and
Federal Governments to stabilize the country.
However, the Federal Government cannot defeat
Al-Shabaab without the necessary tools. For far too
long, our security forces have been in combat with
terrorist groups using the same light weapons — mostly
AK-47s. Despite the bravery of our men and women
in uniform, we were locked in asymmetrical battles
with the terrorists. Without AMISOM forces, who are
supplied with heavy weaponry, we would not have been
able to defeat Al-Shabaab. The long-standing arms
embargo on Somalia severely restricts our ability to
procure heavy weapons, despite the partial lifting of
the embargo in 2013. The time has come for Somalia
to be granted access to qualitatively better weapons
than the terrorists. In that regard, we are asking this
organ, the Security Council, to consider and develop
a clearly defined road map to grant the full lifting of
the arms embargo. That would include improvements
to our weapons management and our command-andcontrol systems.

S/PV. 8046

In the Military Operations Coordination Committee
meeting held on 5 September in Addis Ababa, AMISOM
troop-contributing countries agreed to reduce troop
numbers, as envisaged in resolution 2372 (2017).
AMISOM will start planning for exit before May
2018 and is likely to complete its withdrawal in May
2018, if there is no predictable and sustainable funding
arrangement beyond that date. My Government and the
people of Somalia are grateful for the sacrifices made
by AMISOM over the past 10 years to help to restore
peace in Somalia.
AMISOM has done a great job. However, the
Somali National Army (SNA) and the Somalia National
Security Forces (SNSF) are still faced with many
challenges, including a general lack of capacity and
the effect of the arms embargo. The SNA and SNSF
are not ready to take over security responsibilities in
Somalia and the premature withdrawal of AMISOM in
May 2018 may be a recipe for disaster. It is crucial that
AMISOM be provided with predictable and sustainable
funding beyond 31 May 2018.
When it comes to the assistance we have received in
the security sector from our friends, we are grateful to
all partners for their unwavering and sustained support
over the years. Many provide financial support, while
others provide technical and logistical support. One
partner I would like to dedicate special gratitude to is
AMISOM. Its peacekeeping forces have been working
with us for the past 10 years — much longer than anyone
expected. During that time, they have sacrificed many
soldiers in the quest to help Somalia defeat Al-Shabaab
and rebuild our security sector.
A vital element of rebuilding our security
apparatus is to substantially improve coordination
among international partners on the security front.
We, the Federal Government of Somalia, welcome the
genuine attempt to address this fundamental problem
through the creation of the Comprehensive Assistance
to Security group. This group, in close collaboration
with the National Security Office, must end duplicity
and fragmentation in the security-support sector. On
our side, the National Security Council is designed to
do the same.
For too long, the conventional wisdom has been that
Somalia is a problem to fix and the people have become
a perfect example due of humanitarian breakdown to
the failure of the State to do its job. Today the Federal
Government of Somalia is committed to seizing this

17-284899/10

S/PV.8046

The situation in Somalia

golden opportunity and to nurturing and delivering
better service — a better, stronger and more prosperous
Somalia led by the hopes and aspirations of its people.
This is the best way to continue the process of changing
the prevailing narrative.
Mr President, it is with your assistance and your
support of the Federal Government-led security iniative
that the darkest chapter of Somali history will come
to a close. The Somali people are hopeful and their
Government aims to meet their expectations with
action.
As we are also aware, the Gu rainy season, which
was between March and June, was late, in some areas was
below the average and in many parts of Somalia resulted
in an elevated risk of famine. The United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affaris estimated

10/10

13/09/2017

some time in February or March that 3.2 million people
needed immediate assitance. While the war has been
averted thanks to the help of our partners, the threat of
famine has still persisted in the second half of this year.
The Federal Government of Somalia remains extremely
concerned about the humanitarian crisis. We appeal
again to our international partners to help by providing
us with additional funding to sustain the current level
of humanitarian response and save the lives of many
Somalis.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

17-28489
