United Nations

S/PV.6233 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6233rd meeting
Tuesday, 8 December 2009, 3.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Yoda/Mr. Kafando . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Burkina Faso)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lutterotti
Mr. Du Xiaocong
Mr. Artiñano
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Araud
Mr. Ashiki
Mr. Gebreel
Mr. Puente
Mr. Shcherbak
Mr. Gümrükçü
Mr. Ociti
Mr. Quarrey
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Drug trafficking as a threat to international security
Letter dated 30 November 2009 from the Permanent Representative of Burkina
Faso to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2009/615)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

09-63874 (E)

*0963874*

S/PV.6233 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.25 p.m.
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Bolivia, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Loayza
Barea (Bolivia) took the seat reserved for him at
the side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): I would like to
remind all speakers to limit their statements to no more
than five minutes in order to enable the Council to
carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Morocco.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to welcome you, Mr. President,
and to express the Kingdom of Morocco’s appreciation
for your choice topic to highlight the presidency of
Burkina Faso in December. The choice of this topic is
neither meaningless nor accidental. It clearly illustrates
the concern of many countries, especially African
countries, regarding the magnitude that drug trafficking
has attained and its consequences for the health of its
victims and for development and political stability in
affected States.
Drug trafficking has become one of the world’s
most pressing transnational threats. No country can
consider itself safe from its harmful effects. It is a
threat because of its scope, its cross-cutting nature and
the people involved in it. The $400 billion per year that
the drug trade represents is in and of itself very
revealing in terms of the threat that it poses to our
common security.
The situation in Africa, particularly in West
Africa, is of concern because of the extent of this
scourge. The figure of 50 to 60 tons of traffic per year,
cited this morning by the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),

2

reveals the gravity of this trade and the need to address
it.
The situation is all the more threatening in that it
affects a region that is fragile in terms of peace and
stability and where a number of countries are emerging
from many years of armed conflict. This is of concern
on several fronts, and requires States and our universal
Organization to act, as the threats posed by this
phenomenon are twofold.
On the one hand, there is the risk that a number
of countries will be destabilized in the region by an illintentioned use of the proceeds of trafficking to
undermine the Governments in place, finance
subversive actions or even carry out terrorist attacks.
On the other hand, as international cooperation to fight
narcotics trafficking has developed, there has been a
parallel and increasing collusion among drug cartels,
small arms traffickers and those who exploit
clandestine migration routes. Such groups will stop at
nothing, including terrorism and hostage-taking, to
maintain their illegal source of income.
The major itineraries for the traffic in drugs, in
particular cocaine, have evolved. Given the steady
international demand for cocaine and the strengthening
of measures to intercept the drug along traditional
routes, traffickers have turned towards West Africa.
The choice of this region is incredibly unfortunate, as
our region has just painfully emerged from a decade of
endemic violence.
As seen at the 2008 Praia summit of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), States of the region have demonstrated
their commitment to curbing this traffic. However,
their efforts are not enough in and of themselves.
Financial, technical and training support will also be
necessary to the success of their efforts.
Fighting drug trafficking in West Africa and its
many implications for regional and international
stability require a renewed commitment on the part of
all Member States, given the indivisible nature of
security, in order to assist States of the region to
develop their capacity for cooperation against
organized crime, whose connections to terrorist
networks are now known to all.
My country welcomes the initiatives carried out
by ECOWAS, with the support of the United Nations
and the international community, to reverse the trend in

09-63874

S/PV.6233 (Resumption 1)

this harmful trafficking, as well as the first positive
results of these efforts witnessed since last year. This
initiative must be pursued and broadened to include
other destination countries in the larger Sahara area,
which stretches from West to East Africa.
Strengthening
regional
and
subregional
cooperation in combating drug trafficking in West
Africa requires a multilateral effort in which the
international community should invest in a resolute
approach to curbing the phenomenon. In this respect,
we must note that the critical areas for building West
African capacity to combat this scourge include the
provision of technical assistance by donors, the
improvement of prevention and treatment of addiction,
and the strengthening of cooperation in detection and
interdiction. Given the density and international
ramifications of active local narcotics trafficking
networks, States of the region must cooperate with
INTERPOL.
Given its geographical position, its proximity to
West Africa and the importance it attaches to stability
in that sensitive region of our continent, the Kingdom
of Morocco follows with particular attention the
situation in the vast Sahelo-Saharan region, in
particular the alarming developments in the trafficking
of arms, narcotics and persons and the recent terrorist
acts directed against the people — and sometimes the
States — of the region.
This situation requires the international
community to take a three-pronged approach. First, the
ongoing conflicts and disputes in the region must be
resolved; secondly, countries emerging from conflict
must be bolstered and supported in their political and
economic reconstruction; and thirdly, bilateral,
regional and international cooperation to eliminate
trafficking must be strengthened.
Beyond such urgent measures, the true asset in
combating these scourges remains socio-economic
development and the establishment of economic
governance and the rule of law. We hope that the
response of the international community will be
commensurate with the challenge and our shared
responsibility.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mali.
Mr. Daou (Mali) (spoke in French): First and
foremost, I wish to extend to you, Mr. President, my

09-63874

delegation’s congratulations on your initiative to hold
this open Security Council debate on a phenomenon
that is one of the priorities on the international agenda.
In convening this special meeting devoted to the
problem of drug trafficking as a threat to international
security, your country, Burkina Faso, has given us the
opportunity to hold a constructive debate on a subject
that is of major concern to the international
community, in particular West Africa and the SaheloSaharan belt. These regions have regrettably become a
hub for international drug trafficking.
The scope of the phenomenon of drug trafficking
and its diversification thanks to globalization and
technological progress are of concern to us all. Indeed,
drug trafficking is now a true scourge and a real threat
to the security and stability of a good number of
countries. Illicit narcotics trafficking is today at the
forefront of organized transnational crime, and abusive
drug use leads many young people into physical and
mental decay. Official reports and studies on the issue
point to the fact that drug trafficking has grown
significantly in recent years, thereby becoming a
potential source of instability and destabilization.
In Mali we have made the fight against drugs and
psychotropic products a first-line priority, given their
negative impact on health and negative consequences
in the socio-economic and security sectors. The
Government of Mali has taken a series of steps aimed
at combating this phenomenon by, in particular,
establishing an anti-drug inter-ministerial coordination
committee. The committee is charged with
participating in the development of a national anti-drug
policy, working to coordinate the efforts of various
State services in the area of narcotics and psychotropic
substances, coordinating educational efforts and
offering advice about actions and measures planned by
the Government.
The Government of Mali fully believes that no
country today is immune from drug trafficking. Only
effective and coordinated efforts, both within States
and at the international level, will make it possible to
stamp out this scourge.
The recent incident involving the Boeing plane in
Tarkint has served to remind us of the urgency of better
coordinating and harmonizing the efforts of our
Governments
to
ensure
an
integrated
and
comprehensive approach to the problems and
challenges facing the countries of the Sahelo-Saharan

3

S/PV.6233 (Resumption 1)

region. It also served to underscore the need to further
strengthen national and regional capacities. Upon the
discovery, on 2 November, of the wreck of that plane
in a deserted and uninhabited area of northern Mali, the
Government of Mali quickly opened an investigation
that included INTERPOL, the intelligence services of
friendly countries and the relevant bodies of the United
Nations system. The investigation is continuing, in
particular with regard to tracing the origin of the
aircraft and its route, cargo and equipment and the
reason for the trip.
Press reports and information provided by the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime with regard
to the nature and size of the cargo will in no way
influence the course of the investigation. We continue
to believe that sensational statements and hasty
conclusions will not be useful in exposing the truth.
Having said that, I will say that for my country and its
Government, whose position on this matter is not to be
doubted, this is in no way about adopting a head-inthe-sand approach.
We have known for a long time that the SaheloSaharan strip, which Mali shares with many countries,
has become an area where all sorts of trafficking takes
place — trafficking in drugs, cigarettes, light weapons
and human beings. In addition, the Government of
Mali expresses its great concern at the extent of such
trafficking, which has now joined terrorism and
international organized crime to pose not just a serious
threat to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
countries of the region, but also a major impediment to
their development.
We are aware of the transnational nature of those
threats, as well as of the crucial need for improved
subregional cooperation to overcome them. That is
why His Excellency Mr. Amadou Toumani Touré,
President of the Republic of Mali, has worked
tirelessly for more than two years to hold a regional
conference in Bamako on the issues of peace, security
and development in the Sahelo-Saharan region.
The conference will provide a useful opportunity
for the countries of the region to reaffirm their joint
determination to make the region they share a zone of
peace and security and a centre of stability, growth and
development. The preparatory meeting at the level of
ministers for foreign affairs held in Bamako in
November 2008 has already laid the groundwork. We
hope that, very soon, the heads of State of the countries

4

concerned will meet to consider and adopt the
conference’s conclusions.
We firmly believe that there is necessarily a link
between all the scourges to which I have referred and
that no single country can effectively address them all.
The multiple challenges we face today require a
collective and coherent response at the global level.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate here
Mali’s commitment to working with all countries and
bodies involved in combating drug trafficking. We urge
the international community and the United Nations to
further support the initiatives and efforts made by our
countries in our common fight to halt the drug
trafficking phenomenon and create a better world.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s open debate on
drug trafficking as a threat to international security.
Following last July’s debates on peace consolidation in
West Africa (see S/PV.6157 and S/PV.6160), your
initiative confirms the Security Council’s attention to
the growing threat posed by drug trafficking and
organized crime to international peace and security. I
also wish to express my sincere appreciation to the
Secretary-General and the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
for their comprehensive and accurate reports.
Italy would like to endorse the statement
delivered by the representative of Sweden in its
capacity in the presidency of the European Union.
Never before has individual, national and
international security been so clearly interconnected.
Today transnational crime, particularly the drug trade,
is relevant to the definition of a “world risk society”.
For the international community to tackle it, a new
approach is needed, one that has two main
characteristics: the ability to deal effectively with
non-State actors, and improvements in international
cooperation and information-sharing.
Security today is a multidisciplinary challenge. It
requires global analysis, global commitment and a
global response. While stopping drug traffickers is a
decisive element, it should not be the driver of our
policies. Development is a crucial step towards
achieving security.

09-63874

S/PV.6233 (Resumption 1)

The 2009 Italian presidency of the Group of Eight
(G-8) attached special significance to those new
destabilizing factors and transnational threats. Last
May, an international conference was held in Rome
that was co-chaired by the Italian Interior and Foreign
Affairs Ministers and attended by specialized
international agencies, regional organizations and
prominent experts. At the conference, participants
defined the conceptual framework for the political
declaration adopted in July by the G-8 leaders at
L’Aquila.

next January, UNODC will work in collaboration with
two teams of Italian Guardia di Finanza experts to
develop, execute and implement a capacity-building
project for the law enforcement agencies of Guinea
Bissau, Mali, Sierra Leone and Senegal to fight against
drug trafficking and transnational organized crime. In
response to the requests of national beneficiaries and
the findings of country-based preliminary assessment
missions, the Italian specialized trainers will develop
and run tailored-made training programmes for each of
those four countries.

The harmful leverage of drug trafficking and
organized crime is multiplied in vulnerable regions,
where they destabilize States from within and can
create asymmetrical shocks at the international level.
Your emphasis on the African situation, Mr. President,
is thus particularly appropriate.

Italy
remains
committed
to
supporting
Afghanistan’s efforts to reduce the illegal cultivation
and production of narcotic substances. The outreach
session of the G8 Ministerial Meeting, held in Trieste
on 26-27 June, highlighted the need for joint initiatives
in border management, the harmonization of judiciary
systems, the strengthening of intelligence networks, the
exchange of information, the eradication of illicit drug
crops and alternative development.

West Africa is a test case for the international
community. The West African States’ ability to achieve
the Millennium Development Goals depends, to a large
extent, on strategic and effective coordination between
international cooperation and national policies. The
involvement of the United Nations Office for West
Africa as a bridge between the Organization and
regional efforts, along with the personal commitment
of Ambassador Djinnit, represent an important step in
that direction. I commend UNODC for its commitment
and achievements in every aspect of our common
action.
Some years ago, UNODC gave us an early
warning about West Africa’s risk of becoming a
platform for drug trafficking and organized crime. Its
reports on drug trafficking there represented the most
detailed, in-depth analysis available at the international
level.
UNODC encourages international cooperation
through the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and the West Africa Coast Initiative,
which draw on the combined forces of the Department
of Political Affairs, Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and INTERPOL. Just last week, a donor
conference in Vienna aimed at assisting ECOWAS
attracted major support.
Italy has contributed €1.3 million to those
initiatives and provided a coast guard unit and one
aircraft for border control in Senegal in the framework
of the External Borders of the Member States of the
European Union, or FRONTEX, programme. Starting

09-63874

Italy supports the Central Asian Regional
Information and Coordination Centre (CARICC) and
welcomes its cooperation with the Joint Planning Cell
for the countries of Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan and
the Gulf Centre for Criminal Intelligence.
Italy contributed $500,000 to CARICC and
€400,000 to UNODC regional programme on
Afghanistan and neighbouring countries to enhance
operational capacities in border management and to
counter drug trafficking, and has contributed
€1.5 million to the Afghan Counter-Narcotics Trust
Fund.
Criminal entrepreneurs are exploiting regional
vulnerabilities, taking advantage of their unique
combination of risk and rewards under current
conditions. Our response must change that arithmetic.
Enabling information-sharing and police and judicial
cooperation among all countries affected by this traffic
would give a fundamental added value to our
operational capacities.
In that regard, the United Nations conventions
against crime and corruption are our strongest
weapons. 2010 will mark the 10th anniversary of the
Palermo Convention and its additional protocols.
Today, more than ever, we need a firm commitment
from the entire United Nations membership to that and
other instruments. The General Assembly’s omnibus
resolution on the United Nations Crime Prevention and

5

S/PV.6233 (Resumption 1)

Criminal Justice Programme, proposed by Italy and
approved in November by the Third Committee with
the co-sponsorship of 117 Member States, clearly
affirms those goals.
That resolution requests the Secretary-General to
convene a special high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on transnational organized crime in the
second quarter of 2010. The purpose of the meeting
would be to foster universal adherence to the Palermo
Convention and strengthen international cooperation. It
should also create political momentum for next year’s
Conference of States Parties and its high-level
segment. We call upon all Member States to be
represented at the highest level possible at those
events, so as to confirm our common political will and
shared responsibility in tackling drug trafficking and
related forms of organized crime.
Italy welcomes the presidential statement that
was adopted by the Security Council today and will
continue to be an active partner in international and
regional efforts to tackle the convergent threats to
international security of organized crime and drug
trafficking.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations, Mr. Téte António.
Mr. António (spoke in French): I would like to
begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
this debate and by commending the initiative of the
Burkina Faso delegation, which has always defended
the most vital interests of Africa during its terms on the
Security Council. Through the action of the delegation
of Burkina Faso, African Union (AU) decisions have
been assured resonance in the Council.
We would also like to thank other African
members of the Council, Libya and Uganda, for all the
efforts they have made to achieve the same resonance
of African Union decisions in the Council.
We reiterate our thanks to the Council, which has
always dealt with African issues. A case in point would
be today’s meeting on the Côte d’Ivoire.
We also commend Mr. Antonio Maria Costa for
his very instructive briefing, which painted a very clear
picture of Africa. There is no need to go back over that
information.

The production and abuse of drugs in many
African countries, which are used as a transit point for
their trafficking and stockpiling, is a great challenge
for Africa. Youth is exposed to serious risks as the
result of trafficking and drug abuse, as well as crimes
associated with that problem such as money-laundering
and human trafficking.
Excessive violence and crimes against humanity
in conflict situations are, to a large extent, exacerbated
by drug abuse. Given that situation, Africa is fighting
incessantly to play its role in combating that scourge.
In fact, the very first ministerial conference of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) on the fight
against drugs in Africa, held in Yamoussoukro, Côte
d’Ivoire, had as its primary objective the review and
updating of the action plan that had been adopted
during the thirty-second Summit of OAU Heads of
State and Government in Yaounde, Cameroon, in July
1996.
The conference adopted a new 2002-2006 OAU
action plan to combat drugs. Since that time, the
African Union has followed up on its efforts and the
third regular session of the Conference of Ministers of
the African Union on fighting drugs and preventing
crime was held in Addis Abbas, Ethiopia, in December
2007 on the topic of the renewed commitment in Africa
to combating addiction and drug trafficking and to
preventing crime.
The major result of that session was the revised
action plan of the African Union on trafficking and
drug abuse and crime prevention, as well as its followup mechanism, to be implemented in partnership by the
interested parties at all levels. That plan is fully
integrated as well in the strategic African Union plan for
2009-2012. Priority areas and recommendations listed
and included in the plan clearly place the responsibility
for its implementation on the AU Commission, member
States, regional economic communities, international
organizations, non-governmental organizations and civil
society.
The African plan also includes a multi-disciplinary
approach, one that is coordinated and balanced so as to
resolve the problems of drug abuse and trafficking,
which must be dealt with in the context of African
development beyond the narrow framework of simply
curbing it.
In doing our utmost to find a solution to
addiction, drug trafficking and related phenomenon,

6

09-63874

S/PV.6233 (Resumption 1)

the African Union is also emphasizing the principle of
integration, putting the fight against drugs into all
aspects of planning and the implementation of
development, which includes the fight against poverty,
the empowerment of women, alternative development
strategies and HIV/AIDS programmes.
In the light of this fact, a new partnership was
established with the competent organizations, with the
participation of the Organization of American States,
the Foreign and Commonwealth Office of the United
Kingdom and the German agency German Technical
Cooperation, which has launched cooperation by
sharing experiences and best practices in the
framework of alternative development programmes to
eradicate coca and opium and the illegal cultivation of
cannabis.
The African Union also emphasizes the
importance of strengthening institutions, information
on policymaking, research, the establishment of
networks, national capacity-building, oversight and
implementation of the law, regional legislative control
measures and international cooperation. We are pleased
to note, as a number of speakers have emphasized
today, that African countries are undertaking a variety
of legislative measures or capacity-building to
implement legislation on the ground in order to honour
Africa’s commitment to combating this phenomenon.
We call on the Security Council and the international
community to support these efforts. We therefore
welcome the presidential statement that was adopted
today (S/PRST/2009/32).
A number of delegations referred to the problem
of regional partnership. We think that such partnerships
are a solution that we should build upon.
As with climate change, we assert that Africa is
once again the victim of a situation — in this case,
drug trafficking — for which it is not responsible. In
fact, as many have noted, the drugs are produced
elsewhere. They come through Africa and are for the
most part consumed elsewhere.
There is one mechanism that we believe we may
be able to continue to develop. The African Union, for
example, in the framework of its cooperation with
South America, has made the issue of fighting drugs
one of its priorities. We also have the South Atlantic
Peace and Cooperation Zone. It is clear that the Luanda
Plan of Action sets out important measures that could
be implemented to facilitate cooperation with South

09-63874

America, and in particular those countries of the
continent where the drugs come from.
We also say to our European friends, with whom
we have very close cooperation and ongoing dialogue,
that drugs are consumed in their countries, so we all
need to join in partnership to address this problem,
which is of concern not only to Africa, but the entire
world.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Commissioner for Gender and Human
Development of the Economic Community of West
African States, Ms. Adrienne Yandé Diop.
Ms. Diop: First of all, I would like to
congratulate the delegation of Burkina Faso on having
drafted the presidential statement on drug trafficking as
a threat to international security (S/PRST/2009/32) and
for including this topic on the agenda of the Security
Council. Burkina Faso has thus shown once again its
commitment to regional issues and to resolving this
very important problem.
On behalf of the Commission of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), I have
the honour to deliver the following statement on the
situation of drug trafficking and organized crime in
West Africa and the ECOWAS Commission’s response
to this scourge.
Drug trafficking has become a menace to West
African peace, security and development. Our region is
increasingly used as a transit route in the trafficking of
cocaine towards growing European markets and
demand. Fourteen per cent of Europe’s cocaine
transited through West Africa in 2008 — some 40 tons
valued at billions of United States dollars. Since 2005,
90 per cent of the 1,400 couriers arrested carrying
drugs on commercial flights to Europe have hailed
from West African countries. According to United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) sources,
cocaine couriers have been detected at embarkation
from 11 of the 15 ECOWAS member States, namely,
Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, the Gambia,
Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Nigeria, Senegal
and Togo. Since 2005, cocaine seizures from West
Africa to Europe have more than doubled.
Why has West Africa become a transit route for
trafficking? There are many reasons. First, there has
been increased surveillance on traditional trafficking
routes. Secondly, there is West Africa’s proximity to

7

S/PV.6233 (Resumption 1)

Latin America. Thirdly, West African crime groups are
active and persistent, as well as flexible in their
operations. Fourthly, weak States naturally have great
difficulty in controlling their territory and the porous
borders and permissive working environment if West
Africa. Finally, there is, of course, the high rate of
youth unemployment in our subregion.
The effects of drug trafficking on ECOWAS
countries are devastating and dramatic. To name just a
few, we have seen increased security problems, crime,
violence and conflict. Drug trafficking has had a
negative impact on governance, including corruption,
the undermining of the rule of law and political
instability. Drug trafficking has had a negative impact
on the economy, with an unexplained high influx of
money. We have witnessed the rising use of cocaine,
which creates problems of public health, including
HIV/AIDS, and social problems.
In recent years, this phenomenon has worsened.
First, we have recently started to see local laboratories
transforming cocaine into amphetamines on the spot.
Secondly, it is a known fact that a country that traffics
is a country that consumes, and a region that traffics is
a region that consumes. Our region is becoming a
consuming region, and our youth is the most affected.
Thirdly, drug trafficking has a correlation to moneylaundering, arms and human trafficking. These are
three problems that ECOWAS is presently addressing.
Although policies and institutions to address the
drug problem are in place in individual ECOWAS
member States, they are not enough, given the nature
of the drug problem. It must also be stressed that
trafficking in drugs and other related crime transcends
national boundaries. Drug trafficking, in particular,
usually involves three or more countries — the
producing country, the transit country and the
consuming country. It has been said here over and over
again that no country and no region can do it alone. It
has therefore become a regional and international
issue, and institutions have to come together to combat
such a menace in a holistic manner.
The narcotics problem is a national security and
foreign policy issue of significant proportions. The
drug cartels are so large and powerful that they have
undermined some Governments. We have learned just
recently that, a few weeks ago, a Boeing 707 aircraft
violated a West African country’s airspace. The aircraft
was suspected to be full of cocaine.

8

Money from the drug trade will continue to
undermine efforts at good governance in the region,
and the people who are addicted to the drugs will
continue to constitute security and health concerns for
their communities.
I may be painting a picture that looks grim and
hopeless. Yes, the picture is grim, but we are not
hopeless. We are glad that, based on the
recommendation of a ministerial conference held in
Praia, Cape Verde, the ECOWAS heads of State and
Government rose to the occasion in 2008 by adopting
the Political Declaration on the Prevention of Drug
Abuse, Illicit Drug Trafficking and Organized Crime in
West Africa and the Regional Response Action Plan,
which identified cooperation in preventing and
eradicating drug trafficking and abuse as a priority
programme for the ECOWAS Commission.
Since the Praia conference, the ECOWAS
Commission has taken a number of steps to fight
organized crime and the drug trade at the regional
level. With the support of UNODC, the ECOWAS
Commission developed an operational plan and a
monitoring and evaluation mechanism to translate the
Regional Response Action Plan and Political
Declaration into concrete, time-bound and costed
activities.
The plan is articulated around five thematic
areas:
the mobilization of ECOWAS political
leadership and the need for allocation of adequate
national budgets by ECOWAS member States for
preventing and combating illicit drug trafficking,
related organized crime and drug abuse; enhancing the
effectiveness of law and enforcement cooperation;
developing and adopting legal frameworks for effective
criminal justice administration; addressing drug abuse
and associated health and security problems; and
creating valid and reliable data to monitor the
magnitude of the drug trafficking and abuse problems
affecting the region on a sustainable basis.
The ECOWAS operational plan will also focus on
programmes and projects aimed at harmonizing
national legislation, undertaking research, conducting
training
programmes,
providing
treatment,
rehabilitation and alternative livelihood activities to
drug users, and exchanging information on known and
potential traffickers and drug users, to mention a few.
The revision of legal frameworks seeks to address
the following measures: the refusal of entry visas to or

09-63874

S/PV.6233 (Resumption 1)

expulsion from ECOWAS member States of suspected
drug traffickers and manufacturers, the signing of
extradition treaties covering drug cases on a bilateral
basis among ECOWAS member States, and a study of
the need for introducing in each ECOWAS member
State laws pertaining to the confiscation of the
properties and assets of those involved in the
trafficking of drugs. The operational plan will also
address the dearth of quality forensic services in the
region
through
capacity-building,
enhancing
infrastructure, developing protocol and networking
among experts and laboratories in the region.
The plan does not place the onus of addressing
the drug problem on the region alone. Rather, it also
seeks to incorporate a strong communication strategy
aimed at drawing national and international attention to
the threat and potential impact of drug trafficking in
West Africa.
For the ECOWAS region, the operational plan is
not merely focused on enhancing policing, interdiction
and arrests, but also seeks to explore how we can
exploit our diversity, values and social assets to
address the drug problem. This is why the engagement
of civil society organizations, the media and traditional
institutions, as well as alternative development
programmes addressing cannabis production, are
priority areas in the operational plan.
However, the operational plan is just the
beginning. There is much work ahead. That is why we
look forward to the continued commitment and support
of the United Nations and other partners in our
common resolve to address a growing problem that
transcends beyond boundaries. I am pleased to
announce here that, just last week in Vienna, at a drug
donor roundtable organized jointly by ECOWAS,
UNODC and the Austrian Government, the European
Commission pledged to support the implementation of
the ECOWAS plan through its Regional Indicative
Programme. I would like also like to express at this
juncture our gratitude to all Member States and
institutions that have supported the implementation of
our operational plan.
Other regions that have faced similar challenges
have recorded some degree of success. They have been
tireless in their efforts, and if they could succeed, we in
West Africa can also succeed. I would like to conclude
my address by once again reiterating on behalf of the
ECOWAS Commission my profound gratitude for this

09-63874

opportunity and for the interest expressed in the
development of the West African region.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Amieyeofori (Nigeria): The Nigerian
delegation congratulates you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month and on initiating this important discussion
on drug trafficking as a threat to international security,
thereby capping two years of productive presence on
the Security Council. We thank the Secretary-General
for his invaluable views and continuing efforts to
tackle the problem. We also thank Mr. Antonio Maria
Costa for his comprehensive statement and tenacity in
the fight against drug trafficking.
Drug trafficking remains a major challenge to
global peace and security. No country is totally
immune from its devastating effects and none can fight
and win the anti-narcotics war alone, regardless of the
size of the resources at its disposal. In Africa, illicit
drug trafficking, cultivation, processing and abuse are
persistently on the rise and creating barriers to the
continent’s development efforts. International drug
cartels outside the region are exploiting the
underresourced border enforcement capacities of some
countries and turning them into transit routes for
prohibited drugs.
West Africa is most affected by the reprehensible
activities of these drug cartels. The subregion is fast
becoming a major warehouse and transit hub for
cocaine and other illicit drugs. The actions of these
criminal syndicates constitute a major threat not only
to the subregion’s fledgling democratic structures, but
also to governance in general. Indeed, they constitute
serious impediments to subregional efforts to promote
human prosperity, wealth creation, economic
development, the rule of law and peacebuilding. Drug
trafficking has led directly to increased violent crimes,
small arms proliferation, human trafficking, corruption,
money-laundering and political instability.
Against this background, the States members of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) have demonstrated appreciable political
will and commitment to fighting the scourge. In
December 2008, the ECOWAS Action Plan on illicit
drugs was adopted in Abuja by the heads of State and
Government of ECOWAS as a major legal framework
to complement existing mechanisms. The West Africa

9

S/PV.6233 (Resumption 1)

Coast Initiative to support the implementation of the
Action Plan has also been launched in Vienna and in
New York. The Initiative recognizes the importance of
partnerships for leveraging resources and for building
national and regional capacities in the areas of law
enforcement,
forensics,
intelligence,
border
management, the fight against money-laundering and
the strengthening of criminal justice systems. The
Initiative requires international support and gradual
expansion beyond the pilot countries.
At the national level, the Nigerian National Drug
Enforcement Agency has adopted a dual approach —
drug supply control and drug demand control — to
prevent the country from being used as a source, transit
and destination for narcotics. The Agency is
strengthening its institutional capacity, prosecutorial
capability and surveillance activities. Nigeria remains
firmly committed to achieving the ultimate goal of
ridding the country and the West African subregion of
the menace of drug trafficking. Nigeria is also
committed to strengthening ties with its development
partners and the international community, especially
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
INTERPOL and the United Nations Office for West
Africa.
Nigeria believes that the problem of drug
trafficking requires national, subregional and regional
approaches. Thus, we will continue to work closely
with the African Union, ECOWAS and the
Intergovernmental Action Group Against Money
Laundering in West Africa to tackle this problem. At
the bilateral level, Nigeria is strengthening its ties with
several countries, including the United Kingdom,
South Africa and China, on drug control.
In spite of these efforts, the international
community must continue to pay close attention to
developments in the West African region before the
situation there escalates into an emergency. In the sprit
of shared and common responsibility, Nigeria urges the
international community to provide necessary
assistance to States of the subregion to build their
capacities in order to respond more effectively to these
challenges.
Combating drug trafficking and related organized
crime must be situated in the wider context of poverty
eradication and human development, in line with the
commitments
undertaken
in
the
Millennium
Development Goals. Attention should also be paid to

10

conflict prevention in the subregion and to the role
played by the African diaspora in the chain. Efforts
should not be limited to cocaine and cannabis imported
mainly from outside the continent, but should extend to
drugs produced locally. An urgent area of focus and
capacity support should be the development of
mechanisms for gathering and sharing information on
organized criminal groups in the subregion.
Let me assure you, Mr. President, of Nigeria’s
overwhelming support for the presidential statement
adopted by the Council today (S/PRST/2009/32). We
look forward to working closely with other delegations
to implement existing frameworks.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Cape Verde.
Mrs. Lima da Veiga (Cape Verde): At the outset,
I wish to congratulate Burkina Faso, President of the
Security Council for the month of December, on
having selected the issue of drug trafficking as a threat
to international security as the topic of today’s debate.
This debate has a particular meaning for the West
African region, which is becoming a hub for the
trafficking of drugs, in particular cocaine. The risks
and emerging challenges associated with this problem
are huge for that region, which is already struggling
with social, economic and political vulnerabilities.
Among those risks and challenges are new illicit
businesses in the region whose impact extends to other
regions of the continent and beyond, increasing drug
abuse and related health and security problems, human
trafficking, the destruction of human capital and the
financing of illegal armed activities and terrorism.
Because of its transboundary nature and the
serious threats it poses to regional stability and
international security, drug trafficking has attracted the
growing attention of the international community. It is
on the agendas of the United Nations, the European
Union, the African Union and other international
organizations. It is also the drive behind the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Political Declaration on the Prevention of Drug Abuse,
Illicit Drug Trafficking and Organized Crimes in West
Africa and the Regional Response Action Plan to
address the growing problem of illicit drug trafficking.
In adopting the Action Plan, we members of
ECOWAS have committed ourselves to mobilizing our
political leadership and ensuring the necessary

09-63874

S/PV.6233 (Resumption 1)

resources to prevent and combat illicit drug trafficking,
related organized crime and drug abuse in a strategic
and durable way. In several of our States, the Regional
Response Action Plan has been translated into national
plans, although the rhythm of implementation and
results may differ from State to State due to
endogenous circumstances and constraints.
Referring to the particular case of Cape Verde,
our geographical situation at the crossroads of three
continents — Africa, Europe and the Americas — is a
source of both opportunity and risk. Building upon the
opportunities and reducing the risk factors are
therefore at the core of our transformational
development policies.
To reduce the risk factors and effectively combat
new threats, we have adopted a comprehensive security
policy and strategy that clearly represent a break with
the past in terms of concept, implementation tools and
articulation
with
national
stakeholders
and
international partners. At the legislative level, new
laws to counter narcotics, money-laundering and
corruption have been adopted. Cooperation has been
developed with strategic partners to enhance
institutional capacity, law enforcement, surveillance of
our waters, control of illicit maritime activities and
intelligence-sharing.
Law enforcement and drug control entities and
institutions mandated to prevent and deal with financial
crimes linked to money-laundering and the financing
of terrorism have been put in place. Controls in ports
and airports have been tightened. Furthermore, Cape
Verde has ratified the pertinent international
conventions and adapted its national legislation to the
international legal framework. Drug supply and
demand have been reduced. Preventive education,
treatment, rehabilitation and reinsertion activities have
been implemented in close cooperation with civil
society organizations.
Despite the positive results achieved, the struggle
is not yet over. Many challenges remain. Strengthening
justice administration and continuing to provide law
enforcement entities with the necessary legal
frameworks is essential to reducing the potential
infiltration of Cape Verde’s society and economy by
corrupt practices. Therefore, Cape Verde is focusing
attention on the need to intensify actions to prevent
drug abuse and urban violence, in particular among
young people; to strengthen treatment options for drug-

09-63874

abusers and their social reintegration; to reduce the
possibility of the use of the national territory for the
illicit drug trade; and to enhance national, regional and
international cooperation.
We have been always aware that our fight cannot
be effective and durable while our region continues to
be used as a safe haven by drug traffickers and
organized criminal groups due to weak legislation and
enforcement institutions. Without constant and firm
action by our neighbouring countries, we would be
unable to make further progress. That knowledge
moved us to actively participate in the efforts of
ECOWAS to develop a regional legal framework to
tackle drug trafficking and harmonize the domestic
laws of member States against drug trafficking.
That same reasoning moved us to host in October
2008 in our capital, Praia, the ECOWAS High-level
Conference on Drug Trafficking as a Security Threat in
West Africa, which led to the adoption of the Political
Declaration and the Regional Response Action Plan.
Given our track record on cooperation and our modest
success at curbing drug trafficking from Latin America,
we stand ready to continue to share information and
best practices and to engage with other ECOWAS
member States. That will be important to improve drug
control and to strengthen prevention, treatment and
rehabilitation efforts, while curbing the impact of the
drug trade on national economies and political stability.
While Cape Verde applauds the international
community for its growing concern and attention to the
problem, it is of the view that international responses
should better reflect the seriousness of the situation.
They should be comprehensive, strategic and more
coordinated. In this context, Cape Verde salutes the
recent roundtable of ECOWAS partners organized in
Vienna with the support of the Austrian Government
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. We
salute the various commitments made at the roundtable
and urge their rapid translation into concrete actions to
accelerate the implementation of the Regional
Response Action Plan. Indeed, what has been achieved
so far is very positive, but much remains to be done.
In line with its responsibility to maintain
international peace and security, the Security Council
should continue to monitor the situation and take
measures to assist other United Nations bodies to
deliver a more coordinated response. The extraordinary

11

S/PV.6233 (Resumption 1)

work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
should be duly supported.
We also urge the Security Council and the United
Nations as a whole to strengthen their actions against
drug producing and purchasing markets and transit
countries, and to increase awareness about the harmful
potential of the drug trade. Efforts to effectively hold
accountable all of those involved in this illegal activity
should also be scaled up, in compliance with
obligations set out in the various legal instruments on
combating international crimes. Member States should
unequivocally join these efforts. Regional and
subregional organizations, civil society and other
stakeholders should be encouraged to build resilience
to drug trafficking and to prevent the emergence of
drug conflicts.
The recent reaffirmation in Vienna of the
fundamentals of the ECOWAS Political Declaration
and Regional Response Action Plan and, more
important, the programmes and plans already in motion
are a clear signal of the political will and commitment
of the countries of our subregion to assume their share
of responsibility in the process.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
representative of Luxembourg.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
congratulate the Burkina Faso presidency of the
Security Council on having organized this public
debate on drug trafficking as a threat to international
security. Luxembourg fully supports the statement
made by the representative of Sweden on behalf of the
European Union.
My country agrees with the analysis that
organized crime linked to drug trafficking represents a
serious threat to international peace and security and a
significant impediment to sustainable development. We
must urgently react to the serious problems posed by
the ever-strengthening links between drug trafficking,
corruption and other types of organized crime, such as
human trafficking, illicit arms trafficking, cybercrime
and money-laundering, including that used to finance
terrorism. The international community must step up
its efforts to assist countries, subregions and regions
affected by the scourge of drug trafficking, and the
activities of the United Nations should be at the centre
of these joint efforts.

12

The problem of narcotics trafficking should, in
future, be part of a comprehensive approach to
conflicts and an integral part of peacekeeping
operations, peacebuilding strategies and, in more
general terms, our development policy. In this regard,
we welcome resolutions 1829 (2008) and 1876 (2009),
on Sierra Leone and Guinea-Bissau, respectively.
In my capacity as President of the Economic and
Social Council, I should like to emphasize, in this
context, the potential for cooperation among the
Council, especially through its Commission on
Narcotic Drugs, the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission in the fight against drug
trafficking and its impact on stability, governance and
socio-economic development in countries emerging
from conflict.
Faced with the growth in drug production and
trafficking, the Political Declaration and Plan of Action
on International Cooperation towards an Integrated and
Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem,
adopted at the fifty-second session of the Commission
on Narcotic Drugs, have reiterated once again the
importance of simultaneously reducing supply and
demand, as well as the need to strengthen and step up
joint efforts at the national, regional and international
levels to deal with these global problems in a more
comprehensive way pursuant to the principle of
common and shared responsibility.
If international action is to have its full effect, we
need the support of all the States Members of our
Organization. And those efforts begin with the national
implementation of existing international instruments.
My country has ratified all the international
conventions relating to the fight against drugs and
transnational crime, and, specifically, the United
Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances. In implementing
that Convention, Luxembourg is among the few
countries to have followed up on article 5 and
established a fund to combat narcotics trafficking by
reinvesting confiscated drug money in projects aimed
at fighting drug trafficking. For example, at the request
of the Minister of Justice of Mali, between 2010 and
2012 Luxembourg will co-finance through this fund a
project aimed at fighting the rise in organized crime,
and in drug trafficking in particular, and its
destabilizing effects in Mali and the subregion.

09-63874

S/PV.6233 (Resumption 1)

In the context of our cooperation and
development policy, my country, in addition to its
regular contributions to the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, is also carrying out a number of
bilateral projects in the area of counter-narcotics
trafficking, including projects that integrate aspects of
peacebuilding. Luxembourg is sincerely convinced that
we must address the dimensions of peace, security,
development and human rights in an integrated way,
giving the same attention to each.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Barbarlić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I should like to thank you, Sir, for having
organized the debate on this important topic, with
particular attention to its repercussions in Africa.
Bosnia and Herzegovina aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Sweden on
behalf of the European Union.
The interrelationship between drugs, organized
crime, human trafficking and corruption represents a
universal challenge that endangers the economies,
security and political stability of all countries of the
world. These threats, which do not respect borders,
require each country and the international community
to make additional efforts to enhance multilateral
partnerships and cooperation to properly address this
modern scourge.
Enhanced knowledge of trends is a prerequisite
for effective policymaking and operational responses.
In this context, I would like to underline the
importance of the ratification and implementation of
international legal treaties. Of particular importance is
the need to provide national drug control information
that will enable United Nations treaty-based and
governing bodies to monitor patterns in drug abuse, to
make realistic impact assessments and to develop
global and regional policies to fight illicit drugs and
crime.
On the other hand, technical assistance to
Member States — especially to developing countries
with fragile political and economic situations — is
crucial to strengthening national capacities to create
efficient drug control frameworks, to preventing and
counteracting illicit drug abuse, and to providing
access to drug dependence treatments and creating an
environment favourable to reintegration and alternative
development.

09-63874

My delegation would like to join those who have
acknowledged the seriousness of this problem and to
point out that, given its nature, it is clear that no single
country acting alone can address this problem
successfully. While building the proper judicial and
police systems in individual countries is of paramount
importance, cooperation at the subregional and
regional level is equally important.
In that sense, we fully support the work of the
Economic Community of West African States in
promoting and fostering regional cooperation in West
Africa aimed at countering drug proliferation.
Although we are discussing the situation in Africa,
similar problems are occurring in other regions as well.
I should also like to use this opportunity to state
that my country has undertaken important legislative,
judicial and structural reforms aimed at strengthening
our national drug control system and fighting illicit
trafficking and related crimes. The Parliamentary
Assembly of my country has also adopted a national
strategy on the supervision of narcotic drugs and the
prevention and suppression of the abuse of narcotic
drugs, and a plan of action for its implementation. I
should also like to stress that we have established close
cooperation with the customs and border-control
services of neighbouring countries and initiated the
conclusion of bilateral agreements on police and
judicial cooperation based on the common
understanding that tackling drug trafficking crimes
requires a regional approach.
We believe that it is crucial to cooperate,
exchange information and experiences, and promote
good practices in confronting this issue. In that regard,
Bosnia and Herzegovina fully supports the joint efforts
undertaken by the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and other relevant United
Nations organs and agencies in tackling the numerous
security risks caused by drug trafficking in many
countries and regions, particularly in Africa. Lessons
learned in one place can often be of great use and help
in another. In that context, the knowledge and expertise
of UNODC are of exceptional value, and Member
States should benefit from them.
In conclusion, I would once again like to reiterate
that this discussion in the Security Council is timely
and very important, and we hope that the results of
today’s deliberations will energize the concrete

13

S/PV.6233 (Resumption 1)

activities necessary to combat illegal drug trafficking
and related crimes in Africa. Positive results in this
struggle on the African continent will in turn contribute
to global action to build security and justice in the
region.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
representative of Ghana.
Mr. Christian (Ghana): Ghana is pleased to see
Burkina Faso presiding over the Security Council this
month and was particularly honoured to see Mr. Alain
Yoda, Minister for Foreign Affairs, presiding earlier
over today’s open debate. My delegation also wishes to
express its appreciation to the delegation of Burkina
Faso for having organized this debate, as well as for
having prepared the concept paper on the important
issue as illicit drug trafficking, which poses a real and
present threat to the peace, security and stability of
many regions of the world, including Africa. My
delegation thanks the Secretary-General for his
presence and his statement, and the Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) for his briefing. We also align ourselves
with the statement delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
West Africa has become not only a transit point
but also a final destination for the illicit drug trade,
which usually follows a circuitous route, originating in
South America, to Europe and elsewhere, in a vicious
cycle of reduction, supply, transport, transit and
consumption. In some cases, that illicit trade has
triggered or fueled conflicts, corruption and other
organized crimes, such as the trafficking of persons,
particularly women and children, who are often
deceived, abducted or otherwise forcibly recruited as
drug couriers against their will.
In keeping with Ghana’s commitment to the fight
against illicit trafficking in drugs, the Government of
Ghana has taken measures at the national level to
combat drug trafficking, including strengthening land
border controls and sea patrols. The Narcotics Control
Board of Ghana is being streamlined to enhance its
data collection capability, and the possibility is being
explored to enable the Board to exercise the power to
prosecute drug-related crimes. The judicial and law
enforcement authorities of Ghana have accorded cases
involving drug trafficking renewed priority with a view
to ensuring the speedy disposal of such cases and to

14

imposing stricter bail conditions for suspects, including
safeguards to preserve evidence obtained to facilitate
prosecutions, while at the same time ensuring that
standards of fair trial and due process are not
undermined. Training programmes have been
undertaken to enhance the ability of judicial and law
enforcement agencies to handle drug cases in a more
efficient manner.
Recognizing that our national efforts must be
complemented by bilateral, regional and international
cooperation, given that the problem of drug trafficking
is a global challenge, Ghana has sought and received
bilateral technical assistance to improve airport
screening procedures for passengers and luggage.
Following parliamentary ratification by Ghana of the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in
Persons,
Especially
Women
and
Children,
supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, our country is
considering becoming a party to the principal
Convention itself. In March this year, Ghana hosted an
international meeting to address the protection and
assistance needs of victims of drug trafficking.
At the subregional level, Ghana subscribes to the
Political Declaration on the Prevention Of Drug Abuse,
Illicit Drug Trafficking and Organized Crimes in West
Africa of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), and urges the international
community to provide the required resources for a
more effective implementation of the ECOWAS
Regional Response Action Plan aimed at strengthening
national capacities and cross-border cooperation to
tackle drug trafficking and organized crime.
To that end, Ghana welcomes the West Africa Coast
Initiative, which is a United Nations inter-agency
initiative involving UNODC, the Department of Political
Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
the United Nations Office for West Africa and
INTERPOL. Effective coordination and coherence
among those agencies, and also among the agencies
and ECOWAS and the African Union (AU), would be
instrumental
in
achieving
the
successful
implementation of that Initiative. It is no coincidence
that the ECOWAS Action Plan highlights not only
illicit drug trafficking, but also other organized crimes.
Efforts to combat illicit drug trafficking must be part of
the overall effort to deter, detect and punish organized
crime, as the various forms of organized crimes tend to
be mutually reinforcing and interlinked.

09-63874

S/PV.6233 (Resumption 1)

National, regional and international efforts to
enhance national capacities to combat organized crime
might be fruitless if organized crime networks, which
normally operate in the shadowy underground world in
order to elude detection, succeed in compromising the
integrity of law enforcement agencies through
corruption, which would provide those networks with
the opportunity to conduct and carry out illicit drug
and related activities with impunity. In fact, in many
cases, what is required is not capacity-building at the
legislative, institutional or technical levels, but rather
the ability and political will of law enforcement
authorities and political leaders to say no to crime and
corruption.
That is why Ghana is a party to the African Union
Convention on Preventing and Combating Corruption
and the United Nations Convention against Corruption,
and has introduced various pieces of legislation to
make corruption unattractive to public officials and
private individuals alike. The Attorney General of
Ghana has recently circulated an analytical publication
comparing Ghana’s anti-corruption laws to the United
Nations and AU treaties on corruption as a tool to
create public awareness of Ghana’s commitment to
combating corruption at the national, regional and
international levels. Combating corruption should be
central to any strategy to fight drug trafficking and
other organized crime.
As is well known, the experience of some
countries emerging from conflict has taught us that
illicit drug trafficking and other organized crimes tend
to thrive in an atmosphere of conflict, the absence of
the rule of law and the lack of good governance and
democratic accountability, in which the legitimate State
institutions, and indeed society as a whole, have been
rendered weak and fragile. For that reason, some
organized criminals have at times sought to undermine
the stability of States and frustrated post-conflict
recovery efforts.
During the democracy roundtable held by the
International Institute for Democracy and Electoral
Assistance in Mexico City last week, participants heard
examples of illicit funds that have been used to
influence electoral processes and to corrupt and seize
the State apparatus. It also called for broader
international cooperation against organized crime, with
a focus on the collective defence and protection of
democratic institutions and processes so as to

09-63874

strengthen their resilience to the pressure of illicit
funding and organized crime.
In its presidential statement of July this year
(S/PRST/2009/20), the Security Council recognized the
link between illicit drug trafficking and other organized
crime and conflict when it expressed concern about
cross-border issues in West Africa, such as the illegal
drug trade, terrorist activity in the Sahel, maritime
insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea, weapons proliferation,
in particular of small arms, and the resurgence of
undemocratic seizures of power, and called for a
comprehensive strategy of conflict resolution and crisis
prevention while addressing such issues.
That means that, in addition to the ECOWAS
Regional Response Action Plan to combat illicit drugs,
the international community must support ECOWAS in
implementing its Convention on Small Arms and Light
Weapons, their Ammunition and Other Related
Materials, which came into force recently. Such a
comprehensive strategy should include support for the
ongoing efforts of ECOWAS, in collaboration with the
AU, the United Nations and the international
community in general, to promote respect for human
rights, democracy, the rule of law and constitutional
order in West Africa, including support for the
application of the African Charter on Democracy,
Elections and Governance.
It is equally important for the Council and the
General Assembly to continue or to enhance their
political, financial and strategic support for the
Peacebuilding Commission to expedite its work, in
partnership with ECOWAS and the AU Peace and
Security Council, in addressing the root causes of the
conflicts in Guinea-Bissau, Sierra Leone, Burundi and
the Central African Republic with a view to
consolidating post-conflict recovery in those countries.
I would like to conclude by emphasizing that the
previous and present calls for partnership, shared
responsibility and international cooperation would
suggest that the international community is aware of
what is required to confront the challenge of illicit drug
trafficking and other organized crime. Such calls also
indicate that what might be missing is urgent action to
address the problems already identified in the various
United Nations and other studies and reports, as well as
in resolutions of this Council, including the
presidential statement (S/PRST/2009/32) adopted
today.

15

S/PV.6233 (Resumption 1)

I therefore wish to close by echoing the plea
made in July by the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime that illicit drug
trafficking must be stopped (see S/PV.6157), and to
call for urgent action.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, our delegation, too, wishes to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your work in the presidency
during the month of December and to thank you above
all for convening this open debate. We reiterate the
importance of the Security Council’s holding public
meetings that enable all the Members of the
Organization to express their views and to interact with
Council members. Also allow me to thank through you
Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
for his very comprehensive briefing of the Council in
this morning’s meeting.
The issue of drug abuse and illicit trafficking in
narcotics and related crimes is one of the most
disturbing problems on the international agenda today.
The reports prepared by UNODC, the International
Narcotics Control Board and other sources cite
countries in every part of the world — consumer
countries, countries that produce the various drugs and
countries of transit and sale. The Argentine Republic
upholds the principle of shared responsibility between
producer, consumer and transit countries and stresses
the need for a focus balanced between combating drug
trafficking and related crimes and taking measures to
prevent consumption and ensure help for addicts.
In the fight against drugs and drug trafficking, a
comprehensive
approach
is
needed,
through
coordinating policies for monitoring trafficking,
preventing addiction and helping addicts. At the same
time, it is essential that States’ responses be
strengthened through an ongoing dialogue with civil
society, and that the fight against drug trafficking and
related crimes be conducted with full respect for
human rights and with a nuanced focus that seeks the
social rehabilitation of addicts.
We are convinced that it is important to have a
regional focus that reinforces cooperation at the
international level. In our hemisphere, the InterAmerican Drug Abuse Control Commission monitors
the implementation of binding legal instruments and

16

the Anti-Drug Strategy that was approved in Buenos
Aires in 1996. We believe that monitoring and
assessment should be conducted through multilateral
mechanisms that coordinate international cooperation
and are based on objective, reliable information. We
particularly wish to highlight the importance of the
regional Multilateral Evaluation Mechanism as an
objective instrument for measuring member States’
progress in controlling the illicit drug problem, as well
as for identifying vulnerabilities and areas that need
improvement and for strengthening solidarity and
cooperation in the hemisphere.
Argentina takes an active part in international
initiatives on this subject, and we contribute to the
work of the United Nations Commission on Narcotic
Drugs, of which we are a member. We also support the
central role of the International Narcotics Control
Board and UNODC, as well as other multilateral
initiatives and agreements. Among those I should
single out the Political Declaration adopted in March
during the high-level segment of the fifty-second
session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs (see
E/2009/28-E/CN.7/2009/12), which proposes several
measures to intensify international cooperation, a key
factor in this area.
I shall conclude by stressing that the transnational
nature of illicit drug trafficking calls for a coordinated
response on the part of the international community
and of every region. To that end, the action of existing
mechanisms with specific competencies must be
strengthened in order to fully implement international
and regional legal instruments. That will strengthen
judicial cooperation and cooperation among security
forces and will ensure the resources essential for
combating this phenomenon through international
cooperation, even in the most vulnerable regions.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French):
First, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on Burkina Faso’s accession to the presidency of the
Security Council for December, and to thank you for
taking the wise initiative of organizing this open debate
on the subject of drug trafficking as a threat to
international security, the importance of which is by
now beyond doubt.
I would be remiss if I did not pay tribute to the
Burkina Faso delegation for the excellent way it has

09-63874

S/PV.6233 (Resumption 1)

represented Africa on the Council for the last two
years.
At a time when the international community is
celebrating the centenary of international drug control,
whose foundations were laid by the International
Opium Commission, it is disturbing to note that drug
trafficking continues to be a serious threat to
international and regional peace and security, to States’
political and economic stability and to public health.
In a world characterized by an enormous
expansion of trade and advanced use of modern means
of communication, the production and illicit trafficking
of drugs are among the major activities of international
organized crime, with transactions involving colossal
sums of money. Traffickers have access to ever more
sophisticated ways of laundering income from drugs
and smuggling, which is why it is essential to grapple
with this problem as a whole, keeping in view the
interconnections and known links among the various
evils — of traffic in drugs, people and organs, of
money-laundering and corruption, cybercrime and,
especially, the devastating phenomenon of international
terrorism, for which drugs constitute the main source
of financing, along with ransoms coming from the
crime of hostage-taking.
The intersection of all those crimes and the
confluence of other factors such as the multifaceted
crisis that has rocked the world’s economy are
imperiling international security and the rule of law,
especially in Africa, which has to deal with multiple
challenges. In that regard it is alarming to see that West
Africa is becoming a crossroads for global drug
trafficking, exacerbating political and security
instability in a number of countries of the region to the
point of causing the overthrow of constitutionally
elected Governments, with the potential risk of
spreading to the regional level.
Algeria supports the efforts of countries in the
subregion of West Africa carried out in the framework
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), and we were pleased with the adoption by
ECOWAS at Praia in October of a Political Declaration
and Regional Action Plan that will enable the
establishment of mechanisms and policies capable of
dealing with this scourge.
My delegation also believes that it is vitally
important to strengthen the international treaty
framework by calling on all States to ratify the

09-63874

collection of conventions having to do with combating
drugs, organized transnational crime and corruption
and all relevant conventions regarding terrorism.
Beyond that, we must stick to the objectives set out
during the twentieth special session of the General
Assembly (see resolution S-20/4), as well as the
Declaration and Plan of Action adopted during the
fifty-second session of the Commission on Narcotic
Drugs (see E/2009/28 and E/CN.7/2009/12), aimed at
achieving an integrated and balanced strategy for
fighting the global drug problem. It is clear from those
documents that it is vital to work to reduce both the
supply of and the demand for drugs and to promote
international cooperation through an integrated
approach.
With respect to the African continent in
particular, the international community must work
more closely with States and regional and subregional
organizations to strengthen institutional capacities to
combat drug trafficking and all other forms of
organized crime. It is also essential to become actively
involved in economic efforts and the promotion of
alternative development policies in that region in order
to strengthen and broaden economic opportunities and
prospects, and thereby to reduce the possibilities and
temptations to resort to criminal activity.
For its part, at its twelfth Summit in February
2009, the African Union adopted a decision on the
growing threat of drug trafficking, in particular in West
Africa, which has become a source of concern with
respect to the security and good governance of the
region and the entire continent. In that regard, the
African Union called on the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) to step up and broaden its
cooperation with African regional communities in
order to strengthen its action against the scourge on the
continent. My delegation wishes here to pay a strong
tribute to UNODC, which can play a vital role in
assisting States in their efforts to combat drugs and
organized crime, in spite of being financed essentially
by voluntary contributions. We should also like to
welcome the in-depth analysis developed by
Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, Executive Director of
UNODC, in his briefing to the Council this morning.
In conclusion, the Council, which is responsible
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
must play a greater role in combating drug trafficking
and organized crime in conflict and post-conflict
environments.
My
delegation
welcomes
the

17

S/PV.6233 (Resumption 1)

presidential statement (S/PRST/2009/32), which the
Council adopted this morning on Burkina Faso’s
initiative.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Gutiérrez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your
outstanding work as President of the Security Council
for this month.
The delegation of Peru associates itself with the
statement made by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. My delegation
also wishes briefly to touch on certain issues pertinent
to today’s debate.
The illicit traffic in drugs is a severe problem for
many States and is cause for international concern. The
world demand for cocaine alone amounts to almost
1,000 tons a year, with an estimated value of some
$70 billion. Regardless of the status of the affected
States, be they producer, consumer or transit States, it
is clear that it is a global problem, the responsibility
for which is shared by all, as was recently reaffirmed in
the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on
International Cooperation towards an Integrated and
Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem
(see E/2009/28), adopted recently at the high-level
segment of the fifty-second session of the Commission
on Narcotic Drugs.
Although the world drug problem is addressed in
the appropriate forums of the United Nations system —
the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and its subsidiary bodies, including the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs — we understand that
when the issue is compounded by other problems it
generates instability and can threaten the security of
certain States and their neighbours. That is so because
drug trafficking is associated with violence and
organized crime, and in certain countries is linked with
terrorist activities. Drug trafficking is also associated
with other criminal activities, such as moneylaundering, arms trafficking and corruption, causing
major material damage and the loss of human life.
This dangerous interrelationship is especially
clear in Africa. It is disturbing that, due to demand
generated mostly in Europe, some parts of Africa, West
Africa in particular, have become transit zones for
cocaine trafficking. West Africa has also emerged as a

18

transit point for heroin and the precursors of
amphetamine-type stimulants. According to statistics
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the
volume of cocaine that is said to reach Europe is some
250 tons a year, with a market value of approximately
$11 billion. In that regard, West Africa supplies Europe
with some 30 per cent of its total consumption of
cocaine. However, over the past two years, as a result
of changes in modes of drug consumption in Europe,
those levels fell by 14 per cent in 2008.
In spite of the reduced quantities being trafficked,
such activity continues to have a negative impact on
West Africa, where concern is rising over the indices of
corruption and the impunity enjoyed by drug
traffickers, who also contaminate weak national
economies with their abundant funds. This is
particularly serious when we consider that some
countries facing such threats, especially in West Africa,
are emerging from conflict situations or severe internal
political tensions and remain economically, socially
and politically fragile.
Poverty and the lack of basic services increase
social discontent and remain a challenge to stability in
the region. In this context, organized crime, especially
illicit drug trafficking and corruption, finds fertile
ground for its activities, exacerbating existing
problems and creating additional obstacles to Statebuilding, the well-being of their populations and the
security of the subregion.
The Peacebuilding Commission is playing an
important role in addressing this set of problems,
which is among the many fundamental reasons why
Peru supported its establishment and anticipates
providing it with support in the immediate future. One
concrete example of the Peacebuilding Commission’s
work on this issue was the inclusion in 2007 of
Guinea-Bissau on its agenda, with Peru’s support at a
time when my country was a non-permanent member
of the Security Council.
None of the affected countries nor the region as a
whole can address the drug problem facing Africa by
themselves, since it is not exclusively an African
problem. It is a problem that must be tackled by the
international community as a whole through bilateral,
regional and multilateral strategies. It is high time that
the developed countries, and in particular the consumer
countries, give cooperation against drug trafficking
pride of place on their agendas, especially as the

09-63874

S/PV.6233 (Resumption 1)

Political Declaration adopted at the fifty-second
session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs
highlights the need to intensify and strengthen joint
efforts, inter alia, by increasing and coordinating
technical and financial assistance.
For Africa, in spite of the resolve of its countries
and their strenuous efforts — especially through the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States, with the precious support of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime — even more technical and
material assistance is needed to reinforce border
controls along their coasts and in their airspace, as are
increased training and better equipment for police
forces investigating the activities of organized crime
and drug trafficking. International cooperation is also
needed to create the appropriate legal framework for an
active criminal justice system, to establish the
necessary law enforcement measures, and to gather
reliable data to assess the magnitude of the problems of
drug trafficking and abuse affecting the region.
We must therefore understand where the
cooperation, especially in the form of financial
assistance, is being directed so that we can understand
how States are responding to the drug problem at the
international level. If necessary, we must redirect that
cooperation to the countries in greatest need. In that
regard, Peru believes that we need a global report that
compiles statistics and relevant information on the
resources that international cooperation is devoting to
the fight against illicit drug trafficking and that
identifies key programmes of enhanced cooperation
with the countries most affected by illicit drug
production and trafficking. We believe that a first
step in that direction is that the draft resolution on
international cooperation against the world drug
problem, which will soon be submitted to the General
Assembly for adoption, recognizes the need for this
information and calls on Member States to support the
dialogue on this theme, through the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs.
Supporting African countries suffering the
consequences of drug trafficking on their territories is a
necessity that the international community cannot
ignore, especially when this situation, together with
specific national situations, generates political
instability that can even affect regional security.
Hence, the support we can provide should be part of an

09-63874

integrated development and security strategy that will
contribute to building lasting peace in Africa.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Bailly (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation is pleased to take the floor during this open
debate on the item “Peace and security in Africa: drug
trafficking as a threat to international security”, which
is a matter of great interest to us.
At the outset, Mr. President, I join other
delegations in conveying to you my warm
congratulations on this noble initiative, which has
given us an opportunity to pool our thoughts on one of
the ills that is undermining the harmonious
development of Africa. My appreciation also goes to
the United Nations, and in particular the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, for all the
assistance provided to my country and especially for
the unceasing and tireless efforts to the benefit of
developing countries as they combat the scourge of
drugs.
Trafficking in drugs, which now more than ever
is a part of globalization, is nothing new. We no longer
hesitate to talk about it as a transnational organized
crime with its own characteristics in terms of scope,
organization and financing. The growth of this scourge
has a dangerous effect on the equilibrium of our States,
and because of their transnational nature, these crimes
pose a serious threat to national, subregional and
international peace and security.
In the wake of decades of fratricidal wars whose
disastrous consequences continue to hamper its
development, the West African region has become a
major transit area for drug trafficking, in particular
cocaine being shipped from Latin America to Europe.
This is a major scourge with an impact on the
equilibrium of all our societies. Besides the rise in
crime that it causes, this trafficking harms our public
health systems and spreads HIV/AIDS.
Drug money corrupts our financial systems and
poses a threat to the survival of our States. It generates
a specific type of crime and creates networks of
criminals with their associated terrorism, gang wars
and payback — even armed movements. The fact is
that drug trafficking finances and is accompanied by
other crimes such as arms trafficking, terrorism and
money-laundering.

19

S/PV.6233 (Resumption 1)

Côte d’Ivoire has not been idle in the fight
against drug abuse and drug trafficking. Since the 2002
Yamoussoukro Ministerial Conference on Drug Control
in Africa, we have put in place a comprehensive
national strategy encompassing prevention, education,
health care and treatment, assistance and reintegration,
along with a crackdown on trafficking, illicit
production and consumption. The strategy, which has
the support of the President and the Government of
Côte d’Ivoire, includes a number of special measures,
such as coordination and supervision of the national
fight against drugs by an inter-ministerial anti-drug
committee, and mobilization and action by the police
directorate on drugs, targeting areas such as smoking
rooms and other places where traffickers congregate
and systematically destroying inventories and the
substances seized. We have ratified and are
implementing a number of relevant instruments,
including the 2000 United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocols. We
are working to harmonize our national legislation with
regional and international instruments, and we have put
in place national and subregional training programmes
organized by the Centre régional de formation à la lutte
contre la drogue de Grand Bassam in close cooperation
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
Côte d’Ivoire is mindful of the need for a
comprehensive regional and international approach to
put an end to this scourge, and our action in this sphere
must be taken within a regional and international
framework. Here, my country, which has already
undertaken bilateral agreements and partnerships with
friendly States on securing our borders and other
sensitive sites such as ports and airports, continues to
enhance its cooperation with INTERPOL. My country
is also working with its focal points to implement the
Regional Action Plan against illicit drug trafficking and
organized crime in West Africa, adopted by the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) at Praia, Cape Verde, in 2008.
In spite of these efforts, our States face many
challenges if they are to provide a comprehensive,
coordinated and effective national and international
response. Among other things, we need to strengthen
and harmonize the regional and international legal
framework, exchange information, provide education
and increase legal assistance in order to make
investigations and legal proceedings more effective
both in the ECOWAS area and throughout Africa.

20

Technical and financial assistance is a vital necessity
for capacity-building. We must also secure our land, air
and maritime borders, providing effective systems for
control and verification.
In his report on international cooperation against
the world drug problem (A/64/120), the SecretaryGeneral gives an overview of the world drug situation
and the status of international drug control activities.
Among other things, the alarming increase of cocaine
trafficking through West Africa and heroin trafficking
through East Africa is a matter of urgency. That is why
we must all strengthen international cooperation in
facing up to this global drug problem.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Let me begin by saying
how pleased we are to see an African country, Burkina
Faso, presiding over the work of the Security Council.
My country endorses the statement made on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement on the item on today’s
agenda.
Venezuela appreciates and endorses all the efforts
that Burkina Faso can make during its presidency of
the Security Council to contribute to the resolution of
the armed conflicts Africa faces and to bolster the
initiatives of the African Union towards building peace
and reconciliation among the countries of the
continent. We believe that Burkina Faso will contribute
to preventing some members of the Security Council
from adopting decisions that are remote from
international law and that would prevent dialogue and
reconciliation in Africa.
We have been invited to an open Security Council
debate on drug trafficking in Africa as a threat to
international security. Three fundamental points need
to be highlighted. First, under the United Nations
Charter drug trafficking is not within the purview of
the Security Council. Secondly, this is an issue that,
given its scope, must be addressed in an inclusive
manner, not through a self-interested and a priori
reductionist approach imposed by one, two, three, four
or five countries among the international community.
Thirdly, the Security Council has demonstrated that it
does not wish to or cannot carry out its own functions.
For this reason, it should not claim new functions that
are outside its competence. An illustration of the

09-63874

S/PV.6233 (Resumption 1)

Council’s ineptitude in dealing with issues relevant to
the international community is its complete disregard
for the resolutions adopted with regard to Palestine,
which are binding on Israel.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela shares the
common interest in and will to fight this scourge in the
framework of international cooperation and in fullest
respect for the sovereignty of countries and for human
rights, in particular the principles of due process,
proportionality and the presumption of innocence,
among others. Venezuela believes that the world drug
problem should continue to be addressed in the
framework of the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and its subsidiary body, the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs, in accordance with the
current practice and existing commitments on this
subject.
In this regard, we would recall that as recently as
in March of this year, at the fifty-second session of the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs, Member States
adopted the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on
International Cooperation towards an Integrated and
Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem.
At that session, States affirmed that the world drug
problem is a threat to the public security of our States
and the well-being of all humankind, since it
undermines sustainable development, political stability
and democratic institutions.
Major commitments were undertaken in context
of the Political Declaration and Plan of Action with
regard to reducing the demand for and supply of drugs,
in particular in the areas of controlling precursors and
amphetamine-type stimulants. There was also an
agreement on international cooperation to eradicate
illicit crops used to produce narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances, and to develop alternative
crops, counter money-laundering and provide mutual
legal assistance.
In that context, current and future challenges
were identified and studied, as were new trends in the
world drug problem and possible improvements of the
current assessment system. Mention was made of the
need to strengthen international cooperation in drug
control on the basis of the principle of common and
shared responsibilities. We believe that this is how this
issue should be dealt with and not, for example,
through the use of foreign military bases on the
territory of a given country. The challenges in the fight

09-63874

against drug trafficking identified by the specialized
bodies of the United Nations must be addressed.
We commend the efforts of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime to provide financial and
technical support to African countries with the aim of
supporting and developing their national capacities to
respond to drug trafficking and transnational organized
crime. The Government of Venezuela shares the
concern of African countries over the negative impact
that illicit drug trafficking could have on the stability
of their countries.
That is why Venezuela promotes South-South
cooperation and major initiatives with African
countries to combat drug trafficking. In this regard, at
the Second Africa-South America Summit of Heads of
State, held in Isla Margarita, Venezuela, on 26 and
27 September 2009, our heads of State reaffirmed their
commitment to promoting initiatives, proposals and
activities to combat this phenomenon at the bi-regional
and bilateral levels.
In addition, during the 19th Meeting of Heads of
National Drug Law Enforcement Agencies, tasked with
countering the illicit traffic in drugs in Latin America
and the Caribbean, also held in Isla Margarita from
28 September to 2 October 2009, major agreements
were reached on promoting bilateral cooperation in the
fight against drugs, in particular in West African
countries.
An instructive and encouraging debate is taking
place in several multilateral forums on the fight against
drug trafficking. In all of those instances, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has provided
concrete proof of its solidarity and cooperation with
African countries, in particular those of West Africa, by
signing many bilateral agreements on combating the
world drug problem.
We trust that the consideration of this topic at this
meeting of the Security Council will not set a
precedent or legitimize any action the Security Council
might contemplate on this issue.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): The
issue of illicit drug production and trafficking is one of
the most daunting challenges that the international
community faces today. Illicit drugs pose major threats
to the socio-economic and security situation of all

21

S/PV.6233 (Resumption 1)

societies. The pervasive nature of this phenomenon has
made it such an international problem that it can be
curbed only through collective and concerted efforts
based on the principle of shared responsibility.
In the past couple of years, the bulk of the
Council’s consideration of drug-related topics concerns
the issue of drug trafficking in some regions, including
West Asia and West Africa, and a number of
resolutions and presidential statements contain
references to that issue. Resolution 1817 (2008)
specifically focuses on the connection between drug
production and security, terrorism and organized crime
in our region. In these decisions, the Council
recognized the need for the international community to
come up with an integrated and balanced approach to
address drug-related problems as a shared
responsibility.
The Islamic Republic of Iran is presiding over the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs as of this month and
until December 2010. In this regard, I would like to
enumerate briefly the efforts undertaken by my
Government in curtailing illegal narcotics.
Over the years, we have dedicated thousands of
Iranian police personnel and allocated billions of
dollars to this issue. Based on this approach, the
Islamic Republic of Iran has mobilized about 30,000
troops of its military and disciplinary forces all along
our extensive border areas. Iran has also strived to
reinforce and modify the fortifications, facilities and
intelligence control systems at transit and border
checkpoints in order to prevent the entry of trafficking
caravans into the country. All those measures have
resulted in the confiscation of massive amounts of
various types of narcotics. That has helped to rank Iran
first in the world, as we are responsible for 80 per cent
of the world’s total opium and heroin seizures. I should
mention that the aggregate amount of drugs seized by
the Islamic Republic of Iran in 2008 amounted to 702
tons.
In the area of regional cooperation, Iran has
cooperated with neighbouring and Balkan route
countries. Two regional information-exchange centres
based in Iran, namely, the Anti-narcotics Police and the
Drug Control Headquarters, are fully engaged in
information exchanges with drug liaison officers in
regional and neighbouring countries. The Islamic
Republic of Iran has held eight rounds of the
international conference for drug liaison officers.

22

Iran has also expanded its cooperation with
members of the Economic Cooperation Organization
and contributed to establishing a unit to combat drugs
within that organization. We have also held several
workshops on drug supply and demand reduction.
Moreover, with a focus on the need for close
cooperation and coordination in the region, in
conjunction with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, the Islamic Republic of Iran regularly
convenes meetings and exchanges information with
relevant authorities and senior officials from anti-drug
forces of countries in our region.
In that regard, Iran held a trilateral meeting in
May 2008 as part of the Triangular Initiative. The
Secretary-General referred to it in paragraph 38 of his
report in document A/64/120, noting that “A first pilot
joint operation under this initiative was launched in
March 2009 and led to drug seizures and the
dismantling of criminal drug networks.” Furthermore,
the report gives information on the first- ever joint
operation against drug trafficking networks, which was
carried out in March 2009 and led to seizure of drugs
and the arrest of drug traffickers. I should say that,
sadly, quite a remarkable number of drug traffickers
arrested in my country are from African countries. That
indicates that drug trafficking recognizes no borders or
regions.
With respect to international cooperation, the
Islamic Republic of Iran has signed a number of
cooperation documents in the field of combating
narcotics with more than 30 countries. We have
actively participated in various international meetings
and conferences, such as meetings of the Commission
on Narcotic Drugs and Paris Pact round tables.
We have also facilitated visits by international
authorities — including UNODC, Paris Pact and
Dublin Group representatives — to Iranian borders.
Following all those visits, Iran’s activities and efforts
in combating illicit drugs have been widely recognized
by the international community. Given the fact that this
menace serves as a breeding ground for terrorism,
Iran’s efforts in this regard have undoubtedly made a
fundamental contribution to the global fight against
terrorism.
Drug trafficking in some regions undermines
efforts to achieve stability, prosperity and peace. That
is because narcotic drugs are a source of financing for
terrorism. They also fuel threats to the stability and

09-63874

S/PV.6233 (Resumption 1)

security of regions. We have faced that phenomenon in
our own region for many years. We have experienced
its devastating effects on the social and overall health
of our society. We have shouldered a great burden in
dealing with this threat, largely while receiving little
assistance from the international community, even
though we all know that no country can tackle this
scourge single-handedly.
On the eve of the international conference in
support of Afghanistan, which will be held next month
in London, we hope that that meeting will also
consider the international community’s commitment as
well as, in a spirit of enhanced partnership, the issue of
combating drug production and trafficking originating
from that country. We also hope that the conference
will provide fresh political impetus to mobilize the
international community to support Afghanistan’s
Government and its neighbours.
I would like to conclude by expressing the hope
that the Security Council’s deliberations on
international and regional cooperation on the threat of
narcotic drugs will become a basis for a common and
shared responsibility to counter the world drug
problem and related criminal activities. I also hope it
will help to support relevant national, subregional and
regional activities and mechanisms.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia.
Mr. Loayza Barea (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me first to express
our great pleasure at seeing you, Sir, presiding over the
Security Council. We are absolutely certain that under
your guidance, Burkina Faso and, consequently, the
Council will have a meaningful month of activity.
Bolivia would like to associate itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. We would also
like to acknowledge the briefing given by the
representative of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC).
The Plurinational State of Bolivia is resolutely
committed to combating the world drug problem, drug
trafficking and organized crime. In that regard, it is
important to point out that the Nineteenth Summit of
Heads of National Drug Law Enforcement Agencies —
HONLEA — of Latin American and the Caribbean,

09-63874

which took place in Venezuela from 28 September to
2 October, commended Bolivia for its efforts to combat
drug trafficking and eradicate illegal excessive crops of
coca leaf.
In addition, the presentation of the UNODC
report on the monitoring of coca cultivation in the
Plurinational State of Bolivia recorded that the
Government of Bolivia deserves to be commended for
the significant increase in drug interdiction. There has
been a 45 per cent increase in the quantity of cocaine
based seized, from 14,912 kilograms to 21,641
kilograms, and a 145 per cent increase in the quantity
of cocaine hydrochloride seized. In addition, the
number of laboratories that have been dismantled
continues to increase.
Operations against drug trafficking have
increased by 58 per cent as compared to 2005 — from
6,831 in that year to 10,795 in 2008. The effectiveness
of those interventions made it possible to increase
seizures of cocaine and related substances by 252 per
cent. In 2005, we seized almost 11.4 tons, a figure that
rose to 28.8 tons of cocaine and related products in
2008. In 2009, as part of reducing excessive coca-leaf
production, we eradicated production on 6,272
hectares — a substantial record in the past five years.
That serves to amply confirm the commitment of
President Morales in the fight against drugs. Similarly,
there was a significant increase in 2008 in the seizure
of chemical substances, as well as in the destruction of
recycling laboratories and facilities for crystallizing the
drug.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia has, for the
first time, earmarked $20 million of its own resources
to combat drug trafficking. In the framework of our
regional and multilateral strategy to combat drug
trafficking, the Union of South American Nations has
worked towards the creation of a South American
council to combat drug trafficking. We have signed
bilateral agreements and undertaken joint interdiction
efforts with Argentina, Paraguay and Brazil.
I should also note that, according to the World
Drug Report 2008 published by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, coca leaf crops in Bolivia
account for only 18 per cent of world coca leaf. The
maximum potential cocaine production in Bolivia is
equivalent to 13 per cent of potential cocaine
production worldwide. We should clarify that that
figure will decrease even further once the

23

S/PV.6233 (Resumption 1)

comprehensive coca leaf study is concluded. That
study will calculate the quantity of leaves used for
traditional consumption, subtracting it from the
maximum potential cocaine production in Bolivia.
With regard to traditional consumption, in March
2009 President Morales Ayma presented a draft
amendment to article 49 of the Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs of 1961 to decriminalize coca leaf
chewing, which had been prohibited in that Convention
because of unscientific cultural prejudices. A draft
resolution on international cooperation against the
world drug problem (A/C.3/64/L.15/Rev.1) was
recently adopted by consensus in the Third Committee
and will in turn be adopted by the General Assembly.
The draft resolution reflects the view that due account
should be taken of the traditional licit uses of crops
where there is historical evidence of such use. Coca
leaf chewing is an age-old ancestral practice of the
indigenous peoples of the Andes and the Amazon of
South America and it is part of our history and cultural
identity.
At the second South America-Africa Summit,
held on Margarita Island in September, there was
explicit recognition of the adverse affects of all aspects
of the world drug problem, including illegal trafficking
in drugs and psychotropic substances and connected
crimes, on security, peace, governance, economic
development and public health for our peoples. This
poses a severe challenge to social institutions and
policies and contribute to environmental degradation,
produce poverty and weaken efforts at social
integration.

24

In that context, Latin America and Africa
committed themselves to encouraging bilateral and
regional initiatives activities, as indicated by the
Permanent Representative of Venezuela, always on the
basis of the principles of common and shared
responsibility, which entails an integrated and balanced
focus, respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States, non-intervention in internal affairs
and respect for human rights, as established in the
Charter of the United Nations.
This joint effort, this national effort and this
subregional effort will make it possible to pool the
concerted efforts of the entire international community
to make ever greater strides towards achieving the
results we all hope for in the fight against this scourge,
especially in West Africa. We believe that the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and their
subsidiary bodies are the appropriate forum for indepth consideration of the subject.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General and
all the ministers and other speakers who participated in
today’s debate.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

09-63874
