United Nations

S/PV.4105

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fifth Year

4105th Meeting
Monday, 28 February 2000, 12.25 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Listre . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Argentina)

Members:

Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Chowdhury
Mr. Vámos-Goldman
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. Dejammet
Miss Durrant
Mr. Hasmy
Mr. Kasse
Mr. Andjaba
Mr. Hamer
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Ben Mustapha
Mr. Yel’chenko
Mr. Eldon
Mr. Cunningham

Agenda
Briefing by Mr. Carl Bildt, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Balkans

00-31762 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be
incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation
concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
The meeting was called to order at 12.25 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefing by Mr. Carl Bildt, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Balkans
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia in which they request to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sacirbey
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) and Mr. Čalovski (the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia) took the
seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance with
the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall take
it that the Security Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of the its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Carl Bildt, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Balkans.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Bildt to take a seat at the Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Carl Bildt, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral to the Balkans. Following his briefing, the
members of the Council will have an opportunity to
comment and to ask questions.

2

4105th meeting
28 February 2000
I now call on Mr. Bildt.
Mr. Bildt: It is indeed an honour to be able to
address the Council on the search for self-sustaining
stability, as well as human rights and democracy, in the
Balkans.
Kosovo is once again the centre of public attention.
But it is not my task to go into the details of all of the
challenges we are facing there. Indeed, Mr. Kouchner will
be briefing the Council on these on 6 March, I
understand. It is enough for me to repeat what I remarked
in informal consultations last year: that the operation in
Kosovo is the most complex and the most challenging
operation of this sort that the United Nations has ever
been asked to undertake.
But Kosovo is only one small part of a region that
is in search of stability, and my task as Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General is to see what can be done to
prevent new conflicts from occurring, as well as to see
what can be done to pave the way for self-sustaining
stability in the region as a whole.
Instability and conflict are not recent phenomena in
this region. We often tend to forget that conflicts and
instabilities in the Balkans dominated the first decade of
the twentieth century as much as they dominated the last.
To find a stable political order for this region, with its
rich mosaic of peoples, cultures and traditions — the
result of millennia of rule by multinational empires — has
been a most difficult task.
It was a decade ago that we were confronted with
these issues again. Old regimes and old structures of
repression were thrown away, and the international
community was faced with the task of helping the region
transit to a new order of stability, now also built on
respect for human rights and democracy. This has proved
to be a most challenging task. Some would describe it as
a succession of failures: the failure to prevent the war in
Croatia, the failure to prevent the war in Bosnia and the
failure to prevent the war in Kosovo. Those wars of
course devastated the lives of people and devastated the
region. The United Nations system, from the very
beginning, has been at the forefront of the efforts to
alleviate suffering and help ordinary people. It has often,
as the Council knows, been a thankless task.
As we look at the situation now, a decade later, I do
not think it is possible to say that we have managed to
achieve a situation of self-sustaining stability in the

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year

4105th meeting
28 February 2000

region. Indeed, our combined political, humanitarian,
economic and military involvement in the different parts of
the region is larger and more demanding than ever before.
Were it to be withdrawn today, we would be facing new
wars tomorrow.

but the time is certainly ripe for discussion of the core
issues. Let me indicate four starting points for such a
search for a settlement. They, in turn, come on top of the
most obvious point, namely, taking into account the
wishes of all those living or having their roots in Kosovo.

The larger issue that we are confronted with in the
region is the conflict between what I refer to as the forces
of integration and the forces of disintegration. The conflict
is between those who favour, or at least accept, integration
within their societies as well as between them, and those
who favour — often in the name of extreme nationalism —
disintegration within their societies and between nations.
We know, of course, from rather bitter experience that
virtually every step of disintegration in the region has been
associated with violent conflict of one sort or another, more
often than not resulting in massive violations of human
rights, massive ethnic cleansing and massive destruction of
economic and social infrastructure. This has not been a
region of velvet divorces; this has been a region of violent
divorces.

First, I believe the search for a regional settlement
must have the solid support of the Council. This is not
just an abstract principle or political statement. It is based
on concrete experience in the region during the past 10
years. For only when there has been a solid consensus
among the key international actors — often the United
States, the countries of the European Union and the
Russian Federation — has it been possible to achieve
political agreements between the different warring parties
in the different conflicts in the area. Any lesser
combination has, as a rule, been doomed to failure. It is
thus important for there to be a dialogue within the
Council on the shape of the regional settlement that must
come.

As we look at the region today, we have to conclude
that the forces of disintegration are still stronger than the
forces of integration. As long as this is the case, a selfsustaining stability that also conforms to our other values
will be most difficult to achieve. This makes it even more
important to press on with our search for such stability.
In 1995, after massive failures and massive efforts, we
managed to achieve a political settlement in Bosnia. The
Dayton Peace Agreement remains one of the most
ambitious agreements of its kind in modern history. In
1999, efforts to seek a political settlement to the conflict in
Kosovo failed, and the war that resulted ended with
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), as well as with a
military-technical agreement. But there was and there is no
proper peace agreement.
This is a key factor that makes the task of the United
Nations Mission in Kosovo so demanding and so difficult.
And since the core issues of the conflict concerning the
long-term position of Kosovo are not seen as settled, it has
also made it much more difficult to move towards stability
for the region as a whole. There are simply too many
expectations and too many fears generated by the
apparently unresolved core issues of the conflict.
It is thus imperative, if we are not going to give up
our search for self-sustaining stability, that we be ready to
resume the search for a peaceful settlement to the conflict.
The time might not yet be ripe for more concrete moves,

Secondly, I believe that the States of the region must
be active participants in the search for this settlement. In
Rambouillet a year ago, the search for a settlement was
primarily between Belgrade and the political
representatives of the Kosovo Albanians. Although this
certainly remains the core conflict yet to be settled, its
settlement is no longer enough. The future of Kosovo
affects the region as a whole in a very profound way. We
must thus be clear in seeking the voice and the
involvement of the leaders in Skopje and Tirana, as well
as other regional capitals. We must take into account the
views expressed in Podgorica and in Sarajevo. We must
treat it as a truly regional issue.
Thirdly, I believe it is fundamental that we be ready
to make it clear that a true deal will be one that meets the
minimum demands of everyone, but the maximum
demands of no one. This was the essence of the political
deal that resulted in the Peace Agreement for Bosnia. It
answered to the minimum demands of everyone, while it
met the maximum demands of no one. Only thus could
that deal be achieved, and only thus can that deal be
carried forward.
Fourthly, and what is perhaps most difficult, we
must be able to set an agreement firmly within the
context of a wider arrangement for the region as a whole,
and preferably for the region within the wider European
context. There are obvious interrelationships between the
different conflicts in the region, and there is an obvious
need to create a wider framework that will not only

3

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
guarantee the stability of the different deals in the region
but will also promote the common policies of reform,
reconciliation and reintegration, which will be absolutely
crucial to future development.
There have been, and there are, important regional
initiatives. In the early 1990s there was the United Nations
and European Union-sponsored International Conference on
the Former Yugoslavia, and since the summer of last year
there has been the Stability Pact initiative, sponsored by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and initiated by the European Union. The European
Union has also offered to conclude stabilization and
association agreements with each of the countries of the
region.
These important efforts notwithstanding, it is my belief
that there will be a need for a structure that in its scope,
firmness and perspective goes well beyond what has so far
been contemplated.
All this being said, we all know that there are virtually
no possibilities at the moment of proceeding along this path
of a possible peace. We are, mildly speaking, handicapped
by the regime in Belgrade. The fact that the key political
and military leaders of what is left of Yugoslavia have been
indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for
Yugoslavia for crimes against humanity means that they are
de facto excommunicated from any sort of dialogue or
diplomatic contact.
This is natural, but it is undoubtedly also a dilemma.
We can neither make peace without Belgrade, nor talk
about the different issues of the region as a whole without
taking in Serbia, but there is also no way in which we can
deal with those personalities who are indicted by the
International Tribunal or their close associates. We are thus,
in a certain sense, in a situation in which many of our
efforts in the region can be seen as little more than a big
holding operation until change in Serbia opens up the
prospect of moving forward with a proper peace process as
well as with the wider regional agenda of reform,
reconciliation and reintegration.
But simply to sit and wait is not enough. If we do
that, we might well be faced with further conflicts. We
must actively seek change; we must meet the provocations
that are there and will come later; and we must actively try
to prevent existing tensions from boiling over into open
conflict.

4

4105th meeting
28 February 2000
Let me, in this context, mention in particular the
situation between Serbia and Montenegro. As long as
there is no change of regime in Belgrade, these two
republics of Yugoslavia are set on a somewhat slow but
very steady collision course. President Milosevic has
grossly misused the federal institutions and grossly
violated the rights of Montenegro within that federation.
That the leadership of Montenegro has not reacted to
these violations by seceding outright, but proposed instead
a reformed relationship between Serbia and Montenegro
is an indication of responsibility and statesmanship that
should not go unrewarded.
The position of Montenegro is difficult in a number
of respects. In a way, we can say that it suffers from
double sanctions. From one side, Montenegrans suffer
from the sanctions against all of Yugoslavia, which block
their access to the international financial institutions.
From the other side, they face the de facto sanctions
against them from Serbia, forcing them — to take just
one example — to rely on expensive food imports from
abroad.
I believe that, in the interests of stability, we must
all accelerate our efforts to give them help in this
particularly difficult situation. The confrontation between
Montenegro and Serbia is a confrontation over the future
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. As such, it has
obvious implications for the way in which Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) can one day be fully
implemented. A regional settlement is hardly possible
until key questions of the future shape of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia have been settled. Such a regional
settlement will have to balance the wider interests of the
Serbs or other Slavs with those of the Albanians in the
region. We certainly want to build democracy and civil
society in the entire region and in all of these countries,
but this will not be enough to make all of these other
issues go away. Nationalism and democracy are not
necessarily incompatible.
We must be aware of the tensions that are there
along the fault lines between these wider interests. We
see them on an almost daily basis in Mitrovica in
northern Kosovo. And we must not pretend that we
cannot recognize those extremists groups or individuals
on both sides who are determined to exploit these
tensions to the full along all of the fault lines, be they in
northern Kosovo, be they in southern Serbia, as we are
also seeing, or be they perhaps even in Macedonia.
Again, we are dealing with the clash between the forces
of integration and the forces of disintegration in the

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
region. If the latter are allowed to have the upper hand for
long enough, we will see tensions building up even more,
bringing further conflicts, and perhaps even paving the way
for conflicts every bit as brutal as those we have already
witnessed.
We are thus faced with a complex situation in the
region. There are positive developments. The political
changes in Croatia certainly count very prominently among
those and, in spite of all of the difficulties that we are
facing and the Council is familiar with, we are also making
progress in Bosnia. But overall, we are still far from
achieving the self-sustaining stability which we have been
seeking for the past decade and about which all the
individuals of the different countries of the region,
irrespective of belief, origin or creed, are dreaming. So the
search will have to go on under conditions that are far from
easy.
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): Let me first of all express my
appreciation to you, Sir, for convening this meeting. We
welcome once again Mr. Carl Bildt, the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Balkans, and thank him for
his succinct but wide-ranging briefing and candid analysis,
which I am sure have been extremely useful to Council
members. He has given the Council a lot of food for
thought.
For the purpose of today's discussion, my delegation
wishes to focus on only a few issues of importance to the
Council and to the international community in the
continuing efforts to achieve peace and stability in the
region, especially in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and also in
Kosovo.
First, among these immediate concerns is the return of
refugees and displaced persons. There have been concerted
efforts made by the United Nations system and the
international community as a whole to facilitate the return
of refugees and displaced persons, both in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in Kosovo. In Kosovo, a very large
number of Kosovar Albanian refugees and displaced
persons have returned, but there is now the problem of an
outflow of other ethnic communities from the province,
especially of the Serbs. Meanwhile, the refugee problem
remains largely unresolved in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
even four years after the signing of the Dayton Peace
Agreement.
The refugee problem is, of course, at the heart of the
existing insecurity situation, which is due to the absence of
law and order or to their ineffectiveness, both in Bosnia and

4105th meeting
28 February 2000
Herzegovina and in Kosovo. In our view, the restoration
and maintenance of law and order are important not only
in themselves, but also in terms of encouraging the rapid
return of the refugees.
Secondly, there is a need for continued emphasis on
the reconciliation process. This should remain one of the
priorities, both for Bosnia and Herzegovina as well as for
Kosovo. It is only natural for the communities that have
been subjected to some of the worst crimes against
humanity committed since the end of the Second World
War to seek justice for their loved ones who have
perished. In this regard, it is important that justice be
done and be seen to be done. Hence, the special
importance that we attach to the work of the International
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991 in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo, which
the international community should strongly support.
Thirdly, there should be continued and unstinting
support from the international community for the
rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Kosovo. We note that a lot of work has
been done in this area by the international community as
a whole and countries in the region. We note in particular
the specific plans outlined in the Stability Pact for SouthEastern Europe for further efforts, ranging from economic
reconstruction and political reform to closer regional
integration. We commend these efforts and hope for their
success.
Finally, my delegation would like to underscore the
importance of the role of local leaders. We believe that
much of the success of the efforts of the international
community will depend on the cooperation and
constructive attitude of the local leaders.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Malaysia for the kind words he
addressed to me.
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): We thank Mr. Bildt
for his very frank, thorough and engaging briefing on
Balkan issues. It could not have been timelier, as the
recent incidents in the Balkans, and in Kosovo in
particular, have made us freshly focus our attention on the
international efforts for peace in the region as a whole.
We appreciate this firsthand briefing on Balkan issues
from a veteran such as Mr. Bildt.

5

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year

4105th meeting
28 February 2000

The recent flare-up in Mitrovica has been viewed as
potentially destabilizing for other areas of Kosovo and
beyond. Mr. Bildt has long been championing a far more
intensive involvement on the part of the international
community in reconstruction — not just in Kosovo and
Bosnia, but also across the Balkans as a whole. We agree
with his statement today that the time is now ripe for
discussions on all unresolved core issues in the Balkans.

I believe that in this respect Mr. Bildt is keenly
aware, as he has demonstrated today, of the three
important considerations. The first is, of course, to try to
contribute to strengthening trends towards cooperation and
solidarity as opposed to trends towards disintegration or
division. I believe that this is a very interesting
approach — the only viable one, in fact — and that Mr.
Bildt has rightly chosen it.

The international community has reinforced its
presence to prevent inter-ethnic clashes. This has
contributed, to some extent, to a calming of the situation.
But experience shows that conflicts rooted in ethnicity tend
to be prolonged and even to transcend generations. The
strengthened international presence cannot be a permanent
solution. There should be a built-in mechanism within their
societies which would check and halt any flaring up of
hostile situations.

The second important consideration is that we must
not shy away from the word “reform”. Of course, when
we speak of reform, we mean democratic reform. Indeed,
certain actors in the region must either become more
aware of the need for democratic reform or step aside,
because this is a key element in the successful
consolidation of trends towards cooperation and solidarity.

We should help promote a culture of peace in the
Balkans with determined efforts and with the involvement
and participation of all sectors of their societies. An allembracing movement by civil society for a culture of peace
is possibly the only way to achieve sustainable stability in
the region.
Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): We find
Mr. Carl Bildt’s statements very interesting for several
reasons, the first being his experience. He was the
European Union’s envoy during a particularly sensitive
phase of the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina. He carried
out his task in an authoritative manner, with perseverance
and wisdom, and finally, jointly with Mr. Holbrooke,
achieved a successful outcome. He was the first High
Representative of the international community for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and, as a result, he has a wealth of
experience that it is in our interest to draw on.
The second reason why we attach a great deal of
importance to Mr. Bildt’s statements touches on the very
circumstances of his appointment and his mandate. The
Secretary-General was right to appoint a Special Envoy for
the Balkans as a whole. I believe that what is important
with respect to Mr. Bildt’s task is the scope of his
competence and the need for him to have a global overview
of the region. This is because, as we know, different
institutions and bodies with different mandates and
compositions are taking a variety of approaches to the
Balkan region, and therefore it is up to Mr. Bildt to take a
sweeping look at the overall situation, where, despite the
specificity of the situations, certain characteristic elements
recur.

6

My third comment concerns the importance of
reconstruction. We must continue to lend our assistance
in order to provide grounds for hope.
These three aspects — solidarity, reform and
reconstruction — underpin Mr. Bildt’s overall vision, and
that is why we are gratified to have him with us today.
We welcome the work he has already done, and we
encourage him to continue in that same vein.
Mr. Yel’chenko (Ukraine): I too would like to thank
Mr. Bildt for his informative and thought-provoking
briefing.
The current situation in the Balkans gives us cause
for mixed feelings of both cautious optimism and grave
concern. Our optimism is based on the undeniable
progress achieved through post-conflict peace-building
efforts in Croatia and in Bosnia, while the cause of our
concern is the progressive deterioration of the situation in
Kosovo.
We share the conviction of Mr. Bildt, which he
expressed some time ago, that any long-term strategy for
stability and peace in the region was dependent on a socalled three R’s policy: comprehensive reform of all
conflict-devastated societies, reintegration of the region
with the European and global infrastructure, and
reconciliation between all the States and all the nations of
the region.
My delegation is convinced that the issues of
security, the return of refugees and economic
reconstruction are among the key pillars of the overall
settlement of the Balkan conflict. Needless to say,

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
adequate security conditions are a prerequisite for any
peace process. In the context of the Balkans, first and
foremost, this relates to the current situation in Kosovo,
which continues to challenge European security as a whole
and undermine peace-building achievements in other parts
of the region.
The recent disturbances in Mitrovica showed that more
resolute measures should be undertaken to break the cycle
of ethnic hatred, distrust and revenge and to stop terrorist
and criminal activities against international peacekeeping
and humanitarian personnel.
The return of refugees and displaced persons is one of
the core problems in ensuring political stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Croatia and Yugoslavia. It is clear that
this problem can be addressed only in a regional
framework, provided that there is a close cooperation
between the countries of the region in securing a voluntary
return of the national minorities and in ensuring their
legitimate claims for safety and equal social rights,
including property rights.
In this context, we are satisfied by the reports of an
increase in the positive trend of the return of refugees and
displaced persons to their homes in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The recent statements by the new leadership
of Croatia give us hope for further progress in resolving the
existing problem of refugee return in this country.
We remain deeply alarmed, however, by the growing
large-scale campaign of intimidation aimed at turning the
Kosovo province of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
into an ethnically monolithic area. The economic
reconstruction of the entire region and all of its countries
individually is at the heart of the eventual settlement of
every constituent part of the Balkan conflict.
In this connection, the significance of the Stability
Pact for South-Eastern Europe cannot be overestimated. It
provides a chance for all countries of the region to speed
up its economic recovery and the overall process of
transformation in order to integrate more closely into the
European family of nations. In addition, this document
provides a solid regional framework for the economic
reconstruction of the Balkans as a whole.
Ukraine welcomes the recent adoption of the
Bucharest Declaration of the Third Meeting of Heads of
State and Government of South-East European Countries on
12 February this year, and reiterates its interest in becoming
more closely associated with the joint efforts of the

4105th meeting
28 February 2000
international community as facilitator of the process of
the Stability Pact for South-Eastern Europe. My country
believes that, as a Danube riparian State that suffered
losses because of economic sanctions against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Kosovo crisis, it should
be involved in this ongoing process of regional economic
reconstruction. Undoubtedly, there is a clear linkage
between the developments in different parts of that
region. Therefore, a regional approach should be applied
in settling all the interrelated disputes in the Balkans.
There is a clear need for closer coordination of efforts
between the international players on the ground, including
all the United Nations missions. In this regard, we are
certain that the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Balkans can play a more active role to that end.
At the same time, we have to note the absence of an
established dialogue between the Special Envoy and the
Security Council. I have to confess, Mr. Bildt, that when
we learned about your coming to brief the Council, our
delegation, like many others, tried to figure out the
concrete subject of the discussion in the context of your
activities, simply because the Council has very little
information about this.
We are aware of Mr. Bildt’s broad mandate,
entrusted to him by the Secretary-General. My delegation
believes that this mandate allows him to address some
Balkan issues which, due to different reasons, fall outside
the focus of the Security Council. My country believes
that Mr. Bildt’s role and his efforts in the Balkans are
indeed a valuable contribution to our common cause of
establishing sustainable peace and stability in the Balkans.
Therefore, it seems to me that these common efforts
could be much more effective if the two-way
communication between the Security Council and the
Special Envoy for the Balkans were established on a
permanent basis.
Against this background, we welcome today’s
briefing. My delegation deems it necessary to have such
Council briefings regularly. On the one hand, the practice
of such briefings will enable the Council to be better
apprised of the Special Envoy’s activities in the Balkans.
On the other hand, it will allow the Council, when
necessary, to extend more actively its political support to
him or to use his good offices. At the same time, the
introduction of the practice of briefings should not
preclude the use of a feasible communication channel
between Mr. Bildt and the Security Council, as well as in
the reverse direction, through the Secretary-General.

7

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
We would also like to have more information about
the activities of the second Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Balkans, Mr. Eduard Kukan, who might
also wish to participate in the relevant Council briefings.
Finally, let me wish Mr. Bildt every success in his
activities in the Balkans in his present capacity. My country
stands ready to further contribute to our joint endeavours in
pursuit of the restoration of peace and security in that
region.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian)
I associate myself with the words of welcome to Carl Bildt,
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Balkans,
and I thank him for his clear and thorough statement of his
views on what is happening in the Balkans. I agree with his
conviction that the problem of the Balkans can be resolved
only in a comprehensive way, and that indeed a regional
approach is essential, both in view of the number of
participants and in view of the objective to which we
should all aspire. I particularly wish to emphasize his view
of the necessity to have the agreement both of the Security
Council and, in a broader context, of the international
community on what path we should follow in order to
move towards a settlement of all aspects of the Balkan
crisis. This is extremely important so that we can all work
in one direction and not try to use this or that conflicts for
the advancement of our own national agendas, as that
approach would not lead us to any results. The only way to
achieve results is to follow the agreed approach of the
international community, as reflected specifically in
decisions of the Security Council and the various European
structures.
I entirely agree with Mr. Bildt that one of the tasks
that is enshrined in many United Nations resolutions is that
of putting an end to extremism from all sides and to exert
very strong pressure on the forces of disintegration. Without
this, we cannot count on a sustainable resolution of the
Balkan problem.
We support the call for a regional approach, a
comprehensive approach. In particular I would like to
emphasize what Mr. Bildt said about the role of Yugoslavia
in the Balkans, and I can only agree with his conclusion
that without the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, there will
be no peace or long-lasting, stable development in the
region. That topic has already been discussed in the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council. A lot is
being said about it now, and we consider that the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General could play a positive role
in helping coordinate the various efforts of the international

8

4105th meeting
28 February 2000
community, which are being undertaken in the framework
in the Stability Pact for South-Eastern Europe, by the
European Agency for the Reconstruction of Kosovo, by
the South-East European Cooperation Initiative, by the
Black Sea Economic Cooperation and others. In any case,
there are many regional initiatives that in one way or
another concern the Balkans, and at this stage there is a
need for these initiatives to be coordinated, ideally, or at
least for some summarized information on how these
initiatives are being carried out. Incidentally, the United
Nations Development Programme is doing this, while the
Economic and Social Council adopted a special resolution
and at its last session the General Assembly adopted a
consensus resolution on economic assistance to the
countries of Eastern Europe, as well as a consensus
resolution on humanitarian assistance to the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. So we would urge Mr. Bildt and
all of his colleagues to consider what they could do to
ensure that all of these different efforts are coordinated
and are helped to achieve the common goal of
development of the entire region, without any
discrimination.
The only point with which I find it difficult to agree
in what Mr. Bildt said is his reference to the Belgrade
regime as virtually an obstacle to the development of the
entire region, or at least an obstacle to the resolution of
various problems, including the problem of Kosovo. The
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was a participant in the
settlement of the Kosovo crisis, the principles of which
are described in resolution 1244 (1999).
In our view, many of the problems that UNMIK
now faces with respect to the implementation of that
resolution derive from the fact that UNMIK is, to put it
mildly, not interacting sufficiently with the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia authorities, without whom it will
simply be impossible to implement the decisions set out
in resolution 1244 (1999). The present approach has to
change, both in the political sphere — as I believe we
shall be discussing in detail with Mr. Kouchner and
General Reinhardt — and in the economic, social and
humanitarian areas.
In the economic sphere, I have already mentioned
United Nations resolutions on the reconstruction of the
region and on assistance to the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. In the humanitarian sphere, we should not
forget that the largest group of refugees in Europe is are
now in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. They are
mainly refugees from Bosnia and from Croatia; as Mrs.
Ogata has confirmed here on several occasions, that group

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
of refugees is simply being ignored by donors, or at best is
being given scant attention. This cannot fail to create the
feeling that members of the international community
continue to politicize the Balkans, as seen especially in
discrimination against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
in a wide variety of areas. Incidentally, I must observe with
all due respect for the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia that the trend to politicize matters applies also
to the activities of that body. The politicization is almost
palpable. Specific examples of it have been cited, and
questions have been asked. But the answers we received did
not dispel our doubts.
Let me cite another example of where bias has made
it impossible to make progress in an area relating to the
attempt to resolve the crisis in the Balkans. We know that
there is a problem in Prevlaka. Recently, we have been told
by the Secretariat that on the whole the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and of Montenegro are
implementing the regime in the United-Nations-designated
zones in Prevlaka. But at the same time, the number of
violations is on the rise. We hope that the new Government
in Croatia will take measures to ensure that it too respects
the United-Nations-designated zones there.
But my main point relating to Prevlaka is the
following. We have heard that for nearly seven months the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has been requesting the
resumption of bilateral talks with Croatia on the question of
Prevlaka. So far, Zagreb has not responded to those
requests; according to some information, Zagreb’s position
can be explained by the fact that the Croatian side does not
wish to deal with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
authorities, inter alia because of indictments by the Hague
Tribunal.

4105th meeting
28 February 2000
That indicates that we must all consider where we
are to go if some parties continue to refuse to talk to
Belgrade at all. What do we wish to achieve in this way?
There are regular elections in Yugoslavia, but will we all
respect the outcomes and the choices voiced by the
people of Yugoslavia? This is no empty question; it
involves policies of individual countries that in many
respects run counter to the wishes of the international
community. I might recall that United Nations decisions
reaffirming the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia indicate that such matters,
whether in Kosovo or in Prevlaka, must be resolved with
the direct participation of the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.
There is significant politicization present in the
policies of a number of countries. We have United
Nations decisions, but we must implement them. It is
becoming increasingly difficult to implement such
decisions because of opposition from certain States to the
participation of Belgrade in the implementation of binding
commitments under the resolutions.
I really do not know the answer to this question. But
I appeal to all involved to review their positions and to
consider their own particular tasks and how we can all
truly implement our decisions. In any event, I believe that
the path towards an answer lies in the mandate held by
Mr. Bildt. He has vast experience, enormous energy and
great creativity. The approach he has taken reflects those
qualities, and we trust that the same qualities will help us
all move further ahead in the right direction.
The President (spoke in Spanish): As announced
earlier, I shall now suspend this meeting until 4.30 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.20 p.m.

9
