S/PV.7927

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7927th meeting

Wednesday, 19 April 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Haley. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (S/2017/283)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-10460 (E)
*1710460*

S/PV.7927

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(S/2017/283)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Martin
Kobler, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Libya and Head of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/283, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Kobler and Ambassador Olof Skoog,
Permanent Representative of Sweden, in his capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.

19/04/2017

continues to strongly support the Agreement and its
institutions, and recognizes the Presidency Council as
the sole national executive authority. The statements of
the P-5 ambassadors to Libya and the political support
and engagement of neighbouring countries, as well as
the formation of a quartet comprised of the African
Union, the League of Arab States, the European Union
and the United Nations, are tangible reflections of
international cohesion and commitment. We all share
the same vision. We all share the same road map.
Libyans and the international community alike
support the Agreement. Yes, it can be amended, but
there is no alternative. There is no plan B. Moreover,
there is no need for one. If the parties do not uphold their
responsibilities under the Libyan Political Agreement,
there is no reason to think that they will have any
greater commitment to an alternative agreement.
There are positive signs elsewhere, too. The fight
against terrorism is largely successful in Sirte and
Benghazi. Da’esh no longer controls territory in Libya.
That is a significant achievement as we move towards
the end of the presence of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant in Libya. The security situation in Tripoli
is at least contained. Looking at the economy, oil
production has increased and has potential for further
growth. The National Oil Corporation has achieved
much and demonstrates the need to maintain the unity
of sovereign institutions. Budgetary resources have
been released by the Central Bank of Libya, including
salaries in all parts of the country.

Members of the Council have received the latest
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (S/2017/283). However, in my
remarks, I would like to concentrate on some strategic
lines and to provide recommendations for consideration
by the Council.

Despite what I have said, we should be honest and
see that the optimism and confidence of Skhirat has
faded. Instead, I see frustration, disappointment and
sometimes anger. Often they are justified. The sharp
horizon established by the Libyan Political Agreement
has blurred, and the path forward is no longer clear
for many. Today, uncertainty has contributed to
fragmentation and dissent, contributing to a dangerous
political power vacuum. Violent clashes, social unrest
and increasing criminality remain common in too many
parts of Libya.

Today, it is more important than ever to forge
unity within Libya. Prior to the signing of the Libyan
Political Agreement in Skhirat in 2015, Libya was a
deeply divided country. The broad endorsement of the
Libyan Political Agreement by Libyan stakeholders,
signed with hope and confidence on 17 December 2015,
continues today. The international community also

The institutions of the Libyan Political Agreement
must deliver, if they are to maintain credibility and
legitimacy. The divisions in many of the institutions
have impacted their ability to govern. Instead of
functioning for the good of the nation, many have begun
to perceive the power-sharing agreements through the
interests of one group over the other.

I now give the floor to Mr. Kobler.
Mr. Kobler: At the outset, I would like to
congratulate the United States of America on presiding
over the Security Council this month.

2/22

17-10460

19/04/2017

The situation in Libya

The results of those divisions are setting Libya
down a worrying path. Public services, including
access to electricity, health, education and water, are
failing many. The economy continues to decline. The
gross domestic product has lost over half of its value
since 2012. The lack of liquidity prevents Libyans from
accessing their salaries. The dinar is losing value. The
shadow economy and rampant corruption are growing.
Political divisions also threaten the cohesiveness
of sovereign financial institutions, such as the Central
Bank, the National Oil Corporation and the Libyan
Investment Authority. It is difficult to produce a
realistic common budget for the whole of Libya. The
political vacuum complicates efforts to create a united
security force and has encouraged some to advocate for
a military solution to the Libyan crisis. History does
not tolerate a power vacuum. Armed groups are gaining
power, and Libya is witnessing new and heightened
violence. The gains made against terrorist groups,
including in Benghazi and Sirte, will ultimately be
lost, if some actors continue to strive for power at the
expense of institutions and civil society.
The competition for the control of national resources
will trigger renewed violence if the root causes are not
addressed. The use of violence to obtain short-term
objectives must end. It is time to get back to politics. It
is time to address the core issues, and it is time to get
back to the spirit of Skhirat. Having worked on Libya
since the signature of the Libyan Political Agreement,
I am convinced that Libya will not solve its problems
alone. It needs the strong, united, consistent, robust and
concrete support of the international community; action
and commitment, not merely papers and meetings and
workshops; partnership, not interference; antibiotics,
not aspirin. Please allow me to suggest seven brief points
on the way forward for the Council’s consideration.
First, the Libyan Political Agreement must remain the
framework for a negotiated settlement. I am encouraged
that all important stakeholders and the overwhelming
majority of the Libyan population share that opinion.
Let us build on that consensus. The Prime Minister and
the President of the House of Representatives have both
confirmed their commitment, as has the Commander of
the Libyan National Army, Field Marshal Haftar, during
our meeting last Thursday in Benghazi. The Head of
the State Council has expressed his agreement, as have
almost all representatives of significant institutions and
constituencies. The Agreement is not perfect. There
is a consensus that amendments are needed and that

S/PV.7927

those amendments can only be done by the Libyans
themselves. We are working to create a consensus on
the mechanisms to enable the amendment. That process
must be inclusive, and those deciding must have the
capacity and commitment to implement their decisions.
Secondly, all security actors must refrain from
any action that might trigger violence and escalation.
The temperature in Libya must be lowered, if
political discussions are to resume. Efforts to expand
control through violence are short-sighted and
counterproductive. I am particularly concerned about
the developments in southern Libya, both military and
humanitarian. The much neglected south just cannot
take more. There will be no unity through violence. The
parties need to step back and talk.
Thirdly, the security track aimed at stabilizing
the situation and creating conditions for the formation
of a unified security apparatus must be urgently
reinvigorated. While progress on security is most
effective when combined with advances on the
political track, confidence-building steps must be
taken immediately. The formation of a committee in
Tripoli to supervise the ceasefire is a good basis on
which to move forward with more structured security
arrangements for the city and a means to strengthen the
authority of the Presidency Council.
Fourthly, the economy and financial situation of the
country needs to be stabilized. Agreement on a budget
framework for 2017 was a significant step forward.
However, budgetary and public-finance mechanisms
must be improved in order to ensure unified and
equitable financing of services and the economy, with
funds distributed fairly and transparently to all regions
of Libya. In that regard, I encourage a more constructive
cooperation between Libya’s financial and economic
institutions and the Presidency Council.
Fifthly, national reconciliation must be integrated
decisively at all levels. The ability of Libyan leaders
to mediate local ceasefires is a great asset and has
prevented many sparks from creating fires. Libyans
will soon start a comprehensive bottom-up national
reconciliation initiative supported by the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).
Sixthly, public services, security and governance
must start improving at the local levels. In a country with
a legacy of weak national institutions, local authorities
remain among the most respected and effective actors.
We must support them. Democratically elected mayors

17-104603/22

S/PV.7927

The situation in Libya

must be given authority, funds and responsibility. In
that context, it is important that international partners
be prepared to support the Presidency Council, if
requested, and to deploy expertise, not only outside
Libya, but also in Libya on the ground.
My seventh and last point is particularly important.
It is my wish that the international community move
beyond containment. The focus on the fight against
terrorism and migration alone is not enough. Migration
and terrorism are symptoms, not root causes.
I am grateful for the many initiatives and efforts
of, in particular, neighbouring countries and regional
organizations over the past weeks and months to bring
political and military stakeholders closer together. Now,
I believe it is time for the United Nations to take the lead
again. The United Nations is uniquely placed in Libya.
However, we need the united support of the Security
Council and the wider international community. The
women and men of Libya, its wise elders and its vibrant
youth deserve a better life, and they deserve it now.
I would like, once again, to thank the Security
Council for its unwavering support for my colleagues
and myself. I thank Ambassador Skoog and the
Council presidency, as well as all of the stakeholders
all over Libya, for the cooperation they have extended
throughout the country. I thank them for their support
for the Libyan Political Agreement and for the
opportunity and confidence that they have given all of
us at UNSMIL to serve the people of Libya.
The President: I thank Mr. Kobler for his time, his
leadership and the insight that he has provided today.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Skoog.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): My report is slightly more
dry than the one we just heard, I am afraid.
In accordance with paragraph 24 (e) of resolution
1970 (2011), I have the duty to report to the Security
Council on the work of the Committee established by
the same resolution. The report covers the period from
7 December 2016 to 19 April 2017, during which time
the Committee members dealt with various aspects of
the sanctions regime via the silence procedure.
First, with regard to the arms embargo, during the
period under review, the Committee approved a request
for an exemption from the arms embargo submitted
under paragraph 9 (c) of resolution 1970 (2011) by the
Netherlands. The Committee also received two post4/22

19/04/2017

delivery notifications from the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya and from Malta, respectively, the
latter having been submitted together with that of the
European Union delegation. Those notifications were
for items that have previously been exempted by the
Committee under paragraph 13 (b) of resolution 2009
(2011) and paragraph 9 (c) of resolution 1970 (2011).
The Committee further responded to three requests
from Tunisia, Turkey and Greece for guidance on the
scope and implementation of the arms embargo.
Concerning the assets freeze, the Committee
has not yet concluded its consideration of a request
by Switzerland for exemption, in accordance with
paragraph 19 (b) of resolution 1970 (2011), in relation to
the assets of the Libya Africa Investment Portfolio. The
Committee had no objection to a notification submitted
by the United Kingdom, under paragraph 19 (a) of
resolution 1970 (2011), in relation to the same listed
identity. Regarding an exemption request received
from Canada, pertaining to an asset owned by a listed
individual, the Committee sought additional details
prior to further consideration of the matter.
On the travel ban, during the period under review,
the Committee approved an update to its fourth
implementation assistance notice, which relates to
the travel ban measure. Upon the request of Libya,
the Committee also approved the extension of a travel
ban waiver for a listed individual who is currently
undergoing medical treatment in Egypt until 23 August.
On the subject of communication with Libya,
I would also like to mention that the Committee has
sought information from the Permanent Mission of
Libya to the United Nations concerning the officials
authorized to sign off on documentation relating to
any future arms embargo exemption requests, pursuant
to paragraph 8 of resolution 2174 (2014). That was
done as a follow-up to a recommendation made by the
Panel Of Experts established pursuant to paragraph
24 of resolution 1973 (2011) in its interim report. The
Committee has also shared with the Permanent Mission
details concerning all previous arms embargo and
assets freeze exemption requests considered by the
Committee. Lastly, the Committee has also consulted
with the Permanent Mission on the subject of oversight
of certain Libyan public and financial institutions, also
pursuant to a recommendation of the Panel.
Finally, the Committee received two letters from
Malta concerning the activities of two vessels that
17-10460

19/04/2017

The situation in Libya

reportedly were illicitly attempting to export petroleum
products and fuel from Libya to other destinations. The
Committee has not yet completed its consideration of
that matter.
The President: I thank Mr. Skoog for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the Council.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank Mr. Kobler
and Mr. Skoog for their briefings.
At the outset, I ensure Mr. Kobler of the United
Kingdom’s full support of his work and reiterate its
commitment to the Libyan Political Agreement — the
sole framework for a political solution to the situation in
Libya. Sadly, as he has made clear, its implementation
remains mixed, at best. I very much agree with all seven
points of hos seven-point agenda. As the penholder
for Libya, we see three interlinked areas of concern:
security, the economy and the political process.
In 2017, security has deteriorated significantly,
particularly now in the South, where there are renewed
escalating clashes, which are edging the country
towards civil war. The United Kingdom condemns all
such violence, as well as threats of military action and
reports of gross human rights abuses by armed groups.
Such acts have no place in the Libya of today, and we
are clear that the military and other security structures
need to be under civilian and political oversight. As the
Ambassadors to Libya of China, France, Russia, the
United Kingdom and the United States said last week,
there is a difference between acts against the terrorist
threat and acts that can lead to further deterioration
in Libya.
On tackling terrorism, it is important to recognize
the defeat of Da’esh in Sirte, and I pay tribute to all
involved and acknowledge the many lives lost in that
effort. But in spite of that success, we are now faced
with a threat that is dispersed across Libya. Those who
continue to undermine effective governance in Libya
are feeding the terrorist threat by creating ungoverned
spaces. It is a threat that extends not only across Libya
but across the region as a whole. Such ungoverned spaces
create conditions for human trafficking and criminal
networks to profit from the political and security
vacuum in parts of Libya. Irregular migration can only
be tackled properly by a strong and stable Government.
Turning to my second point, the economy also
remains vulnerable to the volatile political and security
situation. We need to see real improvements. The

S/PV.7927

Presidency Council and the Central Bank must work
cooperatively to address the liquidity crisis and ensure
that public services like water and electricity are
sustained throughout Ramadan. We need to see an end
to parallel institutions undermining the Presidency
Council. There has been some progress, including the
dispersal of the budgets in the early months of 2017
and the economic dialogue on the detail of fiscal and
monetary policy now taking place in Tripoli, but it is
clear that more steps are needed.
Throughout, it is crucial that Libya’s oil resources
remain neutral and be used to benefit the whole country.
The continued unity of the National Oil Corporation
is essential to ensuring that revenues be used for the
national good. We call for much-needed investment in
the maintenance of oil infrastructure to help increase
national exports and reduce the drain on the economy.
Turning to my final point, the common thread
in both the security and the economic situations is,
of course, the political process, but I am pleased to
reiterate here in the Chamber the United Kingdom’s
continued support for the Presidency Council and the
Government Of National Accord, headed by Prime
Minister Serraj, as the legitimate executive authorities
under the Libyan Political Agreement, in line with
resolution 2259 (2015).
But as the security and economic instability
illustrate, Libya needs urgent progress towards full
political reconciliation now more than ever. We support
early signs of progress to bridge political differences,
including regional efforts within the framework of the
United Nations-led political process and reengagement
by Libya’s legitimate institutions, the House Of
Representatives and the High State Council, with
preparations for dialogue.
We have a difficult and long road ahead, so we urge
all parties to commit to progress. We underline our
firm opposition to any attempt to disrupt the political
process. All those who have a role to play, including
those still outside the Libyan Political Agreement, must
engage constructively and in the spirit of compromise.
The international community, as Mr. Kobler reminded
us, must continue to support them.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s commitment
to Libya as one of his personal priorities, and we
reiterate our full support for the central role of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya in advancing
the political process in Libya. As the penholder on

17-104605/22

S/PV.7927

The situation in Libya

this issue in the Council, we will carry on playing our
part. We will continue to monitor the situation in Libya
closely. We will support all efforts to reach a more
inclusive political settlement within the framework of
Libyan Political Agreement and we will work with the
Presidency Council and the Government of National
Accord in their efforts to serve the people of Libya,
because the continued support of the Security Council
and the wider international community will remain
vital if we are to secure a better future for all Libyans.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to thank Ambassador Skoog, Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya, and Mr. Martin Kobler for
their valuable briefings today. I would also like to thank
Mr. Kobler for his tireless efforts, along with those of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, to restore
stability to our brothers in Libya.
We highlight the efforts made by Egypt over the
past few months to provide the necessary support to
enable our brothers in Libya to reach a settlement based
on the Libyan Political Agreement, re-establish stability
in the country and restore Libya’s natural status in the
Arab world, Africa and the international community.
Our efforts to bring our Libyan brothers together have
always relied on the historical link between the peoples
of Libya and Egypt.
The dialogue sponsored by Egypt has continued
with the participation of all the Libyan national
factions in the east, west and south of the country,
with the participation of all legitimate institutions
under the Libyan political agreement. One of the most
important results of that dialogue is the creation of a
dialogue committee to discuss amendments to the
Libyan Political Agreement, including to the provisions
regarding the supreme command of the Libyan
National Army and other issues that have hindered the
implementation of that agreement. Such a committee
would comprise 30 members, designated by the House
of Representatives and the High State Council.
In order for this endeavour to be successful, all
Libyan parties must show the necessary political will
and ability to assume the responsibility of choosing
members of the proposed committee. They must
also show flexibility if they are to facilitate the work
of the committee, keeping in mind the best interests
of the country. If this endeavour is to be successful,
international and regional support is also absolutely
6/22

19/04/2017

necessary. In that regard, we would like to express our
appreciation for the constructive efforts of Algeria and
Tunisia and other regional efforts undertaken through
the mechanism set up by Libya’s neighbours, which held
its most recent meeting in Cairo, as well as the efforts
of the League of Arab States and the African Union.
At a time when Egypt is seeking to establish the
necessary conditions for distancing the Libyan political
dialogue from narrow interests fuelled by certain
regional parties, these same regional parties known to
all continue to play a subversive role in Libya. A clear
example of this situation is the recent attack by extremist
elements on the oil crescent area of the country in
March, at a time when the Libyan parties were preparing
to launch a dialogue based on the agreements reached
in Cairo. This attack came after the Libyan National
Army had been able to place the oil facilities under
the authority of the National Oil Corporation for the
benefit of all Libyans. These subversive actions against
Libya are clear and explicit, and the Security Council
must assume its role and compel all these subversive
regional powers to rethink their positions and avoid any
manipulation of the resources of the Libyan people and
of the region.
Occasional instability in the capital, Tripoli,
shows the dangers of allowing militias to blackmail
and terrorize Libyan civilians. Egypt believes that
international efforts should focus on supporting
the construction of professional-calibre national
security institutions. Egypt believes that the Libyan
National Army should be at the heart of any unified
Libyan armed forces under the supervision of elected
civilian authorities. The National Army has proven its
patriotism more than once, whether by successfully
combating terrorists in the eastern part of the country
or by ensuring the return of oil facilities to the authority
of the National Oil Corporation.
It goes without saying that in order to eliminate the
terrorism of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and other groups posing a threat to Libya, a genuine
national effort must be carried out, and we believe that
the Libyan National Army is in the best position to fulfil
such a role. Therefore, the international community
must recognize that in order to eliminate the dangers of
terrorism and organized crime originating from Libya,
the highest degree of support must be provided to the
Army as soon as possible.
17-10460

19/04/2017

The situation in Libya

Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Martin Kobler, for his very illuminating briefing,
for his tireless commitment and for the report of the
Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (S/2017/283).
For my part, I will discuss the security, political
and economic situation in Libya, which we consider to
be a cause for concern, and propose some possible lines
of action towards which I believe we are converging
collectively and which we must urgently implement.
From a security point of view, we are particularly
concerned about the developments taking place in
the south of the country, while major progress had
been made elsewhere. In Tripoli, the Government
of National Accord contributed to the adoption of a
globally respected ceasefire and is setting up security
institutions, including the Presidential Guard, which
France is helping to train. These efforts, in conjunction
with the United Nations and the European Union, are
essential to protecting the institutions and the people
of Libya. Libyan forces have also made significant
progress in the fight against terrorism, particularly in
Sirte and Benghazi.
On the other hand, for several weeks now,
skirmishes among Libyan armed groups, fighting each
other instead of uniting against terrorism, confirm the
dangerous temptation to take up the military solution.
Shows of strength lead only to political deadlock
and chaos in terms of security, creating fertile soil
for the resurgence of terrorism. Reckless armed
offensives, such as those which took place recently in
Sabha, in southern Libya, could only cause things to
boil over, thereby endangering the political process.
This escalation must cease immediately to allow for
dialogue and national reconciliation, and it is our urgent
responsibility to so inform the Libyan parties. In this
respect, the role of Libya’s neighbouring countries is
invaluable in achieving a return to peace. We welcome
in particular the efforts of Algeria, Egypt and Tunisia.
At the political level, a consensus is emerging
around amending elements of the Libyan Political
Agreement in order to make the institutions more
effective and more representative, which is a step in the
right direction. However, several obstacles remain. The
Government of National Accord, which was the result
of the Skhirat Agreement, which we all recognize,
regularly finds itself in difficulty. The Parliament,

S/PV.7927

which today draws its legitimacy from this inter-Libyan
political agreement, seems to be constrained in its
efforts to promote dialogue. France denounces actions
aimed at undermining institutions that were established
based on the Skhirat Agreement, which reduce the
chances of getting out of the political impasse. In
this context, we fully support the work of the United
Nations to mediate between Libyans and to coordinate
all regional and international initiatives. We welcome
the integration of the European Union into the troika,
which has now become the quartet.
Finally, on the economic side, progress has
been made with the adoption of the 2017 budget by
the Government of National Accord, but certain
developments call for the utmost vigilance. The
National Oil Corporation, the only recognized actor
in the field, is threatened in its full exploitation of oil
under the supervision of the Government of National
Accord and is torn between the various factions of
power. Relations between the Central Bank and the
Government of National Accord remain tense, although
the so-called economic dialogue is working to smooth
things out. It is essential to preserve economic and
financial institutions and ensure that they operate under
the control of the Government. Oil money must be for
building the State, for the sake of the Libyan people and
its prosperity; it is not for financing a war economy or
trafficking of any kind.
Furthermore, I would like to echo the SecretaryGeneral’s report in denouncing human trafficking
in Libya. We call on the Libyan authorities to do
their utmost to ensure that migrants are treated with
dignity on Libyan soil. This is a priority with respect
to the protection and promotion of human rights and
the fight against organized crime. In this context,
we have to ask, how do we get out of this crisis? A
reaffirmed commitment on the part of the international
community is essential, urgent and based on three
complementary concepts.
First, as we have repeatedly affirmed, the solution
to the Libyan conflict can only be a political one. Let
us remember that the logic of the Skhirat Agreement
is based on an agreement among Libyan political
forces, excluding terrorists, around a new model of the
distribution of power. It is therefore a choice in favour
of dialogue and the refusal to use weapons. In this
context, those who use weapons rather than dialogue
and who undermine any hope of stabilization and peace
must be identified.

17-104607/22

S/PV.7927

The situation in Libya

We must therefore reaffirm our collective support,
under United Nations auspices, for the collaborative
review of the Libyan Political Agreement. Accordingly,
we encourage dialogue between the Presidential
Council, the Parliament of Tobruk and the High State
Council so that each body can find its place. We
come together around this table on this point and we
are increasingly doing so, I believe. Neighbouring
countries, particularly Egypt, Algeria and Tunisia, are
stepping up their efforts to reach a political compromise
in support of United Nations mediation. Once again, we
commend those important efforts.
Secondly, it is incumbent on the Council to ensure the
maintenance, effective enforcement and strengthening
of the Council’s mechanisms pertaining to the arms
embargo, which we have established, and to combating
the illegal exportation of oil pursuant to the resolutions,
which we have adopted. In that regard, I must thank the
Swedish chairmanship of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
Libya’s oil resources must remain under the exclusive
control of the Government of National Accord and the
National Oil Corporation of Tripoli, for the benefit of all
Libyans. We must show collective resolve in ensuring
the prevention of all forms of the illegal export of oil.
We welcome the decision of the Presidency Council
to appoint the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Government of National Accord, Mr. Mohamed Siala,
as Libya’s focal point for requesting exemptions from
the embargo for the benefit of that Government.
Thirdly and finally, the Security Council must
exercise all of its authority in the matter to encourage
the Libyans to get along. In that regard, I vigorously
commend the work of the Special Representative and
encourage the work of the United Nations and the
Secretary-General with regard to this issue, which
are essential to revitalizing the political process and
coordinating diplomatic efforts. Given the scale of
the current challenges, the unity of the international
community and the leading role of the United Nations,
accompanied by new proposals, are more necessary
than ever. The moment has come for renewed and
strengthened commitment, which has taken on urgency,
by the United Nations while we assume together
our responsibilities.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would like to thank the Special
Representative for his comprehensive briefing and
continuous efforts in Libya.
8/22

19/04/2017

Italy remains at the forefront of international
support for the Libyan people, the institutions validated
by Libyan Political Agreement in Skhirat and the
mediation role of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya. We are committed to the full implementation
of the Libyan Political Agreement, while at the same
time promoting reconciliation and inclusiveness.
My first point concerns the political and security
track. Cohesive support from the international
community is key to consolidating the results attained
thus far so as to fight terrorism and achieve stability.
Our message should therefore be very clear. First, the
Presidency Council and the Government of National
Accord, headed by Prime Minister Serraj, remain the
sole legitimate executive authorities of Libya pursuant
to resolution to 2259 (2015). Furthermore, we intend to
support them as vigorously as ever in their crucial role
in combating terrorism.
Secondly, we encourage initiatives aimed at
consolidating the Skhirat framework and improving it
where possible through finding workable solutions to
outstanding issues, including strengthening inclusivity
within the Libyan Political Agreement framework.
Thirdly, we promote the cooperation of the
Presidency Council with all legitimate Libyan
institutions to broaden its base of support and achieve
a sustainable political settlement. There is no military
solution to Libya’s problems. A solution can be achieved
only through inclusive political dialogue and national
reconciliation. We reject any attempt to use force to
acquire political and territorial gains, and we emphasize
the difference between acts against terrorist threats and
those that can lead to the further deterioration of the
situation in Libya.
We are following with concern the recent violence
in the south and the area of Sabha. We call for full
de-escalation and avoiding provocative actions. We
welcome the ongoing efforts of neighbouring countries
and regional organizations. Cohesive and coordinated
international efforts to support the United Nationsmediated political process can foster a constructive
attitude for the Libyan stakeholders towards fully
implementing the Libyan Political Agreement.
Moreover, with regard to efforts aimed at
reconciliation, we need to consolidate the progress
achieved thus far by the country in very challenging
circumstances. We have enhanced our capacity to
reach out to the Libyan people and communities in
17-10460

19/04/2017

The situation in Libya

the entire country through our embassy in Tripoli.
We deem it crucial to promote stability through
engagement with all Libyan parties. We are regularly
reaching out to the east and actively promoting
dialogue and mutual understanding with key political
and security figures, including General Haftar. We
are encouraging a constructive approach including on
the crucial issue of implementing the formal security
setup outlined in the Libyan Political Agreement with
unified and strengthened national security forces under
civilian oversight.
In that regard, we echo the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2017/283) in welcoming progress on the
formation of the Presidential Guard. We are also
stepping up our humanitarian help in coordination
with the Presidency Council, for example by offering
medical treatment in Italy to injured Libyans, including
those from the east who were involved in combating
terrorism. We are also planning to step up our
diplomatic presence in the east with a consulate and
visa office in Tobruk.
We are also focusing on the south of Libya, another
key strategic area of the country. We have repeatedly
provided emergency aid to those fragile communities,
and we are promoting initiatives to enhance dialogue
with local municipalities. On 31 March, representatives
of the Tebu and Awlad Sulayman tribes signed an
agreement in Rome aimed at fostering reconciliation,
combating terrorism and countering human trafficking.
Tuareg representatives and Libya’s Deputy Prime
Minister representing the Presidency Council attended
the ceremony in Rome.
Fourthly, concerning the economy, we remain
concerned about the latest developments with regard
to oil infrastructure. As new sparks of tensions rise,
it is crucial to reiterate our support to the mandate
of the National Oil Corporation, acting under the
authority of the Presidency Council to manage the oil
infrastructure, resources and revenues for the benefit of
all Libyans in line with the Libyan Political Agreement.
We support the Libyan economic dialogue to encourage
cooperation between the Presidency Council, the
Government of National Accord and the Central Bank
of Libya. For the first time in years, the Government
now has a budget to implement initiatives for the good
of the Libyan people. We now call on the Government
of National Accord and the Libyan Central Bank to stay
the course and implement their agreement so as to keep
the economy functioning and ensure that the necessary

S/PV.7927

funds for Government activities bring the budget under
control and end the liquidity crisis.
My last point concerns migration. We reiterate our
concern about the smuggling of migrants and human
trafficking that has endangered the lives of thousands
of people in the Mediterranean Sea. In its efforts to
combine security, solidarity and development, Italy
remains committed to rescuing people at sea and helping
migrants from the south to reach our shores. During
Easter weekend alone, 8,500 people were rescued. But
a stronger and shared effort is needed to enhance the
capacity of the Libyan authorities to disrupt criminal
networks that exploit illegal migration flows.
Through its leadership role in Operation Sophia of
the European Union military operation in the Southern
Central Mediterranean, Italy is therefore working in
partnership with Libya to jointly address that common
challenge, thereby fostering cooperation in the area
of the prevention of illegal immigration, human
trafficking, smuggling and border security, based on a
comprehensive approach. We believe that it is a key step
towards better managing migration flows, which would
also sustain the stability of Libya, its neighbouring
countries and the Mediterranean in general.
In conclusion, we can see that it is particularly
important for the Libyans themselves to hear from
the Council that we share the desire for a secure,
democratic, prosperous and unified Libya in which
the State authority and the rule of law prevail. That is
indeed our challenge — to not let the Libyan people
and institutions down while we facilitate their return
to stability and prosperity and stand by their side in
combating terrorism and criminal gangs of smugglers
of human beings.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to thank the Special Representative, Martin
Kobler, for his briefing and for his ongoing efforts and
those of his team in a particularly difficult context.
We would like also to thank Ambassador Olof Skoog
for his report on the work of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya.
We take note with satisfaction of the nearnormalization of the payment of salaries in the country
and the recent successes achieved in the combat
against terrorism.

17-104609/22

S/PV.7927

The situation in Libya

However, more than a year after the signing of the
Libyan Political Agreement, we continue to see a lack of
meaningful progress in the political transition process
following the formation of the Presidency Council
of the Government of National Accord. The support
that the Government has received within the Libyan
political system has been minimal, which hinders the
possibility of stabilizing the country in the short run
and bringing it back onto the path of normality, as well
as that of providing basic services for the people and
ensuring their security.
The painful reality is that the authority of the
Government barely extends beyond the buildings
in which it is working in Tripoli. Paradoxically,
the Political Agreement and the Government of
National Accord have received more support from the
international community than they have from within
their country. It is essential that the new Government
garner broader support among the population so as
to achieve full legitimacy. Otherwise, it will be very
difficult for it to ever govern the country or even the
major part of its territory.
In the meantime, the violence and the fighting
continue to spread; the dozens of militias on the ground
are the ones who hold the true power in Libya. They are
reaping benefits from the power that they do have and
are working to further their economic interests in an
attempt to control the oil business and the illegal traffic
in migrants.
We are concerned at the fact that the deadline for
the Tobruk House of Representatives’ endorsement
of the Libyan Political Agreement continues to be
pushed back. A way should be found for this to take
place and thereby leave aside once and for all a factor
of institutional uncertainty and instability. To that
end, every effort must made to achieve broad national
reconciliation, taking account of the requests of and
proposals by all parties. Today more than ever, dialogue
is vital, as are negotiations. This is the only path to
unity and stability.
In this context, the grave humanitarian situation of
the Libyan people is worsening by the day, with more
than 1 million people in need of urgent assistance. The
situation of migrants for whom Libya is a country of
origin and of those — the majority — for whom it is a
country of transit to Europe, who are fleeing hunger, war
and political crises on the African continent, remains a
source of despair. On a daily basis, we witness tragic
10/22

19/04/2017

episodes that kill dozens or even hundreds of people,
including women and children. Hundreds of thousands
of people are currently in Libya waiting to try to cross
the Mediterranean. They are subject to mistreatment
and to the gravest violations of their human rights.
We condemn the activities of the mafias that engage
in the illegal trafficking of migrants, a business whose
volume appears to be continuing to grow in Libya.
Just a few days ago, the International Organization
for Migration announced the existence of a slave
market in which sub-Saharan migrants are trafficked
for a few hundred dollars. This cannot and should not
be tolerated in any form in the twenty-first century.
Despite the measures adopted in 2016, the number
of migrants who drown when their rickety boats sink
continues to grow. For this reason, in considering
solutions to this problem, priority should be given
to the human rights of migrants and refugees. Only
a stabilization of Libyan political institutions will
make it possible to significantly reduce the number of
occurrences of this phenomenon and to set up adequate
and more effective controls.
I wish to reiterate our support for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and for the role
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, and
we encourage the Special Representative to continue
with his work jointly with Prime Minister Serraj and
the Presidency Council of the Government of National
Accord. This will be pivotal in order for the Government
of National Accord to acquire legitimacy throughout the
country and tackle urgently the tremendous challenges
that Libya faces, which include the combat against
terrorism and the severe humanitarian, economic and
security crisis that is affecting millions of people.
Against this backdrop, we deem it important to
exercise great care in drawing up the new mandate of
the Mission. To do so, it will be important to conduct
a strategic review of the Mission, as envisioned in
resolution 2323 (2016), which we believe would
represent a valuable opportunity to bring the presence of
the United Nations in Libya into line with the political,
operational and security realities on the ground.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank
Mr. Martin Kobler for his briefing. Japan supports the
ongoing efforts of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL) to promote peace and stability
in Libya. I would like to thank also Olof Skoog for
his briefing on the activities of the Security Council
17-10460

19/04/2017

The situation in Libya

Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya.
More than a year has passed since the signing of
the Libyan Political Agreement, and we have seen little
progress. The political situation remains fluid, but there
is an emerging trend, as we have heard today, namely,
a broad consensus among the Libyans to amend certain
elements of the Agreement.
In this regard, the agreement in principle between
the House of Representatives and the High State
Council to form a joint committee to work together to
amend the Agreement by consensus is a noteworthy
development. Japan believes that a Libyan-led process
that ensures broad, inclusive and genuine consultations
among the Libyan people is a prerequisite for achieving
enduring peace. Japan looks forward to seeing the joint
committee formed in that spirit.
The Libyan Political Agreement has now been
given another chance, and we must make the utmost
effort to support the Libyan parties in setting the course
for progress. In this regard, Japan appreciates the
continued engagement of the relevant parties, including
both regional and international parties.
Japan is concerned about the deterioration of the
human rights and humanitarian situation in Libya. This
is the cost of the political stalemate. The international
community cannot leave 1.3 million people in need of
humanitarian assistance suffering from unmet basic
requirements such as medicine, water and food. To
alleviate the suffering of the people, Japan will restart
its economic assistance to Libya for the first time in
three years. We will provide more than $4 million,
including $1.4 million to the Stabilization Facility
for Libya.
We also encourage the financial institutions in
Libya to redouble their efforts to tackle the issue of
funding and liquidity, so that the necessary services
can be provided to the people in need.
The security situation remains precarious. The
escalation of violence in Tripoli and the oil crescent
is another cause of the political stalemate. The recent
escalation in the southern region is of particular
concern. It should be stressed that violence does not
bring peace any closer. Japan urges the relevant parties
to immediately stop acts of violence.
Japan continues to support the Presidency Council and
the Government of National Accord as the legitimate

S/PV.7927

authority under the Libyan Political Agreement.
The Agreement is the key instrument in moving the
process forward, and its framework should be upheld.
Japan encourages UNSMIL to make further efforts
to facilitate the Libyan-led process to implement the
Agreement, in accordance with its mediation and goodoffices mandate under resolution 2323 (2016). Japan,
for its part, will continue to engage constructively
in order to support the implementation of the Libyan
Political Agreement and alleviate the suffering of the
Libyan people.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank Special Representative Kobler and
Ambassador Skoog for their briefings and commends
them for their efforts.
There has been limited progress on the
implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement,
which was signed more than a year ago. The Libyan
peace process is facing serious challenges. The political
dialogue has run into major problems and the parties
lack confidence. The security situation is fragile.
Armed conflicts are escalating, the terrorist forces
have still not been eradicated and arms proliferation
continues to be a serious issue. China firmly supports
Libya in its use of peaceful means to restore national
security and stability, and commends all the Libyan
stakeholders for their efforts to implement the Political
Agreement. They should all work together with the
aim of reversing the current negative trend and take
proactive and effective measures to advance the peace
process in Libya.
First, the only choice for a solution to the Libyan
problem must be a political one. The Libyan political
process should uphold the principle of Libyan ownership
and leadership and an inclusive political dialogue
should begin as soon as possible. All the parties should
demonstrate sincerity and promote dialogue and
negotiation in settling their differences. The relevant
Security Council resolutions and the Libyan Political
Agreement should serve as a foundation for finding a
solution that is acceptable to all parties and will help to
achieve national reconciliation.
Secondly, a ceasefire must be reached if the right
conditions for restoring and maintaining the political
dialogue are to be created. All Libyan stakeholders
should exercise restraint and avoid resorting to force.
They should put aside their differences, build mutual
trust and cooperate in such areas as fighting terrorism

17-1046011/22

S/PV.7927

The situation in Libya

and protecting airfields, harbours and other critical
economic infrastructure, in order to protect the interests
of all Libyans.
Thirdly, the international community should
provide constructive assistance, with the United
Nations as the principal mediator. The United Nations
Support Mission in Libya should conduct its work
based on the mandate assigned to it by the Security
Council. Regional organizations such as the League
of Arab States and the African Union, as well as
Libya’s neighbours, should continue to promote peace,
facilitate talks and encourage all parties in Libya to be
flexible in dialogue and participate actively in national
reconciliation efforts. The international community
should respect Libya’s sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity and increase support to it in
order to help it strengthen its State governance and
development capacities. China stands ready to work
with the international community as a whole and to
contribute to the restoration of State governance and
the realization of peace, stability and development as
soon as possible.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to begin by
thanking Mr. Martin Kobler for his briefing and
his commendable and tireless efforts, which we
greatly appreciate.
The briefing we just heard from him provides a
sobering assessment of the situation in Libya. Despite
the efforts to reinvigorate the political process, the
security situation continues to worsen across the
country. We are particularly concerned about the
recent military escalation in southern Libya, as well as
the recurring violent clashes in the capital, including
attempts to take over Government infrastructure, and
the fighting in the oil crescent. It is imperative that we
not allow such developments to run the risk of returning
the country to full-scale conflict. The consequences
would be disastrous both for the people of Libya and
the security of the entire region.
As documented in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2017/283), the civilian population of Libya is
clearly paying a staggeringly high price as a result of
this conflict. Millions of people have been affected,
with 300,000 currently displaced by insecurity and
violence. Illegal flows of arms into the country prolong
the conflict and increase civilian suffering. We would
like to remind all United Nations members of their
responsibility to fully implement the Libya sanctions,
12/22

19/04/2017

including the arms embargo. A breakdown in the rule of
law has resulted in all parties to the conflict committing
widespread human rights abuses and unacceptable
violations of international humanitarian law, including
against children. Those responsible should be held to
account. The decision of the International Criminal
Court to intensify its work on Libya is more relevant
than ever.
The security vacuum has also had dire consequences
for Libya’s many refugees and migrants, as has been
mentioned here this morning. We are alarmed by the
reports of arbitrary detention and unsafe conditions
in migrant detention centres. We welcome the efforts
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
to investigate the allegations of sexual abuse and
exploitation of women in those centres, and urge the
parties to enable increased humanitarian access for
international organizations such as the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the International Organization for Migration. As one of
the 10 largest bilateral donors to Libya, Sweden stresses
that all international assistance must be implemented in
line with international law, including refugee law.
There is clearly no military solution to the conflict.
The only viable way forward is through Libyan-led,
United Nations-supported political negotiations based
on the Libyan Political Agreement. The Security
Council and the international community as a whole
have a responsibility to come together in support of
the Libyan Presidency Council and the Government
of National Accord as the sole legitimate Government,
in accordance with resolution 2259 (2015) and
subsequent resolutions.
At the same time, we should be receptive to parties’
calls for amendments to the Political Agreement that
can ensure inclusivity. The Political Agreement’s
implementation should reflect the interests of all
Libyans, women and men, and the whole of the country,
including the South. It goes without saying that the
details of any possible amendments are for the Libyan
people to decide. We are encouraged by the parties’
signs of increased willingness to engage in dialogue, as
well as by the constructive support from neighbouring
States and regional organizations. In that regard, we
are happy to see the valuable inclusion of the European
Union, Libya’s neighbour and partner, in the quartet.
In order to respond to what we hope is an emerging
readiness to move the process forward, the United
17-10460

19/04/2017

The situation in Libya

Nations must now urgently pursue a reinvigorated,
broad and long-term approach to Libya. We are therefore
encouraged by the Secretary-General’s commitment to
making Libya a priority for 2017. While reviewing its
long-term approach, it is crucial that the United Nations
remain fully engaged in the short term as well. It must
be equipped to play a leading role, as Mr. Kobler said,
in moving from containment to reinvigorating the
political process in support of negotiations between the
parties and coordinating international efforts. Time is
of the essence.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
Special Representative Kobler and Ambassador Skoog
for their comprehensive briefings. It is disappointing
that no substantive progress has been reached in Libya
since our last meeting in February (see S/PV.7879).
Despite many efforts, the situation has become even
more unpredictable, and there is a visible danger that
the situation in Libya, on all fronts, could deteriorate
even further. However, we continue to believe there are
ways to prevent that. How can we achieve that?
First, we still believe firmly that the political
deadlock in Libya must be resolved through compromise
and finding a consensus solution. It requires getting
the Presidency Council of the Government of National
Accord, the House of Representatives and other Libyan
actors engaged around a process that addresses the core
issues that are obstacles to the implementation of the
Libyan Political Agreement. We consider the political
dialogue to be a good platform for a genuine discussion
of this kind. In that regard, the main task of the United
Nations should be to make sure that it talks to all parties
and that the parties talk to each other as well.
The second and no less important point is ensuring
the responsible engagement by those external actors
capable of exercising influence to encourage the parties
to sit around the negotiating table. It cannot be achieved
by creating alliances of convenience but must be done
by working in good faith based on an inclusive transition
process. It is important to ensure the coherence of all
efforts in a Libya-led process under the auspices of the
United Nations.
Turning to security-related issues, my delegation
strongly condemns the escalation of fighting in Sebha,
the oil crescent, Jofra and other areas. The situation
in Libya can have no military solution. We call on the
parties to cease hostilities and join the negotiation
process. Any delay in doing so will only result in

S/PV.7927

greater suffering for the Libyan people. It is also worth
noting that the volatile environment creates a fertile
ground for the spread of terrorist activities. As we
have learned from the latest Secretary-General’s report
(S/2017/283), after the liberation of Sirte, many fighters
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant moved to the
south, and some of them have formed sleeper cells. That
underscores the urgency of establishing coordinated
security policies on the ground and setting up unified
security structures.
We believe that Libya can overcome its current
threats if it returns to the path of development.
Development requires good partners. We welcome the
fact that the Secretary-General is committed to engage.
In that regard, we look forward to the results of
a system-wide strategic assessment review that will
examine the role and shape the priorities for the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya in both the shortterm and the long-term.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): Let me start by thanking
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Martin Kobler, for his comprehensive briefing
on the latest developments in Libya and the activities
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya. We
commend his efforts in the search for a political solution
to the Libyan crisis. We also thank Ambassador Skoog
for his report on the activities of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011). We appreciate his leadership.
The deteriorating security situation and the
continuing political stalemate in Libya remain a source
of great concern. With the prevailing lawlessness and
the existence of parallel and divided institutions, the
possibility of Libya sliding back into conflict presents
a serious risk, as the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/283) has warned. We believe that the Libyan
Political Agreement is still the only framework for
ensuring a lasting political solution to the Libyan crisis.
The need for renewed efforts to facilitate political
dialogue and address the key controversial issues
that continue to impede the implementation of the
Agreement has already been recognized, but it is now
time for taking concrete actions in that regard.
It is undoubtedly the Libyans who should resolve
their own problems. There is no alternative to Libyan
ownership of the process of resolution. However, careful
coordination of regional and international efforts in
support of the Libyan peace process in full recognition

17-1046013/22

S/PV.7927

The situation in Libya

of the country’s sovereignty and territorial integrity
is vital. In that connection, we acknowledge the key
role played by the neighbouring countries of Libya.
It is in that spirit that we welcome their intensified
efforts to stabilize the situation in the country. We also
support the decision of the African Union High-level
Committee on Libya to include neighbouring countries
as members, recognizing their indispensable role in
addressing the crisis.
In order to ensure the effectiveness of the efforts in
support of Libya, it is imperative that there be enhanced
coordination and coherence among all of the relevant
regional and international stakeholders. In that context,
we welcome the joint communiqué issued by the Libya
quartet’s meeting, held on 18 March in Cairo, which
stressed the importance of a political solution. There
can be no military solution to the conflict in Libya.
Finally, we remain concerned about the overall
humanitarian situation in Libya, as well as the suffering
and plight of refugees and migrants. Though the fight
against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has
brought tangible progress, the continued presence of that
group and its sleeper cells still poses a serious threat.
All of that underscores the urgent need to reinvigorate
the political dialogue in order to restore peace and
stability in Libya. There is a need for unity of purpose
within the international community in supporting and
encouraging all Libyan actors to constructively and
seriously engage in searching for a lasting solution to
the Libyan crisis.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Kobler and Mr. Skoog
for their briefings.
We regret to note that, despite the efforts being made
by the international community to resolve the internal
political crisis in Libya, the situation is not improving.
We are concerned that the fragmentation of the country
and its public administration system are hindering the
solution of the numerous problems that the country
faces in the fields of security and socioeconomics.
Libya is still painfully recovering from the impact of
the political intervention of 2011.
The ongoing confrontation between Tripoli and
Tobruk has led to an actual paralysis of the Government’s
administrative system. One of the latest alarm signals
of general instability is the fighting in the area of ​​the
so-called oil crescent, as well as in the south of the
14/22

19/04/2017

country. Against the backdrop of the power vacuum,
we have seen the presence of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant and Al-Qaeda, as well as the activities
of local extremist groups. The problem of the spread
of terrorism is especially urgent, given Libya’s porous
borders and the absence of centralized law-enforcement
agencies. We are concerned that as a result of counterterrorist actions, some militants have subsequently
scattered to various corners of the country, which might
lead to the formation of sleeper cells.
The negative impact of the situation in Libya is
being felt in Europe, which has had to deal with the
influx of illegal migrants trying to cross over to the
European continent from Libyan territory. Similar
problems include the aggravated problems of crossborder crime, arms smuggling and drug trafficking.
We see a potentially constructive role played by
Libya’s neighbours in suppressing such threats. We
note the importance of the implementation of resolution
2259 (2015), which established the Libyan Political
Agreement as the basis for the settlement of the conflict.
Unfortunately, there has been almost no progress in
implementing the Skhirat Agreement. The main tasks
of the transition period have not been fulfilled. For
example, the work on the text of the Constitution has not
been completed, general elections have not been held,
and as a result permanent bodies of power still need be
formed. It is good that the Libyan parties have declared
their readiness for dialogue, but additional efforts will
be required in order to reach a clear understanding of
the parameters of national reconciliation, including the
formation of national authorities.
The Presidency Council in Tripoli cannot seriously
expand the base of its support and become an institution
of power trusted by broad sections of the population
throughout the country. The capital is controlled by
numerous armed groups and not all of them are loyal
to the Presidency Council. The prospects for the
establishment of the Presidential Guard are still unclear.
Moreover, it is unclear how its formation connects with
the key task of creating unified power structures. The
membership of the Government of National Accord has
not been endorsed by the House of Representatives, as
required by the Skhirat Agreement.
The myriad interrelated problems dictate the urgent
need for vigorous international support for the political
process in Libya, which could reduce the likelihood of
further negative development of the situation on the
17-10460

19/04/2017

The situation in Libya

ground. There is no alternative to continuing, under the
auspices of the United Nations, to work painstakingly
with the representatives of all major political forces,
regions and tribal groups. It is necessary to help them
overcome their internal disagreements and find mutually
acceptable solutions to the remaining controversial
issues. That work needs to be intensified and provided
with specific ideas. We cannot leave anyone on the
sidelines, as some Western countries have done with
the introduction of unilateral sanctions. In that case,
the gradual return to the country of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya must be strictly related to the
security situation.
Libya should not allow room for unhealthy
competition, which will only complicate the prospects
for settlement. Therefore, we attach great importance
to the consolidation of international efforts, including
their important elements in forums such as the African
Union, the League of Arab States and neighbouring
countries of Libya. The development of a common
position by regional forces would be very helpful, since
a stable and secure Libya would meet their long-term
interests. We look forward to continuing the work of
the Rome format, with the participation of all interested
parties. It would be wrong to allow its fragmentation
and gradual demise.
One of the key areas that requires our attention is
the promotion of the unification of power structures. At
the same time, it would be a mistake to marginalize the
Libyan National Army, since the Army could form the
basis for future unified armed forces. A united Libyan
National Army under central command could become
a reliable recipient of international military assistance.
Given the current uncertainty, we believe that it would
be premature to start talking about the full or partial
lifting of the arms embargo imposed on Libya by
Security Council decision.
The fate of the country should be decided by the
Libyans themselves. Trying to provide them with
ready-made solutions is counterproductive. That said,
at the heart of the Libyan political process should be
the refusal of all parties involved to resolve the crisis
through force. The only way out of the impasse must
be found through joint efforts at the negotiating table.
We believe that it is a mistake for some capitals to
support Tripoli against Tubruq. We should not pit one
set of Libyans against another. That kind of one-sided
policy has become a reason for the slow-down of the

S/PV.7927

political process. We would like to hope that the many
foreign military presences in Libya will not contribute
to the further disintegration of the country and its
institutions. The efforts of European countries to fight
the illegal migration passing through Libyan territory
and the measures they have taken to do so should not go
further than their declared purposes.
Russia’s position is consistent. Guided by the
priority task of maintaining the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Libya, we have been working
with all the power centres by encouraging them to
overcome their differences. Given Libya’s particular
situation, it is the only proper approach.
In general, the international community faces the
difficult task of preventing the country’s disintegration
and collapse. It is in our interests to ensure that
Libya emerges from its protracted crisis as quickly as
possible, that it re-emerges as a stable State, sustained
by its strong institutions, a functional army and lawenforcement structure and that it can regain its status
as an important player in the Middle East. A strong,
lasting settlement would not only respond to the hopes
and interests of the Libyans themselves, it would also
have a salutary effect on the Middle East and North
Africa in general. For that, we need coordinated action
on the part of all interested parties, and we are ready
for such cooperation.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): I thank you, Madam President, for
convening today’s meeting. The Plurinational State
of Bolivia is grateful to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Libya and Head of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL),
Mr. Martin Kobler, for his briefing. We would also
like to thank the Permanent Representative of Sweden,
Ambassador Olof Skoog, for his briefing, in his capacity
as Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya,
and reiterate that he has the support of our delegation
in his work.
We welcome the efforts to support the Libyan
political process by both international and regional
actors, including the African Union, the League of Arab
States and Egypt, Tunisia and Algeria individually, and
particularly their willingness to strengthen dialogue,
while respecting Libya’s sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity. Nonetheless, we are deeply
concerned about the escalation of violence in Libya.

17-1046015/22

S/PV.7927

The situation in Libya

According to UNSMIL’s report, it has resulted in the
deaths of more than 100 people and hundreds more
injured between December 2016 and March. We should
remind all the parties involved that the only solution to
the conflict lies in the political transition that is already
under way and must continue. We therefore urge them
to put aside any belligerence or notion that weapons are
the way to resolve this or any other conflict.
We are also concerned about the plight of internally
displaced persons. According to the 18 April report
of the International Organization for Migration, their
numbers have now reached more than 290,000, owing to
the constant clashes between the various armed groups.
And we are very concerned about the worsening plight
of refugees. According to a statement on 22 March by
Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights Kate
Gilmore at the thirty-fourth regular session of the
Human Right Council,
“[M]igrants in Libya continue to be held
arbitrarily for indefinite periods with no due
process guarantees, legal recourse or review. They
commonly face inhuman conditions and horrific
abuse. Often it is armed brigades who exert direct
or indirect control over these centres, including
official detention centres, meaning there is no
effective protection against abuse”.
In that regard, we urge the parties and armed actors to
cease all violent attacks on innocent civilians who play
no part in the conflict and to honour their obligations
under international law.
We acknowledge and encourage the resolute efforts
of the Government and the people of Libya to combat
terrorism, while emphasizing that as areas are liberated,
the humanitarian assistance that the people need can
be correspondingly facilitated and guaranteed. We
reiterate our firm condemnation of terrorism and all
forms of political, social and economic violence as
unjustifiable and criminal, regardless of their motivation
and wherever, whenever and by whomever they are
committed. We also encourage Libyan institutions and
United Nations agencies and services such as the United
Nations Mine Action Service to continue to make every
effort to neutralize the improvised explosive devices
that can still be found in areas that have been liberated
from Da’esh and remain a threat to the life and physical
well-being of civilians.
Finally, we welcome the fact that the Libyan
Presidency Council has approved its budget framework
16/22

19/04/2017

for 2017. In that regard, we call on all parties concerned
to be ready and willing to reach common ground and
take the positive steps that can enable the Libyan
Political Agreement to be implemented effectively,
as an inclusive process designed and conducted to
benefit the Libyan people. We also acknowledge the
progress made on the Libyan Political Agreement and
the assistance provided by the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya during the reporting period. We stress
that all efforts by the Security Council must be aimed
at achieving a peaceful solution that is in the overall
interest of the Libyan people and respects their rights.
To that end, we would like to highlight three points.
First, the Libyan State and its institutions must be
strengthened. Secondly, Libya’s natural resources must
controlled and managed by Libyans and all profits from
them should be used to benefit Libyans. Lastly, I would
like to underscore the primacy of politics as the only
way to resolve this and other conflicts.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): First, I would
like to thank Mr. Martin Kobler for his briefing on the
situation in Libya and for his continued efforts and
those of the entire staff of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya to ensure a successful political process
there. The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Libya can count on the firm support of
the Senegalese delegation. We also support his seven
recommendations, which, if implemented by all of
the actors and parties involved, could help to secure a
lasting political solution to the crisis in Libya. I would
also like to commend Ambassador Olof Skoog for his
briefing and his leadership as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
With regard to the current situation in Libya, which
has been characterized by the continued worsening of
the tragic plight of migrants, refugees, asylum-seekers
and internally displaced persons who fall victim to
various criminal groups, we believe that the SecretaryGeneral’s comments in his most recent report on the
situation in Libya (S/2017/283) were particularly timely
when he stated that
“there is a need for a comprehensive approach
to address the root causes in the countries of
origin that drive so many people to take this
dangerous journey”.
Indeed, the smuggling of and trafficking in human
beings in Libya, including migrants, are among
17-10460

19/04/2017

The situation in Libya

S/PV.7927

the most serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law that the parties to the
conflict in Libya continue to commit, some of which
may constitute crimes of war.

need to address them in the overall framework of the
search for a political solution to the Libyan crisis. There
can be no military solution, no matter where it comes
from, to this conflict.

The case of women and girls is equally alarming, as
they are subjected to conflict-related sexual violence,
committed by the parties to the conflict in Libya, as
well as by smugglers, traffickers, affiliates of Da’esh
in Libya and other criminal groups. This happens even
when girls and women are detained in formal and
informal detention centres for irregular migrants. In
the face of the deteriorating humanitarian and human
rights situation in Libya, we remind all Libyan parties
of their duty to protect civilians and of their obligation
to respect and implement the provisions of International
humanitarian law and human rights.

As such, like the majority of Libyan stakeholders
and the international community, including the African
Union, we support the Libyan Political Agreement, while
taking note of the wish expressed widely by Libyans to
amend it. We would therefore like to invite all Libyan
parties to work to overcome their political differences
through dialogue, which is the only way to preserve
the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity
and national unity of Libya. That dialogue, of course,
should be as inclusive and representative as possible and
extended, in particular, to all tribes, women’s groups
and youth groups with a view to initiating a process of
local and national reconciliation carried out by Libyans
themselves, with the good offices of the United Nations.
Issues that hamper the implementation of the Political
Agreement at the executive and security levels should
be high on the agenda of this dialogue.

At the political level, my delegation would like to
emphasize that the impasse in Libya does not allow for
the stimulation of the country’s already fragile economy.
Of course, we are pleased that the Presidency Council
of the Government of National Accord has been able
to draw up and implement the budget for the current
year, and we call for improved collaboration with all
Libyan financial institutions in order to better confront
shortages of funds and liquidity, and to provide more
services to the population. However, on the security
front, my delegation regrets the recent fighting in the
oil crescent and in the capital, Tripoli. We believe
that the progress made in restoring oil production and
exports could be compromised by the continuation of
such clashes.
We are also concerned that Libya remains an
enabling environment for terrorist group activities,
despite the liberation of the cities of Sirte and Benghazi
from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). The
presence of the ISIL in Libya shows the urgent need to
establish strong and unified governmental institutions
and security structures throughout the country in order
to contain this threat.
The necessary unification of all military and
security forces under the authority of the Government
of National Accord is one of the main challenges of the
Presidency Council, as the situation remains precarious
throughout Libyan territory with consequences that are
felt both nationally and regionally. Whether it concerns
the plight of migrants in Libya, the fragile economic
situation of the country, humanitarian or security
challenges, my delegation remains convinced of the

My delegation hopes that, in the case of Libya, we
will not lose sight of the principle that sanctions are a
means of restoring peace and security and not an end
in themselves.
Finally, while welcoming the ongoing efforts
made by neighbouring countries and the quartet with
regard to Libya, my delegation wishes to reiterate to
the international community the appeal made by the
African Union through its High-level Committee on
Libya, calling for a better coordination of efforts in
support of Libya, among the various countries and
organizations concerned, and with all Libyan actors,
with a view to advancing the political process for the
restoration of peace and stability in Libya.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakstan): We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya and
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), Mr. Kobler, and Ambassador Olof Skoog
for their briefings.
My delegation would like to make the following
observations and recommendations. Kazakhstan
reiterates its commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national
unity of Libya and its institutions under the Libyan
Political Agreement, which must be Libyan led
and Libyan owned. There is no military solution to
the crisis. Rather, the solution involves inclusive

17-1046017/22

S/PV.7927

The situation in Libya

19/04/2017

political dialogue, confidence-building measures and
national reconciliation.

is ready to work with Council members in support of
peace, security and stability in Libya.

We commend the ongoing mediation efforts of the
Special Representative, UNSMIL, the African Union,
the League of Arab States and the European Union.
Moreover, we fully endorse the Secretary-General’s
recommendations, which should be fully implemented
in cooperation with regional actors, as well as
neighbouring countries, including Egypt, Tunisia and
Algeria, to support the Libyan political process.

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United States of America.

We express our deep concern over the renewed
military escalation and the fragile security situation,
which can undermine the political process and create
a breeding ground for terrorist and violent extremist
groups, including affiliates of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham and Al-Qaida. What is necessary
is to immediately focus on the largely unaddressed
structural political issues and the multiplicity of armed
actors on the group with conflicting agendas. Therefore,
every effort must be made to build and strengthen State
structures, the armed forces and the security sector,
which will in turn enhance political stability.

I want to thank again Mr. Kobler, as well as
Ambassador Skoog, for their briefings and their insight.
The stakes for achieving stability in Libya are
high. Heavily armed factions are fighting each other
to control land and resources. Thousands of desperate
migrants die every year after setting sail from Libya’s
shores. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham and other
violent extremist groups are looking for safe havens in
places that are beyond the Government’s authority. The
Libyan people are suffering. For too many Libyans,
the promise of throwing off a brutal dictator has been
replaced by the reality of harsh conditions and life under
militias. The effects of that instability are spreading
throughout North Africa and across the Mediterranean.

Regarding the economy, the vulnerabilities of
Libyan society can be overcome only with investments
in sustainable development to ensure socioeconomic
stability and meeting basic needs to support the
political process.

It does not have to be that way. If Libya’s leaders
can work together, Libya can, with the support of the
United Nations and the international community, start
to rebuild. That path starts with a national political
reconciliation among Libya’s parties. The status quo,
with various officials all claiming to speak for the
Libyan people, is not sustainable. It does nothing to
re-establish the institutions and the security that the
Libyan people crave.

The deteriorating humanitarian situation in Libya is
in urgent need of our attention. Combating transnational
crime, especially in illegal migration, human and drug
trafficking, with the support of UNSMIL, the United
nations system and other international partners, is
equally critical, and we call for coordinated and
comprehensive actions in that regard.

The United States believes that the best way to
resolve differences is through a Libyan-led dialogue with
the support of the United Nations and the international
community. All parties should immediately commit to
that process. If the parties do not come together soon,
Libya will only grow more dangerous and difficult to
govern. That is an outcome that no party should want.

The Security Council should therefore play a
more urgent and proactive role in the resolution
of the Libyan issue, which must not be lost among
other pressing crises. It is necessary to send a clear
message to all parties for the immediate cessation of
military operations, the de-escalation of tensions and
engagement in political dialogue.

The Libyan Political Agreement remains the
framework that Libyans have agreed on for their
country’s transition. It is the road map towards a
democratic Libyan State — one in which all Libyans
can have a say. Implementing the Agreement is vital
to restoring stability. The United States welcomes
indications of support from many parties for the
Agreement. At the same time, we call on those who
have not yet dedicated themselves to engaging in the
process and ask them to do so immediately. There may
need to be certain amendments to the Agreement, but
the important point is that every Libyan faction needs to
come together in a national dialogue and agree on how

Finally, it is increasingly important that all
countries fully implement all sanctions measures
imposed by Security Council resolutions on Libya with
regard to an arms embargo, the travel ban, the assets
freeze and the illicit export of crude oil. Kazakhstan
18/22

17-10460

19/04/2017

The situation in Libya

to carry out its terms. Dialogue and compromise — that
is what the United States urges the parties to engage in.
But some actors have pursued destabilizing
military operations, while refusing to fully commit to
finding political agreement. Violence on the ground
has escalated in recent weeks. Conflict now looms
at Tamehint airfield, where forces aligned with the
United Nations-recognized Government were recently
attacked by a rival group. Such destabilizing attacks
are unacceptable. They must stop now. When Libya’s
factions keep fighting instead of talking, the biggest
winners are the terrorist groups.
Libya’s security cannot rest in the hands of
various separate factions. The country deserves a
national, unified military under civilian oversight.
Moving forward in Libya requires building up such a
force — one that is capable of securing the country. That
is an extremely tough task. Libya’s international parties
need to be clear in pushing for a single Government
security force.
Finally, the Libyan Government of National
Accord must deliver for the country’s people, but the
Government cannot function unless it has control
over the resources that provide its budget. Libya’s oil
wealth can help fund the restoration of public services,
including policing and other security measures. The
United Nations and Libya’s international partners must
help the Government of National Accord manage the
country’s resources, so that the Government can help
ordinary Libyans with their everyday needs. That
is why Libya’s oil and petroleum industry must be
safeguarded for the benefit of the country’s people.
When groups try to smuggle Libyan oil out of the
country, they are smuggling away Libya’s future. Those
are funds that would otherwise help rebuild Libya’s
shattered economy. So, we in the Council need to take
an unequivocal stand against oil smuggling from Libya
in all of its forms. The international community must
work closely with the Government of National Accord
and the National Oil Corporation, which is based in the
capital, to shut those rogue operations down. That is
what the resolutions of the Security Council demand.
None of that will be easy. Libya faces an immensely
challenging road ahead to rebuild its institutions and
recover from years of civil war. The first step, though, is
clear. Libya’s leaders need to come together in support
of a single Government and a single military. They need
to talk through their differences, not fight them out,

S/PV.7927

and they need to compromise. That is the message that
each of us on the Council needs to bring to the parties.
That is how we can one day stop talking about Libya as
a threat to peace and security, and instead focus on the
opportunities that Libya has to thrive.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to representative of Libya.
Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Madam,
on your presidency of the Security Council during
this month. I would like to thank His Excellency the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2017/283) on the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).
I would also like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Martin Kobler, for his
efforts to help the parties in Libya reach a compromise
and for his important briefing on the most recent
developments in Libya and Ambassador Olof Skoog,
Permanent Representative of Sweden, for his briefing
in his capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
I would like to reiterate that the Government of
National Accord supports all United Nations efforts
aimed at achieving a solution to the political stalemate
in Libya with a view to ensuring stability in the
country and alleviating the suffering of its people.
The ongoing political division and the deteriorating
security conditions, in addition to a variety of difficult
circumstances, undoubtedly cast a shadow over Libya
at various levels and exacerbate the suffering of the
Libyan people on a daily basis, despite the serious
efforts by the Government of National Accord to
salvage the situation and overcome the stalemate and
the worsening difficulties. We reiterate the importance
of reaching an inclusive political solution among the
actors so as to put an end to the division in Libya, relying
on the framework of the Libyan Political Agreement.
The threat of violence and force by any party can
have only very negative consequences on the security
and stability in the country. In that regard, we pay
tribute to all of the initiatives and efforts of the United
Nations, the League of Arab States and the African
Union, in addition to those of neighbouring and fraternal
countries, for their efforts to mend the rift between the
parties in Libya and to establish peace and security
throughout the country. We hope that their constructive
efforts will continue to address the political stalemate

17-1046019/22

S/PV.7927

The situation in Libya

and allow them to reach a compromise and minimize
the tension among the various parties.
We also reiterate that the Libyan Political
Agreement might need limited amendments, especially
on the agreement of the political stakeholders. We do
not think that that is impossible. It could be achieved
by way of a constructive dialogue among the parties
to the dispute. In that regard, we welcome the decision
of the Libyan House of Representatives regarding the
resumption of political dialogue. We consider that to be
a very important step towards a final inclusive solution
to the crisis in Libya.
Since the Libyan Political Agreement was signed on
17 December 2015, the Government of National Accord
has faced and continues to face many challenges, but it
has managed to take important steps aimed at delivering
its citizens from their suffering, which are related to
the country’s socioeconomic and security problems.
The Government operationalized the institutions of the
country and adopted the 2017 budget, so as to be able to
deliver basic services to its citizens, establish peace and
combat terrorism, irregular and illegal migration and
the smuggling of petroleum products. The Government
of National Accord is also facing many challenges, and
in that regard we commend the sacrifices and efforts
made by all the people of Libya, especially in the two
cities of Sirte and Benghazi — which have resulted in
a lull in terrorist group activities. It is highly necessary
in that respect to have a unified national army to work
under the political leadership of the country and in
accordance with globally recognized professional and
military procedures.
In connection with the Presidential Guard, the
Presidential Council is making ongoing efforts to set
up the system, in coordination with the command of
the Presidential Guard and Lieutenant-General Paolo
Serra, the Senior Advisor to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on security sector matters.
We call on the international community to support
the system, exempt it from the weapons embargo and
provide it with all of the important equipment that it
needs to undertake its mission, which is to safeguard
governmental institutions. We also call for the Libyan
National Army to be exempted from the weapons
embargo, so that it can uphold its counter-terrorism
mission throughout Libya.
The unjustified and sudden military escalation
around Tamanhint airport, which started with heavy
20/22

19/04/2017

artillery and aircraft strikes in recent days and
resulted in heavy casualties and damage to facilities,
has brought the country to the brink of civil war and
may even have dealt a very strong blow to all of the
de-escalation and settlement efforts for which we have
been calling. Everyone knows that the targeting of those
areas has nothing to do with the war against terrorism.
We welcome the call issued by the ambassadors of the
permanent five on 12 April for the de-escalation and
immediate cessation of all hostilities. Nevertheless,
the violations and land and air attacks continue. All
of that notwithstanding, the Presidential Council has
established a ministerial committee to de-escalate
and minimize the tension, as mentioned in the letter
by the head of the Presidential Council on 16 April to
the international community, aimed at immediately
urging those responsible for the escalation to cease
their activities.
The human rights situation in Libya remains
a cause for great concern, especially owing to the
ongoing violations taking place for political reasons
or for extortion and ransom, not to mention the
suffering of civilians under the military operations
and indiscriminate bombing, and the illegal migrants
exposed to grave abuses. We reiterate that it will be
difficult to address all of those issues unless stability is
restored throughout the national territory and until we
rid ourselves of the rampant armed groups. To that end,
agreement must be reached between the Presidential
Council and the House of Representatives, so that
the Government of National Accord can undertake its
mission, as required.
Based on the principle of national ownership,
we call on the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) to cooperate and coordinate with
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in preparing reports,
especially some that are not included in the Mission’s
mandate — such as a report on illegal migrants in Libya.
Indeed, illegal migrants transiting through Libyan
territories suffer, and we therefore hope for future
coordination with the Libyan authorities to address
that issue. UNSMIL’s positions should be reflected in
writing instead of on Twitter, because tweets might
inflame public opinion.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Kobler
to respond to comments.
Mr. Kobler: I am grateful for the solidarity
expressed around the table in the Security Council. The
17-10460

19/04/2017

The situation in Libya

solidarity and cohesion of the Council is an important
message. It is an important signal for those in Libya
who seek procrastination and delay instead of progress
and stability. I also appreciate the messages of support
from my colleagues in particular, who increasingly
work inside Libya on a daily basis in order to make life
better for the Libyans.
I would like to comment briefly on the situation in
the south, which is a matter of great concern for us. Many
here have rightly said that there is a difference between
the fight against terrorism and just taking an airport and
achieving territorial gains. The humanitarian situation
in the south, in Tamanhint and the town is, to say the
least, very difficult. There are internally displaced
persons, so any fighting aggravates the humanitarian
situation, and people leave the areas where they reside.
That is the case in Tamanhint. We try our best to not
only politically urge interlocutors to stop the fighting
but also to relieve the humanitarian situation. There
is only one hospital left, and it has neither medicine
nor equipment. We have tried to go there to advocate
for allowing relief and humanitarian goods into the
hospitals and the area.
Many have mentioned the situation in the detention
centres, and I cannot but underline the importance of
human security in Libya, which extends far beyond
the detention centres. I bring to the Council’s attention
the situation in prisons, which was not mentioned. The
situation for prisoners in Libya is not better than for
those in the detention centres — with overcrowding and
bad health conditions. It is the lack of accountability,
the lack of State structure and the failure to restore
the needed State authority throughout the country. We
should not forget the many thousands who are subject to
torture and arbitrary detention in Libya. The restitution
of State authority is progressing. However, the situation
in detention centres was duly noted. I personally try
to go to those detention centres at least once a month,
and I see the overcrowding, the health situation and the
problems that the detainees face.
The solution is not only in the repressive means of
closing the borders but also in the repatriation of those
who are in the detention centres. The International
Organization for Migration does a great deal to repatriate
between 100 and 200 people every week to their
countries of origin. But, given the thousands that are
there, it is only a drop in the ocean of illegal migration.

S/PV.7927

I floated the idea with the Chief Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court as to whether it would
be possible to consider human trafficking as a crime
against humanity, given the thousands of people who
have drowned and the irresponsible behaviour and the
lack of accountability of human traffickers operating
in Libya. I think that the relationship between human
security, human rights for everybody and political
security is obvious. I am very glad that the Council is
also addressing that problem.
With respect to the illegal flow of arms, Libya has
20 million weapons. With a population of only 6 million
people, that is really a problem. I always say, and I have
said it to the Security Council in previous consultations:
weapons come from somewhere — they do not just
magically appear — they come by air, they come by
sea, they come by land. Exports of illicit oil and diesel
find their way to other countries through smuggling.
I genuinely appreciate the Council’s endeavour to
block the illegal import of weapons and the smuggling
routes, because it is very important to do it in a legal
way via the United Nations Sanctions Committee, with
exemptions if that is desirable, or through the lifting
of the weapons embargo, but it is up to the Sanctions
Committee to make the appropriate recommendation.
Let me conclude by going a bit beyond 2017 and
2018 in strategic terms. In 2050, Africa will have
2.4 billion inhabitants, nearly doubling its population
size from 1.4 billion now to 2.4 billion, so it is easy
to imagine what we can expect in terms of population
movements, not in the short term, but in the medium and
long term. However, Libya, a large country, will have
only 9 million inhabitants in 2050. As a country that is
large and rich, but does not have a sizeable population,
Libya will be strategically facing large immigration
waves early in the years 2030, 2040 and 2050.
I therefore think that we should reflect upon how
we stabilize the country beyond the short term. It is
important not to lose sight of a strategic vision for the
future. Something dramatic has to happen if we are to
be able to cope with the problem of 2.4 billion people
in sub-Saharan Africa, 70 per cent of whom will be
between the ages of 15 and 29. The so-called youth
bulge and the youth problem, combined with enormous
population growth, particularly in the Niger and Chad,
Libya’s direct neighbours, which will show enormous
population growth of an order not shared by other
countries, must be kept in mind, as we strategically
think about the future. Human security, the strategic

17-1046021/22

S/PV.7927

The situation in Libya

lines of Libyan population growth and the youth bulge
all over the continent are all topics that are important
to consider.
I thank the Council members for their great support,
for the solidarity they have been showing and for the
important signal that this meeting has sent today to the
Libyans themselves.

22/22

19/04/2017

The President: I thank Mr. Kobler for his
clarification and his comments. We understand that this
solidarity is what he needs to push harder in his role,
and we encourage him to continue moving in the right
direction. We appreciate his efforts.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

17-10460
