S/PV.7583

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7583rd meeting

Tuesday, 15 December 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Gombo
Ms. Sapag Muñoz de la Peña
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Hmoud
Mr. Špokauskas
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Adamu
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-42800 (E)
*1542800*

S/PV.7583

Non-proliferation

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006)
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Ambassador Román Oyarzun Marchesi,
Permanent Representative of Spain, in his capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006).
I now give the floor to Ambassador Oyarzun
Marchesi.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): I have the honour to present the report of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) in accordance with paragraph 18 (h) of the same
resolution. The present report covers the period from
15 September to 14 December, during which time the
Committee held an informal meeting on 24 November
and conducted additional work using the no-objection
procedure envisioned by paragraph 15 of the guidelines
for the conduct of its work.
I am pleased to note that on 18 October, the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) came into
effect, 90 days after the endorsement of the JCPOA
by the Security Council through resolution 2231
(2015). That day is known as “adoption day”. While
the JCPOA participants began at that time to prepare
all the measures necessary to implement the nuclear
agreement, all provisions set forth in resolutions 1737
(2006), 1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and 1929 (2010)
remain in force until implementation day, when the
Security Council sanctions measures will be lifted as
relevant Security Council resolutions are terminated.
The Committee further notes that paragraph 21 of
resolution 2231 (2015) provides for exemptions to
the current measures with regard to certain activities
related to the Fordow and Arak facilities, and the export
of Iran’s enriched uranium in excess of 300 kilograms
in return for natural uranium.

2/12

15/12/2015

During the reporting period, the Committee
considered its 2015 annual report on 9 December
through its no-objection procedure. The report has
been submitted to the President of the Security
Council and will be issued as document S/2015/947.
The annual report provides an overview of the range
of activities pursued by the Committee in 2015, in
accordance with its mandate. I would like to highlight
that the Committee has recently revised its guidelines
to include the additional mandated tasks in accordance
with paragraphs 21, 22 and 23 of resolution 2231 (2015).
During the period under review, the Committee
received two reports from Member States alleging
violations of paragraph 9 of resolution 1929 (2010) and
paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007), respectively.
At the informal consultations held on 24 November,
the Committee instructed the Panel of Experts to
investigate the two reported incidents and report back to
the Committee on the Panel’s findings and conclusions.
On 9 December, the Panel submitted to the Committee
its investigation report on an incident reported by a
Member State on 27 July. The Panel concluded that the
attempted procurement of grade 5 titanium alloy bars
constitutes a violation by Iran pursuant to provisions of
Security Council resolution 1737 (2006) and subsequent
resolutions. However, the Panel could not reach a
definitive conclusion on this being a wilful violation by
Iran’s authorities.
The Panel also submitted to the Committee on
11 December an inspection report concerning the
alleged test launch of an Emad ballistic missile by Iran
on 10 October, which was reported to the Committee
by a Member State on 21 October on behalf of three
other Member States. The Panel concluded that the
Emad launch was a violation by Iran of paragraph 9 of
resolution 1929 (2010).
The Committee received four notifications — three
from a Member State, of which one was submitted
in accordance with paragraph 22 of resolution 2231
(2015) — informing it of the delivery of natural
uranium to Iran; two in accordance with paragraph 21
of resolution 2231 (2015), informing it of the transfer
of low-enriched uranium from Iran; and one from a
Member State informing of its successful disposal, in
cooperation with another State, of a cargo pursuant to
paragraph 17 of resolution 1929 (2010).
With regard to a request from a specialized United
Nations agency seeking to provide technical assistance

15-42800

15/12/2015

Non-proliferation

S/PV.7583

to Iran, the Committee continues to consider its
response.

actions as the alleged launch of Emad ballistic missiles
reported to the Committee on 21 October.

During the reporting period, the Panel submitted
its mid-term report to the Committee on 6 November,
in accordance with paragraph 2 of resolution 2224
(2015). Following a discussion by the Committee of the
report on 24 November, it was submitted to the Security
Council on 3 December.

On the other hand, we welcome the report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), ending
the 12-year investigation into allegations that Iran was
developing a nuclear weapons programme, thereby
closing the issue of a possible military dimension of the
Iran nuclear programme, which is a key step towards
the lifting of international sanctions.

The Panel continues to carry out its activities in
accordance with its mandate set forth in paragraph 29
of resolution 1929 (2010). It is currently completing
one more investigation report on an earlier incident
reported by a Member State concerning paragraph 13
of resolution 1929 (2010). The Panel is planning to
conduct an investigation into an incident reported by
a Member State to the Committee on 24 November,
which concerns paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007).
The Committee looks forward to the Panel’s findings
and conclusions in that regard.
The President: I thank the Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) for his
detailed briefing.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): We thank Ambassador
Román Oyarzun Marchesi for his presentation of the
90-day report of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006). We commend his excellent
work as Chair of the Committee.
We are pleased that on 18 October — adoption
day of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) — the participants began the necessary
arrangements, including legal and administrative
provisions for the implementation of their commitments
under the JCPOA. This is a positive step that we hope
will lead to a long-lasting solution to the Iranian nuclear
issue.
It is crucial that during the transitional period,
the Government of Iran seek to implement all specific
actions stipulated in resolution 2231 (2015), by which the
Security Council endorsed the JCPOA, so as to expedite
the easing of the sanctions against Iran by reaching
implementation day, putting an end to all sanctions
imposed on Iran. In that regard, we strongly encourage
the Government of Iran to remain fully committed to
the measures imposed by relevant Security Council
resolutions until implementation day, and avoid such

In conclusion, we would like to express our
recognition of Iran’s right to pursue a nuclear programme
exclusively for peaceful purposes, and encourage the
Government to continue its cooperation with the IAEA
in implementing the related measures stipulated in the
JCPOA and in accordance with resolution 2231 (2015).
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi for his briefing. I
appreciate his efforts and those of his team to advance
the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). China welcomes the on-schedule
entry into force of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) as an important milestone in the
comprehensive, enduring and appropriate settlement of
the Iranian nuclear issue. The fact that the P5+1 and
Iran have acted in accordance with the time frame
specified in the JCPOA is a practical demonstration of
their political support for the agreement.
As the JCPOA implementation day fast approaches,
the Council’s work on the Iranian nuclear issue will
enter a new phase. In that context, China wishes to
make a few comments.
First, all concerned parties should prepare well
for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). In
accordance with the resolution’s requirements and on
the basis of the agreements reached among the parties,
the Council should thoroughly prepare its mechanisms,
procedures and tasks so as to exercise its authority and
ensure the smooth implementation of the resolution.
Secondly, all sides should accurately interpret the
contents of the resolution with a view to fostering positive
synergy towards the comprehensive, enduring and
appropriate settlement of the Iranian nuclear question.
On implementation day, the Council’s sanctions will be
lifted and replaced by restrictive measures. The Council
should work in a balanced and objective manner so as
to ensure the comprehensive implementation of its own
resolutions, properly address sensitive issues and lend

15-428003/12

S/PV.7583

Non-proliferation

support to and coordinate with the implementation of
the JCPOA, which is the paramount task.
Thirdly, the various parties need to maintain their
political will, effectively implement their commitments
and promote the steady implementation of the JCPOA.
The Iranian nuclear question is extremely complex
and the implementation of the JCPOA has many
unprecedented elements. As the implementation
process unfolds, various problems, difficulties and
even challenges are expected to emerge. China hopes
that all concerned parties will seek tomeet each other
half way, uphold the principles of synchronization and
reciprocity, accommodate each other’s concerns and
ensure fairness and balance.
Fourthly, China has noted the final assessment
report of the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on the possible military
dimensions of Iran’s nuclear programme. We appreciate
the constructive cooperation between the IAEA and
Iran towards implementing the road map. The related
resolution adopted today by the IAEA Board of
Governors is conducive to ensuring the smooth start
of the implementation of the JCPOA, for which China
wishes to place its appreciation on record.
China has actively mediated the negotiation
process on the Iranian nuclear question, while playing a
constructive role in such key issues as the modification
of the Arak heavy-water reactor. Going forward, China
will engage closely with all the parties and contribute
to promoting the smooth implementation of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action.
Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi for
his presentation of the quarterly report of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), and his
entire team for the excellent work they have been doing
for nearly a year.
The Vienna agreement of 14 July and the Council’s
adoption of resolution 2231 (2015) marked a historic
step on the road to establishing confidence in the
exclusively peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear
programme. For 12 years, the international community
worried about Iran’s alarming expansion of its nuclear
programme. Today, after long and difficult negotiations,
a path has opened towards a lasting solution to the
issue. The July agreement between Iran and the E3+3
meets the traditional and essential requirements
for non-proliferation that we outlined during the

4/12

15/12/2015

negotiations. In order to ensure Iran’s compliance with
its commitments, we have established a robust and
detailed verification regime. The Vienna agreement
is now our collective road map. We will monitor it to
ensure that the timetable and measures defined in the
agreement and in resolution 2231 (2015) are rigorously
and comprehensively implemented.
Positive progress has been made since July. On
18 October, following the completion of the national
investigation process, the Vienna agreement went into
effect, and just today the Board of Governors of the
International Atomic Energy Agency took important
decisions aimed at re-establishing the relationship
between the Agency and Iran on new foundations.
Having endorsed the Vienna agreement through
the adoption of resolution 2231 (2015), the Council
must now shoulder the responsibility of implementing
it. I would like to recall in that regard that both the
agreement and the resolution establish that until
the start of implementation, all existing Security
Council measures, including sanctions, remain in full
effect. In that context, we were disturbed to learn the
conclusions of the latest incident report from the Panel
of Experts concerning the ballistic missile launched
by Iran on 10 October. According to the report, the
Panel’s rigorous independent inquiry concluded quite
unambiguously that the missile launch constituted a
violation of resolution 1929 (2010). That violation must
receive an appropriate response from the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). The
Panel of Experts also mentions a possible ballistic
missile launch on 21 November. That information
should receive our full attention, and if it is confirmed
we should also respond to it.
In a second report concerning an attempt to transfer
titanium bars under embargo, the conclusions in the
Panel of Experts are no more reassuring. If the transfer
had been successful, it would also have constituted a
violation of resolution 1737 (2006). Such violations,
coming so soon after the July agreement, do not augur
well. They demonstrate just how vigilant we must
continue to be.
The Vienna agreement on the Iranian nuclear
programme will be a victory for international
diplomacy only to the extent that it is fully and
rigorously applied. In that regard, we will remain
engaged in its implementation in good faith but in a
spirit of watchfulness that can ensure the credibility

15-42800

15/12/2015

Non-proliferation

S/PV.7583

of the agreement and that the solution to the Iranian
nuclear issue will be a lasting one.

be said of the joint collective work regarding many
regional crises.

Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The Russian Federation is grateful
to Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi, Permanent
Representative of Spain, for his briefing on the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) during the latest reporting period.

On the whole, the preparations for launching the
practical implementation of the Plan of Action are
going pretty well. In accordance with the report of
the Director General of the IAEA of 18 November
(see A/70/219), as well as our contacts in the Agency,
the Iranians are quite quickly bringing their nuclear
programme into compliance with the requirements of
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. The IAEA
is ready to take action at any time to start verifying
Iran’s compliance with its obligations under the Plan.
The Agency and Iran have already coordinated their
approach to applying safeguards in all areas of the
nuclear programme, and the IAEA is also carefully
monitoring the Iranians’ efforts to bring the programme
into compliance.

Today, in a special session, the Board of Governors
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
adopted a resolution on Iran, closing the issue related
to Iran’s alleged military nuclear research, superseding
all previous resolutions on Iran, and establishing a clear
path towards the Board’s full closure of its dossier on
Iran.
Iran and the IAEA have fully complied with
and thoroughly gone over the road map agreed on in
mid-July and designed to clarify issues pertaining to
Iran. The most important conclusion of that process
was that no signs of undeclared nuclear material or
activities were found in Iran. That is particularly
important in assessing Iran’s compliance with its
nuclear non-proliferation obligations, as one of the
principal aims of the system of safeguards is to ensure
control over nuclear material. We believe that a new
chapter has begun in the relationship between the
Agency and Iran. In the future, cooperation between
Iran and the IAEA will be based on the Agency’s
traditional frameworks — a comprehensive safeguards
agreement and its additional protocol, along with
voluntary commitments on the part of Iran to promoting
transparency within the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action. The tools at the Agency’s disposal will enable
it to verify the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s
nuclear programme.
The Russian Federation is pleased that the agreement
reached on a final settlement of the nuclear programme
situation is based on a formula proposed by Russia’s
President, which involves the recognition of Iran’s right
to the peaceful use of nuclear energy, including the
right to enrich uranium, and the simultaneous lifting of
all sanctions after all outstanding issues are closed and
the arrangements for Tehran’s nuclear programme are
under strict international control. The solutions arrived
at during the negotiations are clear testimony to the
fact that any challenges to the nuclear non-proliferation
regime can and must be removed through diplomacy
and on the basis of international law. The same can

In general, we believe that it is important to take
advantage of the opportunities that have emerged since
the adoption of the Plan of Action to engage Iran in
full-on economic cooperation, as well as in cooperation
aimed at addressing regional problems in the Middle
East. For its part, the Russian Federation will provide
practical cooperation in complying with the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would first
like to thank the Permanent Representative of Spain for
his excellent presentation and for his role in leading
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). I would also like to thank the Panel of Experts
for their work in preparing the latest report.
We are now nearing the start of the implementation
of the Iran nuclear agreement under the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action signed in July by the
Iran and the P5+1, as well as the issuance of the report
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
confirming Iran’s fulfilment of its obligations. We
stress the importance of the nuclear agreement and
the full implementation of resolution 2231 (2015),
which provide essential guarantees for the Iranian
nuclear programme. We hope that the launch of the
implementation of the Plan of Action will help to
strengthen international efforts aimed at addressing
the challenges threatening the security of the Middle
East, promoting the principles of good-neighbourliness
and strengthening peace and security, while at the same
time reinforcing the nuclear non-proliferation regime
in the Middle East, which of course will also have an
impact on international peace and security.

15-428005/12

S/PV.7583

Non-proliferation

In regard to the report on the work of the 1737
Committee, Jordan supports the Committee’s efforts
to prepare for the effective implementation of the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. We call on the
Committee to continue implementing its mandate and
the relevant Security Council resolutions until the
Council receives the IAEA report confirming that Iran
has effectively undertaken measures pertaining to its
nuclear programme, pursuant to resolution 2231 (2015).
The world will thereby by reassured of the peaceful
character of its nuclear programme.
By the same token, Jordan is concerned about the
contents of the 11 December report of the Panel of
Experts, especially in regard to violations mentioned
therein and Iran’s launch on 11 October of a ballistic
missile capable of carrying a nuclear weapon. We call
on the Committee to look into the matter.
In conclusion, we welcome the role played by the
Committee and its request for various bodies of the
United Nations system to provide technical assistance
to assist Iran in implementing the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We thank
Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi of Spain for his briefing
in his capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). New Zealand is
a strong supporter of the mandate of the Committee.
We commend the Panel of Experts on its good work
and encourage both the Committee and the Panel to
continue their efforts.
Like others here today, we are pleased to note that
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) was
adopted on 18 October, 90 days after endorsement
of the Plan by the Council. Adoption was indeed an
important milestone in the process of ensuring that the
international community can have full confidence that
Iran’s nuclear programme will be used for exclusively
peaceful purposes. We are pleased to note that JCPOA
participants, particularly Iran, are taking the necessary
first steps towards the full implementation of the nuclear
agreement. United Nations Member have also begun
the process of revising their domestic settings to reflect
the provisions of the agreement. This includes drafting
changes to allow for the removal of sanctions and for
snap-back arrangements, should these be required.
The process is by no means straightforward, and
we are acutely aware of the challenges faced by small
States in particular in implementing complex sanctions

6/12

15/12/2015

regimes. Member States will continue to require
guidance to clarify and implement obligations under
resolution 2231 (2015). In order for the agreement to be
fully and effectively implemented, it is important that
all Member States and private sector entities be ready
to act in advance of implementation day. The Council
has an important role to play in assisting them to ensure
that they are indeed ready.
In the intervening period, we remind Member
States that all existing sanctions against Iran remain in
force. We note with concern the Panel’s recent finding
of a violation of paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007),
although we note that it did not reach a conclusion
as to whether this represented a wilful violation on
Iran’s part. Additionally, the Panel has concluded
its investigation into Iran’s test launch of a ballistic
missile on 10 October. New Zealand notes with concern
the Panel’s conclusion that the launch of the Emad
missile was a violation of resolution 1929 (2010). Such
actions risk undermining confidence in and support
for the agreement and jeopardize its full and effective
implementation.
We urge all parties, in particular Iran, to approach
JCPOA implementation with the same positive intent and
good faith that enabled the agreement to be concluded.
We further note that even after implementation day,
Iran will remain subject to paragraph 3 of annex B of
resolution 2231 (2015), which calls upon Iran not to
undertake any ballistic missile launches.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Let me join others
in thanking the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) and its Chair, as well as the Panel
of Experts, for their continued hard work in supporting
the Council’s resolutions on Iran.
I would like to begin by echoing Ambassador
Oyarzun Marchesi’s words and welcoming the passing
of adoption day on 18 October. That was a major
milestone on the road to the successful implementation
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). Our
focus now must be on the swift and full implementation
of the JCPOA. We look to Iran to complete promptly the
agreed measures, giving the international community
confidence that its nuclear programme is and will remain
exclusively peaceful. We also join others in noting the
important decisions taken today by the International
Atomic Energy Agency Board of Governors.
As the Committee’s report reminds us, however,
during the current transitional period the bulk of

15-42800

15/12/2015

Non-proliferation

sanctions will remain in place and will continue to
be enforced in full. These include all United Nations
sanctions and all obligations on Member States arising
from Council resolutions on the issue. The phased lifting
of sanctions should act as an incentive for Iran to meet
all obligations under the comprehensive agreement.
The report is also a reminder that Member States
must continue to raise any suspected violation of Council
provisions, in accordance with the requirements set out
in resolution 2231 (2015). There have been three issues
of note since we last met to discuss this (see S/PV.7522):
first, the notification from Member States informing the
Committee of the delivery of natural uranium to Iran;
secondly, the two notifications regarding the transfer
of low-enriched uranium from Iran, in accordance with
resolution 2231 (2015); and finally, the notification
regarding the successful disposal of cargo, pursuant to
resolution 1929 (2010).
Turning to the work of the Committee, I am grateful
for the continued crucial role it plays in supporting
the enforcement of the Council’s relevant restrictive
measures on Iran. We note with great concern the
medium-range ballistic missile Iran launched on
10 October, which was subsequently referred to the
Committee for investigation. This was a Missile
Technology Control Regime Category I missile, capable
of delivering a nuclear weapon. As such, it was clearly
prohibited by operative paragraph 9 of resolution 1929
(2010), which remains in force. We further note that the
Panel of Experts’ own independent investigation into
the incident, completed in the past week, has likewise
concluded that the launch was a violation of Council
sanctions. The United Kingdom supports immediate
Committee action to address those findings. We are
also concerned by reports of a further ballistic missile
launch by Iran. If it is confirmed, we will support a
similar appropriate reaction.
In other areas, we note the report of the Panel on
the attempted procurement of grade 5 titanium alloy
bars. As the report states, this was a violation by Iran
of its commitments under Security Council resolutions.
Although the Panel was not able to determine whether
this was a wilful violation, the incident highlights the
importance of Iran tackling illicit procurement routes.
This is particularly crucial as we move towards the
implementation of the JCPOA, wherein the attempted
procurement of sensitive goods outside official routes
could constitute a breach. We welcome the Member
States’ report on the incidents that led to the Panel’s

S/PV.7583

investigations and encourage others to benefit from the
Panel’s assistance in that regard.
Let me close by underscoring my gratitude for
the assistance provided by the Committee and the
Panel of Experts to Member States and international
organizations and for their participation in international
meetings and conferences. Such efforts are vital to a
lasting peaceful solution to the Iran nuclear issue. That
is a goal the United Kingdom shares. The comprehensive
nuclear agreement with Iran is in all our interests.
For the international community, it is the best way of
ensuring that Iran does not develop a nuclear weapons
capability. For Iran, it would reset relationships with the
international community and help open up a country
that has been closed far too long. The United Kingdom
will continue to make every effort to implement the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action successfully. We
look to all parties involved to do the same.
Ms. Sapag Muñoz de la Peña (Chile) (spoke
in Spanish): I thank Ambassador Román Oyarzun
Marchesi and his team for presenting the quarterly report
on the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) and for their effective conduct
of its work.
Chile welcomes the start of the implementation of
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action on 18 October,
known as “adoption day”. On 15 October, Iran complied
with the agreed measures with the International Atomic
Energy Agency, as reported by that body. We hope
that the measures set forth in resolution 2231 (2015)
can be verified promptly by the International Atomic
Energy Agency on what has come to be known as
“implementation day”.
We note with concern the information provided
by the Panel of Experts on the possible violation of
paragraph 9 of resolution 1929 (2010). It is important
that we act responsibly and in accordance with the
resolutions of the Council, while taking into account
the political context. By the same token, it is important
to underscore the responsibilities incumbent upon all
Members of the Organization in complying with the
sanctions regime.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons is a cornerstone of the nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation regime. The implementation of
its three pillars — disarmament, non-proliferation and
the right to the peaceful use of nuclear energy — must
be balanced. Chile recognizes the right of the Islamic

15-428007/12

S/PV.7583

Non-proliferation

Republic of Iran to develop nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes and values the efforts on the part of Iran
and the international community to implement the
commitments they have undertaken.
In this discussion, we must not forget the need
to move forward as well on the nuclear disarmament
obligations set out in article VI of the Non-Proliferation
Treaty. The establishment of internationally recognized
and verifiable nuclear-weapon-free zones is a political
and legal commitment. We therefore reiterate the
importance of establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone
in the Middle East and that the international community
must contribute to its establishment.
Mr. Adamu (Nigeria): I also thank Ambassador
Oyarzun Marchesi for his briefing. Nigeria welcomes
the entry into force of the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action on 18 October, which is a major step in the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). In our view,
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action provides a clear
road map for the implementation of the agreement by
Iran and the P5+1 with regard to the Iranian nuclear
programme. It is our hope that that will lead to a
resolution of all outstanding issues. We would like to
reiterate our support for the agreement and urge the
parties to implement it in a transparent manner and in
good faith.
We are encouraged by reports coming out of
Vienna today that indicate that the Board of Governors
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has
adopted a final resolution, completing the Agency’s
probe of Iran’s nuclear programme. That is another
crucial step in the implementation of the Iranian nuclear
agreement. We look forward to implementation day, at
which time the Security Council sanctions imposed
on Iran will be lifted. We commend the Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) for his effective leadership and
assure him of our continued support.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I join other Council
members in thanking Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi
of Spain, in his capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006), for his briefing to the Council. I wish to
also take this opportunity to commend and express my
delegation’s appreciation to the Chair and his team for
their able stewardship of the Committee.
Against the background of the historic breakthrough
and the progress on resolving questions related to Iran’s

8/12

15/12/2015

nuclear programme, the work of the Committee and its
Panel of Experts remains of interest to the Council.
Looking ahead, we are of the view that the work of
the Panel of Experts should progressively include
more activities on outreach to all United Nations
States Members, interested partners and stakeholders
so as to explain and clarify provisions of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). Alongside
other Council members, we understand that, since the
conclusion of the JCPOA and the subsequent adoption
of resolution 2231 (2015), in July, the Committee and
its mandate remain in place until the day known as
implementation day, as stipulated in the JCPOA.
In that connection, Malaysia notes the findings and
conclusions by the Panel of Experts on alleged violations
of the sanctions regime pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), as outlined in the Chair’s report. We would urge
caution and prudence when deliberating on that issue.
We reaffirm our commitment to work constructively
with other Council members, while being fully mindful
of the need to preserve the Council’s unity on the matter.
At the same time, Malaysia takes this opportunity
to reaffirm the call on all the parties concerned to
continue engaging and working constructively with the
Committee, including on resolving outstanding issues
and questions. In our view, positive cooperation and
sustained engagement in that regard would build further
confidence and pave the way for a smooth transition to
the processes envisioned under the JCPOA.
The Chair’s previous briefing (see S/PV.7522),
in September, came at a time when the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) was reviewing the
structural framework in place to ensure that Iran would
arrive at the completion of the initial steps outlined in
resolution 2231 (2015). In that regard, we welcome the
IAEA’s preliminary report on Iran’s implementation
of the road map. With regard to implementation, we
welcome, and are encouraged by, the cooperation and
positive steps taken by Iran to date, including, among
others, on the removal and storage of enrichment
centrifuges. In addition, we welcome the agreement
reached on the redesign and reconstruction of the Arak
nuclear reactor, announced on 22 November.
While noting that some challenges remain in
clarifying certain issues and questions related to Iran’s
nuclear programme, Malaysia believes that a positive
outcome on the full and timely implementation of the
road map is still achievable, provided that all parties
engage earnestly and in good faith. On that note, we

15-42800

15/12/2015

Non-proliferation

would reaffirm the sovereign right of all countries,
particularly those from the developing world, to pursue
and develop nuclear technology for peaceful purposes
with the appropriate safeguards. As such, we reiterate
the call upon those States with the relevant capabilities,
skills and expertise to support such aspirations, in
line with the principles enshrined under article IV of
the Treaty on the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons.
In conclusion, Malaysia wishes to reaffirm its belief
in the importance of matching the progress on nuclear
non-proliferation with similar progress on the nuclear
disarmament side. Stalled efforts aimed at achieving
that goal in recent years remains a cause for concern,
particularly for non-nuclear weapons States. We urge
renewed commitment and action, particularly on the
part of the nuclear weapons States, aimed at achieving
the goal of a world free of nuclear weapons.
Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi, Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006), for his quarterly briefing
on the Committee’s activities from 15 September to
14 December.
With respect to the Iranian nuclear issue, we
welcome the entry into force, on 18 October, of the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, 90 days after
the adoption of resolution 2231 (2015). We reiterate
that the Plan was a diplomatic and historic victory.
Accordingly, we call upon all the parties concerned
to conscientiously implement it and to overcome all
possible future obstacles through dialogue.
Moreover, beyond the Iranian nuclear issue, and
mindful of the ongoing conflicts and tensions in the
Middle East, the Security Council should accord
particular attention to the development of weapons of
mass destruction on the part of certain States in the
region and encourage the establishment of a zone free
of weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East.
With regard to the activities of the 1737 Committee,
we commend it on its dynamic work and encourage
it to continue its efforts in the implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions. We take note of
its contribution and activities during 2015, its review
of the Committee’s guidelines, in line with resolution
2231 (2015), and the mid-term report of the Panel of
Experts, which was transmitted to the Security Council
on 3 December.

S/PV.7583

In conclusion, we reiterate our full appreciation to
the Chair of the 1737 Committee and all the experts for
their commitment and dedication to the implementation
of their mandate.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We want to thank
Ambassador Román Oyarzun Marchesi for his
presentation of the quarterly report of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006). Similarly, we would like to express to him
and his team our gratitude for the efforts undertaken
to promote and fulfil the Committee’s programme of
work.
The consideration by the Security Council of
the Iranian nuclear issue is at a critical transitional
phase. The Security Council’s unanimous support
for the agreement adopted in resolution 2231 (2015)
has helped to lay the groundwork for the successful
implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action and the promotion and maintenance of
the international non-proliferation regime. The
achievement of that important diplomatic agreement
demonstrates once again that, through dialogue and
negotiation, peaceful solutions can be found to disputes
that affect international peace and security.
The adoption of the Joint Plan has had a positive
impact on the start of a new chapter in diplomatic
relations between Iran and some very influential
members of the international community. The brotherly
country of Iran is a key partner in the search for political
and negotiated solutions to the serious conflicts that
afflict the roiled region of the Middle East, solutions
that require the taking into account of Iran’s views
and interests. In that context, we welcome the fact that
dialogue and cooperation has continued between Iran
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
We also welcome the recent reports submitted by that
multilateral institution that indicate that monitoring
and verification activities are being carried out without
any setbacks, and with the support and facilitation of
the Iranian authorities. We encourage the parties to
intensify their efforts so that by the end of 2015 all
outstanding issues between the IAEA and Iran can
be resolved. We acknowledge the role played by the
Agency in resolving all issues related to the Iranian
nuclear programme, and hope that cooperation will
grow stronger with a view to moving forward with the
measures related to the implementation of the Plan.

15-428009/12

S/PV.7583

Non-proliferation

The Islamic Republic of Iran, an important
member of the Non-Aligned Movement, has given
tangible evidence of its commitment to comply with
its obligations undertaken with the framework of the
agreements reached with all the parties involved in the
process. In that respect, we urge taking advantage of
this political juncture to focus on resolving differences
on the basis of dialogue and negotiation. Moreover, it is
important to underscore that, once the IAEA informs
the Security Council that the Islamic Republic of
Iran has completed the implementation of the initial
measures related to its nuclear programme as set out in
resolution 2231 (2015), a significant change is expected
to take place with regard to the sanctions regime
applied to that country. The definitive lifting of the
Security Council sanctions regime and the unilateral
coercive measures implemented illegally against both
Iran, as well as against other countries in relation to
their cooperation with Iran, should be the next step
once implementation day takes place, in accordance
with the Plan of Action. We therefore hope that the end
of the sanctions regime will facilitate, on the basis of
mutual respect, the development of full relations in the
economic, trade, financial, technological and energy
sectors between Iran and the other members of the
international community interested in strengthening
ties with it.
In that context, Venezuela once again invokes
the sovereign right of developing countries to use
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in accordance
with article IV of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. To that end, Venezuela believes
that, in addressing the issues on the agenda of the 1737
Committee, it is important to bear the current political
context in mind as we move through this crucial phase
of the implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action. Under the current circumstances, the
Committee should focus its efforts on contributing to
the smooth implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action and play a constructive role so as to
ensure a definitive and comprehensive solution to the
Iranian nuclear issue, while carrying out its work in a
balanced manner in order to avoid any measures that
could impact or hinder the implementation of the Plan.
With regard to the cases presented in the report of the
Chair of the 1737 Committee, we encourage the parties
to settle those differences in an atmosphere of respect
and dialogue and based on objective investigations
in the relevant bodies. We urge the Committee, in
accordance with its mandate, to investigate and consider
10/12

15/12/2015

the information on cases and to take appropriate action
with the consent of all its members, including the
country concerned itself.
We would like to reiterate that the most important
task at this stage is to move forward with the
implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action. My country reaffirms its full support for the
implementation of this historic undertaking. We also
encourage all Member States to respect and comply
in good faith with the provisions adopted in this
comprehensive agreement.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate that,
once the Iranian nuclear issue is resolved, the Security
Council and the international community should devote
themselves to continuing to work on the denuclearization
of other regions of the world, in particular the Middle
East.
Mr. Špokauskas (Lithuania): I would like to thank
the Ambassador for his report and efforts in steering
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006) during this crucial year.
Lithuania welcomes the fact that, since agreement
was reached on the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) in Vienna five months ago, all sides have been
taking the necessary steps according to the agreedupon schedule. Implementation day is undoubtedly the
next important milestone, and Lithuania hopes that
Iran will complete its nuclear commitments fully and
in good faith.
At the same time, the international community’s
ability to verify the implementation of those
commitments is indispensable, and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) must be granted
full access by Iran, as well as all the time it needs
to thoroughly verify Iran’s fulfilment of its nuclear
commitments. Resolving the outstanding issues
regarding Iran’s nuclear programme, including its
possible military dimension, is another important
element in building the international community’s
trust. In that regard, we note the IAEA report on the
final assessment of past and present outstanding issues
regarding Iran’s nuclear programme, which states
that a range of activities relevant to the development
of a nuclear explosive device were conducted in
Iran prior to the end of 2003, with some continuing
thereafter. The report also states that the Agency has no
credible indications of Iran’s activities relevant to the
development of a nuclear explosive device after 2009.

15-42800

15/12/2015

Non-proliferation

In that regard, Lithuania welcomes the IAEA Board
of Governors adoption by consensus earlier today of a
resolution on JCPOA implementation, verification and
monitoring in Iran.
As efforts to reach implementation day continue,
all Security Council sanctions remain in effect and
must be robustly implemented by all Member States.
The Sanctions Committee must also fully implement
its mandate and take appropriate action in response
to sanctions violations. As on previous occasions,
Lithuania cannot ignore the fact that Iran, while taking
steps under the JCPOA, continues to disregard certain
provisions of Security Council resolutions, in particular
those related to ballistic missile programmes and
conventional arms. In that regard, we note with concern
the latest conclusion of the Panel of Experts that the
launch of the Emad medium-range ballistic missile on
10 October was a violation by Iran of resolution 1929
(2010), which prohibits launches using ballistic missile
technology. The 1737 Committee should now carry
out its mandate in considering and taking appropriate
action in response to that violation.
No less important is the need to focus on continuing
reports of conventional arms transfers by Iran to
countries in the Middle East, in contravention of the
Council-imposed arms embargo. The latest reports on
Iran’s possible involvement in the supply of weapons
to Yemen should be taken seriously and taken up by
both the 1737 Committee and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014).
Upon the IAEA-verified implementation by Iran
of the nuclear-related measures, previous Council
resolutions on Iran will be terminated, but will be
subject to re-imposition in the event of significant
non-compliance. However, specific restrictions on
the transfer of proliferation-sensitive goods, ballistic
missile activities, as well as a conventional arms
embargo, will come into force. The Council will be
responsible for monitoring the implementation of those
restrictions and has to be fully prepared to undertake
that task. Lithuania calls for a swift agreement on
the practical arrangements needed for the Security
Council to fully implement resolution 2231 (2015), and
underscores the need to involve all Council members in
that process.
In conclusion, let me reiterate Lithuania’s belief
that, if implemented fully and in good faith, the JCPOA
will become a fundamental element in building trust

S/PV.7583

between Iran and the international community, and
will contribute to regional and international peace and
security.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States of
America.
I thank Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi for his
briefing. We are grateful for his leadership during this
important transition period.
Five months have passed since the P5+1 countries,
the European Union and Iran concluded the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). Like others,
I am pleased to note that the JCPOA participants are
making progress in fulfilling their commitments under
the deal. Iran is taking key steps outlined in the JCPOA,
such as removing centrifuges, and it has begun work to
eliminate 98 per cent of its enriched uranium stockpile.
When the International Atomic Energy Agency verifies
that Iran has completed those steps — we call this
implementation day — then we will enter a new phase
of this landmark deal.
After that day, however, the Council will continue
to play a crucial role in JCPOA implementation and in
monitoring compliance with resolution 2231 (2015). Prior
to JCPOA implementation day, all the current Security
Council sanctions remain in place. Nevertheless, we
have seen a troubling tendency to look the other way
when those measures were wilfully violated in recent
months. For example, this past October, Iran launched a
ballistic missile that was obviously capable of delivering
a nuclear weapon. Resolution 1929 (2010), which is still
in force, prohibits that kind of launch. After reviewing
that incident, the independent Panel of Experts also
concluded definitively that it was a violation of the
resolution. Yet instead of an effective timely response,
the Security Council has dithered. We intend to keep
working with Council members so as to acknowledge
and respond appropriately to that serious incident.
And there have been other violations. Just last
week, the international affairs adviser to Iran’s Supreme
Leader admitted outright that Brigadier General
Qasem Soleimani, who is subject to Security Council
travel ban, visited Russia. That adviser called such
travel “absolutely normal”. Also, in late September,
a shipment of arms from Iran was intercepted off
the coast of Oman. That shipment was a violation of
resolution 1747 (2007). We do not see how Council
members can cast doubt on those violations. In many

15-4280011/12

S/PV.7583

Non-proliferation

cases, Iranian officials have boasted publicly about
taking prohibited actions, leaving them no plausible
deniability — no desire on their part for deniability.
After the October launch, Iran’s Defence Minister even
declared, “We don’t ask permission from anyone”, as he
then went on to describe the ballistic missile’s technical
capabilities. The Council cannot allow Iran to feel that
it can violate our resolutions with impunity. Some
Council members may not like those resolutions, but
they are our resolutions.
Furthermore, we reject the notion that those
countries that raise those violations in the Security
Council, countries such as the United States, are
somehow responsible for destabilizing the JCPOA.
Implementing Security Council resolutions is the sine
qua non of a credible, enforceable nuclear deal. To
suggest otherwise is to miss the point of the JCPOA and
the point of the Security Council. A sense of impunity
for violators will not help this deal. The Council
members that raise violations of our resolutions, who
seek action from the Council in response to violations,
are not the destabilizers. We are not the rule-breakers.
Iran is, when it violates Council resolutions. It is not
allowed under the resolutions, and they are admitting it.
The United States of America, as well as other
Council members, have appropriately and firmly
condemned those violations. We will continue to
dedicate resources and work with international partners
to make sure that United Nations measures are better
enforced. We will continue to intercept and seize Iranian
arms exports, in accordance with international law. We

12/12

15/12/2015

will continue to identify and obstruct shipments to Iran
of prohibited ballistic missile-related items. And we
will continue to hold Iran accountable for violations of
the measures imposed by the Council.
But that is not enough. The Security Council
itself — we here, we 15 — must take responsibility to
respond to violations of our resolutions. That will be a
long-term challenge. After JCPOA implementation day,
there will still be measures imposed under Article 41 of
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. That
is part of the JCPOA. Those measures, enforced by the
Security Council, will remain in place for many years.
That includes restrictions relating to arms transfers and
ballistic missile-related items. The United States and
our partners will continue to bring violations to the
Security Council’s attention and press for this organ to
respond appropriately.
All of us are very pleased by the JCPOA. We are
glad that it exists. We think it is good for peace and
security. We have to remember how we got this deal;
decisive Security Council action played a major role
in getting Iran to the negotiating table. But our job
here is not done. We have to work together in the same
spirit of resolve that led to the JCPOA to support the
implementation of this nuclear deal and to enforce the
Council’s resolutions.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The meeting rose at 4.05 p.m.

15-42800
