C
TWENTY-SIXTH

YEAR
:/ ,
;;i1*

;

th

MEETING: 15 DECEMBER 1971
NEW

‘“i?\,,,j.
!>,&
,’

, ‘..
:

,: ; .,lll

,j ,‘: 1 i* ::,,ij

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 615) . . . , . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoptionoftheagenda

1

, ,. . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The situation in the India/Pakistan subcontinent

. ,... ... ..., ..........

1

SJPV.1615

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the’ Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Secutity Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SIXTEEN

HUNDRED

AND FIFTEENTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Wednesday, 15 December 1971, at 3.30. p.m.
President: Mr. I. B. TAYLOR-KAMARA

(Sierra Leone),

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Beh&n, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.
Provisional agenda (SIAgendajl615)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the India/Pakistan subcontinent,
The meeting wascalled to order at 7.20 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

procedure of the Security Council and with the consent of
the Council, I shall proceed to invite the Permanent
Representative of Ceylon to participate in our debate,
without the right to vote.
At the invitation’ of the President, Mr, H. S. Amerasinghe
(Ceylon) took the place reserved for him in the Council
chamber.
4. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (traizslation porn Chinese):
At the meetings of the Security Council and the General
Assembly, the Chinese delegation has repeatedly stated the
views of the Chinese Government on the current situation
in the India-Pakistan subcontinent. The armed conflict
between India and Pakistan is in essencethe struggle of
interference and counter-interference, subversion and
counter-subversion, aggression and counter-aggression between the Indian expansionists and the Pakistan Government and people.

The agenda wasadopted.
5. With the support of the Soviet Government the Indian
Government has openly committed aggression against Pakistan and thus seriously wrecked the peace on the India1. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council will recall Pakistan subcontinent. In order to achieve a peaceful
that at a previous meeting [1606th meeting] the Council
settlement of the issue between India and Pakistan the
decided to invite the representatives of India and Pakistan
essentisl prerequisite is an immediate cease-fire by India
to participate in the debate of the problem currently under
and Pakistan and the withdrawal of their respective armed
forces to their own territories. This is common sense. At
discussion by the Council, without the right to vote. In
accordance with that decision, and with the consent of the the meetings of the Security Council the Soviet’ represenCouncil, I shall invite the representatives of India and tatives went so far as unreasonably to veto two draft
Pakistan to take their places at the Council table,
resolutions which contained such provisions. The problem
wasthen referred from the Security Council to the General
At the invitation of the PreSident, Mr. Swaran Singh
Assembly and 104 countries were in favour of the
resolution calling for a cease-fire and troop withdrawal
(India) and Mr. A. Shahi (Pakistan) took places at the
[2793 /XXVli/. However, at the Security Council meeting
Council table.
of 13 December [1613th meeting], the Soviet representative again unreasonably vetoed the draft resolution, the
2. The PRESIDENT:
The Council has also decided
[1607th meeting] to extend invitations to the represen-, contents of which conform to the will of 104 countries.
tatives of Tunisia and Saudi Arabia to take the seats
reserved for them in the Council chamber, with the. 6. This is the first time that the Chinese delegation takes
understanding that they will be invited to take a place at part in the work of the United Nations. The Soviet
the Council table when it is their turn to address the representative has three times flagrantly abused the veto
power in disregard of all consequences, with the obvious
Council.
aim of marking time so as to shield India in its occupation
At the invitation of the President, Mr. R. Driss (Tunisia) of East Pakistan. We are deeply shocked by such things,
and Mr. J. 44. Baroody (Saudi Arabia) took the Places which we did not expect when we first took part in the
work of the United Nations.‘This cannot but make people
reserved for them in the Council chamber.
think. How can a super-Power defy the opinion of well over
100’ countries and behave so arrogantly and truculently?
3. The PRESIDENT: I have just received a letter from the
This
cannot but make people think. How can a superPermanent Representative of Ceylon [S/104541, request&
Power, which has given such undisguised support to Indian
that he be permitted to participate in our discussion on t,s
item. In accordance with rule 37 of the provisional rules of. aggression against Pakistan, truly and really help the Arab
The situation in the India/Pakistan tibcontinent

ruling clique has let a wolf into its own house, and the
Indian people will be the first to suffer. It will not be too
long before India itself will suffer the grave consequences of
dismembering another country. In acting so truculently, the
Soviet leading clique will only enable the Afro-Asian people
and the people of the whole world to seeever more clearly
its true features of social imperialism and further raise their
political consciousness and thus it will only accelerate the
doom of the new tsars who stop at nothing in doing evil.

people in the Middle .East in opposing the aggression
committed by the Israeli Zionists with the support of
United States imperialism? This cannot but make people
think. since if a super-Power can give such undisguised
abetment and support to a country in interfering in the
internal affairs of another country and violating its territorial integrity, then how many :ountries in the world can
possibly be exempt froin the ,present sufferings of Pakistan?
7. In a speech of 13 December, the Soviet representative
attacked the leaders of China with slanderous language,
accusing China of attempting to exploit the India-Pakistan
situation for expansion. This indeed is not worth refuting.
The facts speaker louder than words. China has no military
bases and not a single soldier on foreign soil. Who
committed armed invasion and occupation of Czechoslovakia? Who has stationed large numbers of armed forces
on foreign soil? Who is establishing military bases everywhere? Who is controlling its own a&es? Who has been
subverting the legal Governments of Afro-Asian countries?
Is it not the Soviet revisionist renegade clique which has
betrayed Marxism-Leninism, betrayed the Soviet people
and the people of the whole world?

12. China is following with deep and great concern the
development of the India-Pakistan situation. No matter
what happens in the India-Pakistan subcontinent, the
Chinese Government and people will firmly support the
Pakistan Government and people in their just struggle
against foreign aggression and in defence of national
independence and unity. We are deeply convinced that no
matter how many difficulties and twists and turns may still
occur, the Pakistan people, persevering in the struggle, wili
surely win final victory.
13. The Chinese delegation has consistently held that the
United Nations and the Security Council must respect the
sovereignty, independence, national unity and territorial
integrity of Pakistan. In order to put a quick end to Indian
aggression, the Chinese delegation will not oppose a draft
resolution calling for an immediate cease-fire by India and
Pakistan followed by the withdrawal of their troops from
the territory of the other side, but the draft resolutions
now under consultation have failed to reflect the just will
of the 104 countries in the plenary meeting of the General
Assembly. On the contrary, they contain provisions which
seriously contravene the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and which are partial to the aggressors.The
Chinese delegation is most dissatisfied with all. this. The
Chinese delegation declares that, should any draft resolution contain provisions which interfere in the internal
affairs of Pakistan, disrupt the national unity of Pakistan
and support the puppet regime, the so-called “Bangla
Desh”, China will have no part in it.

8. Here I deem it necessary to mention the Polish draft
resolution [5’/10453/Rev.1]. This is a draft resolution to
dismember Pakistan and legalize the dismemberment. This
is a draft resolution to involve the Security Council directly
in the dismemberment of Pakistan. ,China firmly opposes
this draft resolution. This draft resolution certainly cannot
represent the Polish people, because they cannot possibly
forget the sad history of their own motherland which was
partitioned on many occasions, not can they forget the
unpleasantness of Poland today. To put it bluntly, this is
not a Polish draft resolution but a Soviet draft resolution.
9. During the debate, Britain and France assumed an
attitude which is seeniingly impartial, but fails to distinguish between right and wrong on the major question
concerning the Soviet Government’s suPport ,for Indian
aggression and the disinemberment of Pakistan. This has
inflated the aggressive arrogance qf the Soviet Union and
India. This reminds us of the ,$,eagueof Nations during the
thirties. The United Nations is now standing at the
crossroads of history, Whither the United Nat’ions? This is
a question which gives much food for deep thought by all
the countries tid ‘peoples who love ,peace arid uphold
justice.
.

14. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative of
Ceylon to take a place at the Council table and to make a
statement.
15. Mr. AMERASINGHE
(Ceylon): I must express my
sincere thanks to you, Mr. President, and to the members of
the Security Council, for extending to me the courtesy of
participation without the right of vote in the discussion of
the item that is now before the Council, namely, the
situation in the India-Pakistan subcontinent.

10. In defiance of world opinion and in disregard of all the
consequences, the Soviet leadifig’clique is abetting, encouraging and supporting India in its aggressionagainst Pakistan.
Its purpose is to make use of the wild ambitions of the
Indian expansibnists to control the India-Pakistan subcontinent and the Indian Ocean and to ga,in su$eriority on
the subcontinent as a flanking movement to affect the
situation in the Middle EaA, to stibngthen its position in its
confrontation with a&her super-Power in the Middle East
and other parts,of the world and to wage an even fiercer
struggle for world
,: hegemony with another super-Power.

16. We are witnessing one of the most fearful and
poignant tragedies in the history of the United Nations, the
imminent disintegration of a country, a Member of the
United Nations since its foundation. Born of partition, its
geographical division into two widely separated constituent
elements was in itself a formidable obstacle to unification.
It is now experiencing a greater agony. At this moment of
appalling destiny, one final effort is required to salvage
something from the wreckage, something for the future,
even if it is something as insubstantial as hope and as
evanescent as d dream.

11. But the, Soviet revisionist so&l i$erialis& and the
Indian expansionists should not become overjoyed too
early. The question is far from b&g finished. ‘l’he Indian
D

17. Ceylon has watched with increasing concern, distress
and despondency the deepening crisis that has enveloped
2

the India-Pakistan subcontinent. The situation has steadily
worsened despite the best efforts of members of the
international
community, the Security Council and the
General Assembly, clearly made in good faith and from the
highest of motives, namely the preservation of the principles of the Charter and the search for the slightest
efement that could provide some hope of a satisfactory
settlement.
18. It is not the fate of Pakistan alone that is being settled
today, it is not her destiny alone that is being determined
by the events of the day; it is for peace and harmony in our
part of the world that the bell will now toll unless we act
with vision, courage and faith.
19. Ceylon has been impelled to seek a hearing before the
Security Council for two reasons, First, and it goes without
saying, we enjoy the friendliest and most fraternal relations
with all parties to the conflict-and there are three, the
Government of Pakistan, the people of East Pakistan and
the Government of India. These feelings and that relationship are the product of a common origin, a common
heritage, a common culture, the most priceless part of a
heritage, a common experience and common problems and
aspirations. The second and equally cogent reason is our
own national self-interest which lies in the speedy restoration of conditions of peace and harmony in the area. This
should not be placed in jeopardy by any act of omission or
commission at this crucial juncture.
20. That mistakes-incredible
and avoidable mistakeshave been committed by the Government of Pakistan in its
handling of the East Pakistan question has been admitted
with courage and candour by the Deputy Prime Minister
and Foreign Minister of Pakistan. We recognize that
unspeakable sufferings have resulted from those mistakes;
we recognize the crushing burden imposed on India’s
resources, and the deadly threat to economic, political and
social stability posed by the refugee problem. We recognize
equally the heavy strain imposed on the patience of India’s
leaders and on the forbearance of its people by the events
of the last eight months, whose unhappy climax now
confronts the world.
21 . But it is just such a seemingly hopeless situation that
calls for the display of a spirit of chivalry and magnanimity
on the part of those who alone are in a position to do so.
22. We want a settlement that will prevent victory from
being an embarrassment, defeat from being a humiliation,
and peace from being an illusion. My Government’s
approach to the problem is based on a policy of strict and
scrupulous neutrality-not the neutrality of indifference to
facts, but the neutrality that is the mark of the genuine
friend and conciliator. My Prime Minister has at all times
been ready to associate Ceylon with initiatives accepted by
the United Nations towards achieving a settlement, and has
always been ready to use her own good offices in any way
possible, if and when necessary, We have considered a
political
settlement in East Pakistan to be central to any
and negotiations between the Government of
solution,
Pakistan
and the acknowledged leaders of the people of
East Pakistan to be the only effective and legitimate means
of achieving that settlement. We have also held that any

such settlement must be in accordance with the wishes of
the people of East Pakistan.
23. A cease-fire and the cessation of all hostilities constitute the first and indispensable requirement. Simultaneous
with it, negotiations must commence between the Government and the acknowledged leaders of East Pakistan. The
withdrawal of the armed forces of the two countries to
their respective territories would be a subsequent step.
24. If the imperious and inexorable logic of fact and
circumstance dictates the withdrawal of the Government of
Pakistan from East Pakistan in deference to the will of the
people of East Pakistan, let it be given the opportunity of
doing so-with honour and dignity, and in response to the
international community’s request for a political settlement.
25. In other situations, we have asked for a political
settlement-not a military solution. That is the quintessence
of the Charter. I ask you not to deny to the Government of
Pakistan what we-every one of us-would wish if a similar
fate overtook us: and th&t is the opportunity of making
peace with honour.
26. Rarely has a situation demanded the exercise of
greater statesmanship. We are confident that the leaders of
all parties concerned are capable of rising to those heights.
Military problems must now be subordinated to political
exigencies-political
exigencies that are not merely of
parochial and provincial import. The only settlement worth
achieving is one that would not merely bring the hostilities
to an end and settle the future of East Pakistan, but one
that would at the same time heal the wounds that have
been inflicted, without leaving them to fester-one that
would help repair the ecpnomies ravaged by war, one that
would substitute economic growth for moral and material
decay, and one that would, above all, provide a sure and
stable foundation for lasting peace and harmony between
those who are brothers and must always remain so.
27. As important as a settlement itself are the means by
which it is achieved. No one would profit by a Pyrrhic
victory. We had hoped to suggest the terms of a draft
resolution to be sponsored by any interested member or
members of the Security Council, but we were not prepared
to do so without the concurrence of both India and
Pakistan. If any other draft resolution secures their approval, we would be happy to see this consummation of the
untiring efforts of the Security Council.
28. Mr. MALIK

(Union

of Soviet Socialist Republics)
The situation in the Hindustan
peninsula has become extremely acute, and as a result
immediate measures are essential.
(translation from Russian):

29. On instructions from the Soviet Government, the
delegation of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics has,
during the disctission of this question in the Security
Council and the General Assembly, made every effort to
achieve a break-through from the armed conflict between
two States in that region to a just and lasting settlement. A
complex situation arose in the Hindustan peninsula, and in
the course of attempts to achieve a settlement, many

Bangla Desh’. This is the sort of thing upon which it is
traditional for Americandiplomats to insist. It galls a bit
to hear the idea of self-determinism spoken in Russian
while Washington, insisting upon the right of its forces to
bend Viet-Nam to. its will, also insists upon an Indian
withdrawal from Bangla Desh, which at this time would
jeopardize Bangla Desh independence. Wli# Washington
seems to be saying is that it is under no compulsion to
heed the rules it lay’s down for other nations.“*

further complications have arisen. The beginning, the
development and the causes of the conflict are of an
unprecedented nature; this fact is generally recognized.
Only the Chinese representative, in his efforts to mislead
both the United Nations and the Security Council, refuses
to recognize the unprecedented nature of these events and
closes his eyes to reality. This replacement of reality with
fabrications and with slander against the Soviet Union is no
doubt an inherent characteristic of the Maoist clique. He
has claimed that the Soviet representative used words which
he finds displeasing. It was not the representative of the
USSR who started using these words. Let the Chinese
representative stop using such words and he will not hear
them from me.

Only Washington is mentioned here; there is no mention of
Peking. Yet Peking is following exactly the same course as
Washington. In this respect; too, in this area, too, as has
already been noted, a Chinese-United States ddet is being
played.

30. An unprecedentedly acute crisis has arisen in East
Pakistan. Instead of taking swift and positive measures for a
peaceful political settlement, the authorities used methods
of terror and violence to stifle the will of the population of
East Pakistan, As has been pointed out more than once
during the discussions in the Security Council and the
Assembly, this led to unprecedentedly tragic consequences.
Hundreds of thousands of people perished, more than 10
million were forced to flee to save themselves, to abandon
their native land and their houses, and to flee to another
country.

34. Peking is not interested in the fate of 10 million
people who arz undergoing unheard-of suffering, It is
interested in only one thing, in exploiting the situation in
order to strengthen its position in South-East Asia and in
the Hindustan subcontinent. This is what Peking says the
Soviet Union is doing, but the Soviet Union has no such
intentions; it never has had, and it never will have. A
solution to the problem we are discussing can be found
only on the basis of recognizing the need for a cease-fue
between India and Pakistan and combining it with a
simultaneous decision on a political’settlement
in East
Pakistan.

31. However, neither the Deputy Prime Minister of Pakistan, Mr. Bhutto, when speaking in the Security Council, nor
the Chinese representative has said a word about this. It is
of no interest to them. The death of several hundred
thousand people means nothing to the Chinese representative. The flight of 10 million people from their native
land to a foreign country to savetheir lives is to him a trifle
which is not even worth mentioning. There you have the
typical Maoist approach to such important, unprecedented
events. Here you see both the Chinese representative and
Chinese policy in their true colours.

35. As a result of the prolonged and many-sided discussion
of the problem in the Security Council and the General
Assembly, it is becoming more and more obvious that a
political settlement can be found only on the basis of
recognition of the expressed will of the people of East
Pakistan The real situation dictates the necessity for a
cease-fire and a simultaneous political settlement in East
Pakistan. The question of the withdrawal of troops has
been raised; however, we may be sure that the Indian side
could cease-fue ana withdraw its troops if the Pakistan
Government withdrew its troops from East Pakistan and if
a political settlement was achieved there by peaceful means,
with the lawful representatives of the people of East
Pakistan. To achieve this, power must be transferred to
those elected by the people, to the representatives of the
party, that won a majority at the elections in December
1970.

32. The very unprecedentedness of these events, and their
specific character, call for the adoption of something other
than the usual decisions. The essence and nature of these
events require us to take all the circumstances into account
and make the right decisions. We must take all aspects of
the problem into account, especially its primary cause, and
not close our eyes to the real situation. In the quest for a
solution, we must show a sober, calm and firm approach.

36. Another important, vd indeed essential, requirement
is the creation of conditions ‘in which all the East Pakistan
refugees can return from India. Who can create and
guarantee these conditions? Surely no one, in the light of
the nine months’ experience of the bloody events in East
Pakistan, can assert that the,,Pakistan military authorities
are capable of creating or ensuring conditions in which all
the East Pakistan refugees, numbering more than 10
million, can return from India. This can be done and
guaranteed only by new authorities consisting of, and
appointed by, the lawful representatives of the East
Pakistan people and elected by that people.

33. It has become obvious to all of us that this problem
cannot be settled by a one-sided approach. Many delega,
tions have informed either me personally, or members of
the Soviet delegation, that the Soviet approach to solving
the problem, which links the cessation of hostilities to a
political solution, is perfectly correct. Even the bourgeois
United States press, which no one could ever suspect of
sympathy for the Soviet Union, recognizes the correctness
of the Soviet position, of the Soviet’ Union’s approach to
solving the problem. For example, today’s issue of the
leading Boston newspaper, The Boston Globe, states:
“This is substantially the Russian position too, and it is
difficult to quarrel with it. Russian ,Ambassador Yacob
Malilc has asked only that the United Nations take no
decision ‘without ‘ensuring the .mterests of the people of

37. The Chinese representative is not interested in this
aspect of the matter, either. While passing himself off as a
1 Quoted iu English by the speaker.

4

L

SUppOrter Of a cease-fire and an end to military action, he at
the same time remains silent about the fate of 10 million
people, and talks as if these 10 million should return to
those from whom they fled. This is Chinese logic; this is the
Chinese approach to rectifying such an important situation
which is unprecedented in the history of the post-war
period.

42. Because of the unprebedented nature of these events,
the Soviet delegation proposed concrete and practical
measuresto settle the situation. The unprecedented nature
of the events calls for the adoption of unusual, unprecedented, measures to achieve a settlement.
43. After studying the draft resolution submitted by the
representative of Poland [S/104.53/Rev.I], the delegation
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics has concluded
that that draft outlines the right approach both to a
cease-fire and the cessation of hostilities in the Indian
subcontinent and to the methods and means of achieving a
peaceful political settlement with the lawfully elected
representatives of the people of East Pakistan. Power must
be handed over to them, since they alone are capable of
creating normal conditions for the return of all East
Pakistan refugees from India to their homes. Those who
forced the refugees to flee can neither assure them normal
conditions nor provide a guarantee of safety.

38. The East Pakistan people themselves will decide what
they want and determine their own fate. The Security
Council has heard a statement by the Minister for External
Affairs of India, Mr. Singh [1611rh meeting], which made
it perfectly clear that India has no intention of imposing its
will on the people of East Pakistan, and that they
themselves will determine their own destiny,
39. This and nothing else must be the essential basis for
immediately putting an end to the conflict and simultaneously setting about reaching a peaceful political settlement *

44. The adoption of such a resolution by the Security
Council would open the way for a solution to the problem,
and would ensure a peaceful political settlement in East
Pakistan and an end to the serious military conflict between
India and Pakistan. If this draft does not receive support,
then the delegation of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics reservesthe right to submit its own proposals.

40. A constructive and peaceful settlement of this complex problem, which has already more than once been
termed unprecedented, also requires that neither side
should undertake unilateral
action or engage in any
ostentatious moves. There remains one more thing which is
important to a solution of this problem: the Government of
Pakistan must also enter upon a real path of political
settlement in East Pakistan, on the basis of a peaceful
settlement with the lawfully elected representatives of the
people of East Pakistan. It may be objected that such a
solution to the problem would be unusual. However, no
one can deny that the events in East Pakistan themselves,
which were the main and decisive cause of the conflict in
the Hindustan peninsula, were unprecedented, and consequentIy unusual. Ten million people left their country, left
their native land, in order to save their lives. As has already
been pointed out, this is equivalent to the population of a
whole State. It is larger than the population of 88 States
Members of the United Nations.

45. In the course of consultations, the delegation of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics proposed amendments
to one of the drafts prepared by other delegations. The
essenceof our proposals is that all parties to the conflict in j
the Indian subcontinent should be invited to take steps
towards an immediate cease-fire and a cessation of all
hostilities on both the eastern and the western fronts. This
is the first point, the basic and important point.
46. The second point, equally basic and important, is
inseparably linked with the first; it is that the Council
should recognize that simultaneously with the cease-fire,
power in East Pakistan must be handed over to the
representatives of the majority party who were elected in
December 1970.

41. Mr. Bhutto and Mr. Huang Hua, however, have not
given us an analysis of this terrible event. They have made
no effort to look this startling fact in the face. They have
proposed no way out of the situation. They protest and
object to concrete proposals for a political settlement, and
this attitude was reflected in the Chinese representative’s
vote against the Soviet draft resolution [S/10418]. He
referred here to the Soviet veto, but said nothing about his
own very r.eal veto. He voted against the Soviet draft
resolution,
which contained an appeal for a political
settlement
in East Pakistan, as a result of which there
would inevitably have been a cessation of hostilities. He
voted against a Soviet proposal to call upon the Government of Pakistan to take measures to put an end to all acts
of violence by Pakistani forces in East Pakistan which have
Iod to the deterioration of the situation. In objecting to and
voting against those proposals he took the course of
approving
and covering up the bloody terror in East
p&&tan.
There is the true face of the Chinese repsentat&,
and the essence of Chinese policy. For this reason,
none of his slanders against the policy of the Soviet Union
onn be taken seriously. They are far-fetched, and have been
repeated every day for many Years.

47. We submitted these amendments to one of the drafts
proposed during the previous discussion of this question by
the Security Council. We are firmly convinced that if the
sponsorsof that draft had accepted our amendments at that
time, the problem would already have been solved. We
introduced our own draft [~S/J0428], although after the
Chinese representative had voted against the Soviet draft
calling for a political settlement and a simultaneous
cessation of hostilities, it became obvious that he would
also vote against our second draft.
48. This is the reality. This is the essenceof the matter.
The Chinese representative prevented the adoption of a
resolution which might have facilitated a settlement in the
Hindustan subcontinent. In doing so, he, destroyed that
possibility. In his statement, he referred in his usual
impertinent and slanderous manner to the Middle East.
49. I will confine myself to just one comment. It would be
a good +fing if China gave the peoples of the Middle East,
5

the peoples of the Arab countries who are waging noble and
jet struggle for their rights, and for their territory which
has been seized by an imperialist aggressor, the same
assistance as those p,eoples have received in the past, are
receiving now and will continue to receive from the Soviet
Union.

monstrous lie that I see no need to waste time replying
to it.
54. As for his reference to Marxism-Leninism, I cannot
agree with the Chinese representative that this problem, and
the crux of the ideological differences between us and the
Chinese, should be brought up as a subject for discussion in
the Security Council. Here again we disagree with the
Chinese representative. There are other opportunities and
other places for that, and I think that to refer here in the
Security Council to our differences with regard to
Marxism-Leninism, as to who is a real Marxist-Leninist and
who is a traitor to the idea of Marxism-Leninism, is quite
inappropriate. This is not the .place for discussing this
problem, or for ideological disputes between us. To us, the
social treachery of the Maoists is perfectly obvious,

50. In our statement in the General Assembly during the
discussion of the Middle East question,2 we quoted
statements by distinguished Arab figures thanking the
Soviet Union, its people and its Government for the great
help given by the Soviet Union and for the efforts which
the Soviet Union is making, together with them, to ensure
the elimination of the consequences of the Israeli aggression
against the Arab countries. The appearance of China in the
United Nations gave the Arab countries, and those who are
their friends and who support their just struggle, grounds
for hoping that China would take an active part in the work
of giving the Arab countries assistance and co-operation in
the United Nations in their noble and just struggle to
eliminate the consequences of imperialist aggression. However, China has refused to share in the assistancegiven to
the Arab peoples. The Chinese representative has refused to
take part in consultations among the five permanent
members of the Security Council with a view to cooperating with and assisting the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ambassador Jarring, in his noble
efforts to solve the problem of the withdrawal of Israeli
forces from the Arab territories occupied by them and to
achieve a peaceful settlement.

55. The Chinese representative referred to faces, to persons. However, I think all Missions to the United Nations
and all representatives to the twenty-sixth session of the
General Assembly and members of the Security Council
have discovered the true face of that anti-Soviet slanderer,
the Chinese representative. By his uninterrupted slanderous
statements, he has fully confirmed that face in its true
coIours as the face of an anti-Soviet slanderer.
56. And now a few comments on the statements by the
Deputy Prime Minister of Pakistan, Mr. Bhutto [1611th
and 1613th meetings/. The Soviet delegation feels corn.
pelled to express its regret that Mr. Bhutto, in his two
lengthy statements in the Security Council, was almost
completely silent on the real crux of the problem from
which the conflict in the Hindustan subcontinent arose, the
spark which set the whole forest on fire. It was obviously
not to his advantage to go into the essence of the problem,
It was precisely in this connexion that I recalled that the
Deputy Prime Minister of Pakistan had spoken about
everything, including the Roman Empire, but had said
nothing about the unprecedented events in East Pakistan,
except for one word, that there had been “mistakes”,

51. Thus, China is helping not the Arabs, but Israel and
the United States. Consequently, to slander the Soviet
Union’s position in regard to the Middle East and to the
provision of assistance to the Arab peoples and Governments is easier than to give them practical assistancein their
noble and just struggle to eliminate imperialist aggression.
The Chinese delegation prefers to substitute anti-Soviet
tittle-tattle in United Nations organs for assistance to the
Arabs.
52. This is the second time we have heard the Chinese
representative refer to Czechoslovakia. The Chinese representative has thus given the whole world, and the United
Nations, notice of China’s real intentions with regard to
Czechoslovakia, which are to give that socialist country
over into the hands of imperialism and reaction. Now, after
the Chinese representative’s statement in the Security
Council and his reference to Czechoslovakia, this is perfectly clear, And herein lies the essence of what we call
social treachery.

57. I would imagine that both contemporary and future
historians will not be in error if, in describing the events in
East Pakistan, they rephrase the famous comment of
Talleyrand and say, “This was not a mistake; it was more
than that, it was a Crime.”
58. Mr. Bhutto used here in the Security Council the term
“a handful of secessionists and rebels”, but surely this is
not a convincing argument. More than 10 million people
fled for their lives from the bloody terror and violence in
East Pakistan, and for Mr. Bhutto this is a “small handful of
secessionists and rebels”. Moreover, unless my memory
deceives me, the term “rebels” was also used by Mr. Huang
Hua. The terminology used by Mr. Bhutto and by
Mr. Huang Hua is identical, More than 10 million people
saved themselves by fleeing from the threat of death which
washanging over them, and in Mr. Bhutto’s and Mr+ Huang
Hua’s eyes this is “a handful of rebels”. It is sufficient to
reflect on this to understand what both Mr. Bhutto and
Mr. Huang Hua are trying to lead the Security Council into,
What that is is something which we would call, in the first
place, a departure from reality and, in the second place,
adherence to what I might term the Pakistan-Chinese

53. The Chinese representative talked about Soviet bases
on foreign soil. There are no such bases. There were in the
past, and even on Chinese soil at Port Arthur, but the
Soviet Union has eliminated them. Reference to any such
non-existent Soviet bases on foreign soil completely unmasks the essence of the slanderous position of the Maoist
clique with regard to the USSR and their pathological
anti-Sovietism. The Chinese representative’s talk of the
%rbversion” of Governments by the Soviet Union is such a
2 See Offtcial Recordsof the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Plenary Meetings, 2009th meeting.
6

methods
March.

which have been used in East Pakistan since

peculiar picture which the representative of China suggested.

59. Mr. Bhutto expressed his delight at the policy and
adherence to PrinCiple
of certain great Powers, including
the United States. But here again he is closing his eyes to
reality. This approach leads in essenceto closing one’s eyes
to what is going on in Indo-China, as well as to treaties of
military aggression and their purposes, and to trying at the
same’time to discredit the Soviet-Indian treaty, Mr, Bhutto
went so far as to attempt to compare the noble contents of
that treaty on friendship and co-operation, concluded in
the interests of strengthening peace between two great
peoples-the peoples of India and the Soviet Union-with
the WPsiVe
military pacts, the Central Treaty Organization KENTO) and the South-East Asia Treaty Organization
(SEATO), of which Pakistan is a member and to which it is
a Party. However, we must give Mr. Bhutto his due in that,
in an outburst of emotional self-pity, he revealed the
essence of these two pacts of military aggression,He stated
that the Soviet-Indian treaty speaks of peace and a joint
consultation. “But”, he said, “we know the value of such
words. We are members of two treaties and we therefore
know the difference between what is written down and the
red purpose of these treaties.” Thus Mr. Bhutto drew back
the veil on the essence of the two military aggressivepacts,
CENT0 and SEATO. The words say one thing, but the
reality is something else. The point of these treaties is
aimed against other countries, and, of course, above all
against the Soviet Union. I do not know how it is now, but
when these pacts were concluded and signed they were
equally directed against China, although China is apparently
ROW inclined to defend them. This is the useful conclusion
which
we draw from the admission Mr. Bhutto made in his
outburst of emotional self-pity during his statement in the
Security Council. We shall take note of it. We have a
Russian proverb: *‘If the mother-in-law is a lady of doubtful
virtue, she will not trust her daughter-in-law either.”
Mr. Bhutto, who knows a lady of doubtful virtue, or rather
two ladies of doubtful virtue, CENT0 and SEATO, is
attempting to cast doubt on the Indian-Soviet treaty.

63. My delegation, as perhaps. all delegations in the
Council-I say perhaps all-has given much thought to the
problem. We have already explained our position on the
substance of the problem many times. We recognize the
urgency of the problem. We recognize the complexity of
what I would call the practicalities of the possible solutions.
We have studied the diverging. points of view expressed
during this debate. We have also studied in particular the
statements made by the representatives of India and
Pakistan,
64. In this light, we have submit&d a draft resolution,
which is now before the Council. In doing so we have taken
into account both the essential needs for a political solution
which, as I understand it, are not questioned by anybodycorrection once more-are not questioned by anybody
except perhaps one member of the Council. We thought
and continue to think that this is the core of the problem
we are facing.
65. We have also taken into consideration the question of
a cessation of hostilities and withdrawal of troops in a way
which could ensure the elimination of the threat to peace
and security of the region.
66. Finally, we have taken into account a very important
element, the humanitarian one, to which several speakers
referred in the debate, that is, the need to ensure that no
acts of repression against any group of the population will
take place.
67. Our draft resolution, therefore, covers all these three
elements and suggests ways for a joint and interrelated
solution of the problems. In elaborating this draft resolution, we were guided by three basic considerations: first,
the urgency of the situation; secondly, political realism; and
thirdly, the need for concretely formulated steps which
could give effect to the first two considerations. We have
also drawn on whatever experience we may have acquired
from our participation in international commissions, bodies
or missions.

60. I would request Ambassador Shahi to assure
Mr. Bhutto that the Indian-Soviet treaty has nothing in
common with the two aggressive military pacts, CENT0
and SEATO, to which Pakistan is a party; Mr. Bhutto’s
attempt to draw such a parallel is artificial and unfounded,
and its only purpose is to divert the Security Council and
the United Nations from the true essenceof the question
under discussion.

68. This, very briefly stated-and I do not want to enter
into a further elaboration of my explanation, reserving my
right to do so at some other time-is the aim which we are
trying to achieve through our draft resolution. I repeat, this
is our aim, and since this is a Polish resolution, I consider
myself best qualified to enlighten the Chinese delegation as
to these aims.

61. I shall conclude on this note. I should like to state
once again that the Soviet delegation reservesits right to
introduce its own proposals at the appropriate stage, if the
proposals which it supports are not adopted.

69; I regret that it .is necessary to refer to some other
comments which were made. One comment was that this
draft reHolution does not represent the Polish people. That
is indeed a curious attitude, a strange attitude, an unacceptable attitude. Does Mr. Huang Hua presume to dictate who
represents whom, to dictate who represents Poland? China,
it is true, claims to be the spokesman for smaller and
medium-sized countries. It seems that it means that very
literally. Indeed, that is not serious, on the one hand, but,
on the other ,hand, it may be a warning to all those small
and medium-sized countries for which China claims to be a
spokesman.

62, Mr. KUI,!AGA (Poland): I did not intend to Speak at
this meeting.
I was going to heed the President’s appeal
that, in view of the consultations which were going on, he
wanted to suspend the meeting. But in view of the
comments which were made on the Polish draft resolution
[s/l0453/..ev.I]
by the Chinese delegation, I think I
should speak briefly on the real aims of this draft resolution
h order to give the Council a true picture of it, and not the
1

76. I turn now to some comments made by the Deputy
Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union, Ambassador Malik, I
have listened with great respect and admiration to him in
past debates; I have heard how valiantly he upheld the
sacred principles of the Charter. The role- of the Soviet
Union in the Middle East crisis earned our unstinted praise,
And that is not a secret. I gave expression to that, I paid s
tribute here to the representatives of the Soviet Union on
innumerable occasions when they defended the principles
of the Charter against the position taken by the United
States. In those debates we were completely, one hundred
per cent, with the Soviet Union and against the United
States. But his statements in this debate, including the one
today, I regret to say have been so one-sided and partisan as
to cause deep dismay to countries like mine, which look to
this great socialist State as the expression of certain
profound principles translated into actuality, as a State
which has defended the rights of peoples over so many
years. I am sure my delegation is not alone in feeling this
pain and regret at the position adopted. by the represen.
tative of the Soviet Union in the present India-Pakistan
crisis.

70. The representative of China also made another statement. He said that this was not a Polish draft resolution,
but a Soviet.draft resolution. There most probably was an
error in translation. That sometimes happens in the United
Nations. As an old hand in the United Nations, I can testify
to that. I think it would be best for the Chinese
representative to correct the mistake ’ in the Chinese
translation of the Polish draft resolution.
71. Now, lastly, the Chinese representative made a comment about, I think, an unpleasant situation in Poland.
Well, that is very thoughtful of him. But I would like to tell
him that without him we are doing very well in Poland. We
are forging ahead in Poland. We are forging ahead as a
united nation, working in unison to develop our country, to
develop economically, to raise our standards of living. We
have had, during these last days, a congress of our Party
whibh reaffirmed these aims, these lines of action and this
unity of our people.
72. So. Mr. Huang Hua, please do not worry about us.
73. The PRESIDENT:
of Pakistan.

I call now upon the representative
77. In regard to what particular newspapers may say about
the India-Pakistan crisis, let me put the question: how
many editorials, how many articles and columns show even
an elementary knowledge of what the United Nations is
about and what the principles are on which it is founded?
Do the editorial writers take the norms of the Charter into
consideration when they write editorials? I should have
thought that the bourgeois press of the United States was
not the best source of objective expression of opinian,
because that same press took a quite different position, one
that was not to the liking of the representatives of the
Soviet Union, in other crises nearer to the Soviet Union,

74. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): It was not my intention to
speak this evening, because the situation caIls for action by
the Council and not for statements at this critical juncture.
Nevertheless, I deem it necessary to speak, because some of
the speeches we heard this afternoon have distorted the
perspective of ihe problem in the India-Pakistan subcontinent and have been lacking in any display of a true
sense of fairness and proportion. In order to remove the
confusion that has been created, I should like to make a
few comments.
75. First, I shah refer to the statement of the Ambassador
of Ceylon, for whom we have such high regard. Ceylon is a
country whose impeccable policy of peaceful coexistence
has earned our admiration. Therefore, anything that I may
say by way of comment on his statement is prompted by
the same spirit of friendship and goodwill towards him and
his
country that he has expressed’ towards mine. The
representative of Ceylon spoke of the quintessence of the
Charter. Yet I was pained to hear him advocate negotiations
for a political settlement simultaneously with a cease-fire;
that is, given ‘the present situation in East Pakistan, he
advocated negotiations for a political settlement when East
Pakistan is under the occupation of Indian military forces. I
was somewhat disturbed-perhaps I did not follow him very
closely-that when he spoke about giving expression to the
wishes of the people of East Pakistan, he even seemed to
convey the impression that that part of the territory of
Pakistan should be allowed to secede, whereas in a previous
statement of great eloquence and brilliance3 he had
maintained that those who had advocated secession must
renounce such a position before they could qualify for
political negotiations towards a settlement that would truly
reflect the wishes of the people of East Pakistan in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter,
including the principle of the national~unity of Pakistan and
its territorial integrity.
3 Ibid.,

2003rd

78. I had occasion to comment on the Soviet draft
resolution both in the Security Council and in the General
Assembly. I therefore would not like to repeat myself. The
main defect, the main departure from a position of
principle in the Soviet draft resolution is that it fails to call
for a withdrawal of the Indian occupation forces’ from East
Pakistan. Assuming that a political solution based on the
wishes of the population of East Pakistan is imperative to
resolve the crisis in what the Soviet representative calls the
“Hindustan peninsula”-and I would like him to take note
also of the existence of a State called Pakistan in the
subcontinent; it is the India-Pakistan subcontinentassuming, as I say, that a political solution of that nature is
imperative, is not the withdrawal of the Indian occupation
forces also imperative? How can we rest satisfied with the
assurance that of course the Indian occupation forces will
withdraw? If it is their intention to withdraw, why should
any Soviet draft resolution not give expression to the
Indian intention to withdraw? Therefore, I should think it
would be eminently acceptable to both India and the Soviet
Union that the sponsors of the various draft resolutions,
including the representative of the Soviet Union, should
add an unequivocal clause for the withdrawal of Indian
occupation forces from East Pakistan, so that a genuine
political settlement based on a true and free expression of
the will of the people of East Pakistan could be achieved.
But we are urged to achieve a solution before the
withdrawal, under the duress of war and under the

meeting.
8

L

occupation regime imposed by India, Is that consistent with
the Charter?

launched by India on 21 November against a part of East
Pakistan. Not one word was said by the.representative of
the Soviet Union about the intervention in the internal
affairs of Pakistan, about the fomenting of civil strife,
about the sanctuary given to anti-State elements, about
arming, organizing and directing them to cross the border
from India in order to prevent the return of normalcy and
to prevent a political solution of the East Pakistan problem
within the framework of what the Soviet representative
sometimes refers+ to as the Pakistani State, We were
saddened by this silence of the representative of the Soviet
Union on crucial aspects of the situation, such as military
invasion and the organization of subversion and intervention-unprecedented intervention-in the internal affairs
of Pakistan.

79. Now I should like to point out that when the Deputy
Prime Minister of Pakistan spoke so movingly and with such
passion and eloquence, as a man of the people, about the
traumatic experience of Pakistan, he did not in any way
intend to pass over or to gloss over what the representative
of the Soviet Union calls the appalling event that occurred
in Pakistan. Mr. Malik stated that the Deputy Prime
Minister of Pakistan did not offer an analysis of the crisis,
nor did he propose a political solution, I should have
thought that the Deputy Prime Minister, as a political
leader who has assumed office, did speak at considerable
length about the political crisis and the necessity for a
political solution. He did not think it necessary that
another analysis of the events of the last nine months
should be placed before the Council, This has been done
repeatedly, and on several occasions by.the delegation of
Pakistan, both in the General Assembly and in the Security
COWC&
and if the Deputy Prime Minister did not wish to
go over the same ground again it wasbecause these debates
are fresh in the memory of the members of the Council and
of the General Assembly and all the others who are present
here.

83. The Deputy Prime Minister of Pakistan made certain
comments about the Indo-Soviet treaty. We are not
.concerned about the intention of the Soviet Union in
concluding this military alliance. I have said on more than
one occasion that this treaty will be judged not by its
intent, but by its results, by its fruits. And we all know that
it was that treaty which led tothe unleashing of aggression
by India against Pakistan. The representative of the Soviet
Union referred to aggressive pacts such as CENT0 and
SEATO. I am glad that he also said he did not know what
the present position was about these pacts, My country has
not engaged in any hostile actions against the Soviet Union
by virtue of our membership of CENTO, nor against the
People’s Republic of China because of our membership of
SEATO. But in the wake of the Indo-Soviet treaty came a
military invasion whose true aim, as is now being abundantly revealed, is not the return of refugees, but the
dismemberment of Pakistan.

80, Therefore, thereafter, when the delegations of India
and Pakistan had presented their cases, members of the
Security Council and the General Assembly gave expression
to their own views and, as a result, on three different
occasions the Security Council adopted resolutions which
commanded a majority of 11 votes and, in the General
Assembly, a massive majority of 104 votes against 11. For
any Power represented in this Council or in the United
Nations, howsoever great, to reject the expression of
majority will so clearly and decisively given is far from
democratic. This United Nations is an attempt to establish a
democratic international order, and we have seen that in
this crisis the dedicated, untiring efforts of so many
delegations in the Security Council were brought to naught
and the will of the international community asexpressed in
the General Assembly wasnegated in this very Council.

84. In regard to the question whether the Indo-Soviet
treaty is a true treaty of friendship and co-operation or a
military alliance, those representatives who may be interested in engaging in a degree of research will find that
article 9 of the Indo-Soviet treaty is very similar to article 4
of the South-East Asia Treaty and to a similar article in the
ANZUS Treaty, which is a military alliance between the
United States, Australia and New Zealand. A military
alliance does not ceaseto be a military alliance just because
certain countries conclude a treaty which is similar to a
military alliance, How can we argue that when instruments
embody almost identical language of commitment in the
event of threat to one party or the other, identical language
in two respective instruments, one becomes a military
treaty and one does not become a military treaty?

81. Surely it is neither right nor just for a great Power to
impose its own will on a country which is passing through
such a traumatic crisis as mine, and to insist on a solution
contrary to the expressed will of the international community on the basis of dismemberment of Pakistan because
10 million refugees-accepting the Indian figure, which we
do not, but assuming that there were 10 million-fled from
East Pakistan to India. Is the solution to be one of
dismemberment?
Consider the percentage of population
represented by 10 million; the population of all Pakistan is
130 million, and of India, nearly 500 million. So, assuming
that every one of those 10 million refugees wanted the
dismemberment
of Pakistan, what about *he wishes of the
120 million people of P&Stan?

,85. Finally, I should like to say a word or two about the
Polish draft resolution /S/l 0953/Reu. 1J . I shall preface my
comments by saying that it is a matter of deep regret to us
that a country with such a profoundly tragic history as
Poland, which has been dismembered and partitioned,
should now present a formula or prescription for the
dismemberment of the Pakistan State. The Polish draft calls
for the peaceful transfer of power to the representatives of
the people, but while war is raging and while Indian troops
occupy East Pakistan. It is only thereafter-after transfer of
power in such conditions, under duress-that a cease-fire is
to come into effect and the Pakistan armed forces in East
Pakistan are called upon to withdraw from East Pakistan,

82. When the representative of the Soviet Union criticized
the Deputy Prime Minister of Pakistan for passing over in
silence what the representative of the Soviet Union called
the crux of the problem in the Indian subcontinent-I
should like to remind him that in all his statements he
passed over in complete silence the military invasion
9

the effect of the implementation of this draft resolution 1s
nothing but dismemberment. Secondly, while the Polish
draft resolution contemplates an immediate transfer of
power to the representatives of the people, we must all take
into account the reality of the present situation in which
the Indian occupation forces are present in East Pakistan. If
the Indian occupation forces -were to withdraw irnmedl.
ately, then the will of the elected representatives of the
people would be manifested in a free and uncoerced
manner.

withdraw from their own territory, even before the people
, of East Pakistan have expressed themselves in regard to a
political solution. This is determined in advance. The Polish
draft resolution does not even wait to see what will be the
result of this political settlement and what the people of
East Pakistan have to say about the presence or withdrawal
of the Pakistan armed forces from East Pakistan. Then,
even more strange, in operative paragraph(e) the Polish
draft resolution states that after the Pakistan troops have
begun withdrawal, the Indian armed forces will withdraw.
That is, first the Pakistan forces should withdraw from their
own territory and then the foreign occupying forces will
begin to withdraw. Then the draft resolution goeb on to
state that such withdrawal of troops will begin upon
consultations with the newly established authorities organized as a result of the transfer of. pdwer to the lawfully
elected representatives of the people. In other words, while
the new Government is to take power and office under
Indian military occupation, then the question of the
withdrawal of Indian forces will be decided in consultation
with the new Government, and that Government will be the
Government established by Indian military occupation
authorities; and we know very well that in such a situation
even a government which reflects the popular will of East
Pakistan will be under duress, will not be a free agent and
will not be in a position to take a free decision without
coercion in regard to the Indian occupation forces. Yet this
i’s the draft resolution that the representative of the Soviet
Union commends to the Security Council.

91, Mr. FARAH (Somalia): When the representative of the
Soviet Union spoke, he mentioned a draft resolution that
had been brought to his attention and suggested certain
amendments to that draft resolution. Unfortunately, my
delegation is not in possession of that particular draft, so to
enable us to have an idea of what it is all about, it would
certainly help if the delegation sponsoring that draft
resolution could bring it to our attention. Perhaps that
delegation could also let us know why it found it
impossible to accept the suggestions or proposals made by
the Soviet Union.
92. Furthermore, yesterday we adjourned our meeting
because the representatives of the United Kingdom and
France said that they were actively involved in consultations in an attempt to reach a formula by which this
Council would be able to proceed to a stage whereby we
could at least find some measure of agreement in bringing
this fighting to a stop. It would certainly help my
delegation-and I am sure other meinbers-to know exactly
how far these consultations have gone: whether they have
foundered or whether they are still continuing. If they have
foundered, perhaps the representative of France or the
representative of the United Kingdom could let us know
why they have foundered so that we can know exactly
what the imponderables are.

86. Mr. KUlJAGA (Poland): I do not want to prolong this
meeting, but I think I should say a few words about one or
two points which the representative of Pakistan has now
raised. The representative of Pakistan returned to the thesis
of dismemberment. This is not the aim of the Polish draft
resolution, as I said when I explained the motives of my
delegation ifi presenting that draft resolution. The representative of Pakistan will not see this word in our draft
resolution.

93. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): This is in reply
to the representative of Somalia. May I say that our
consultations have been intensive to a degree. We are now
on what is called Anglo-French draft revision 5. I hope we
are going to show it to the parties principally interested
after this meeting. It would be nice if we were able to
submit it this evening, if we are able to agree. Otherwise, we
shall continue to press on as hard a$ we can. As you wti
see, Mr. President, it has been raiher Complicated-and this
you will appreciate from the discussion in this chamber.

87. The representative of Pakistan talked about the fact of
Pakistani armed forces having to leave first. I said that one
of our aims, one of our basic premises in the resolution, was
the fact that we have to be realistic, we have to analyse the
situation as it started and as it evolved until it beCame an
international problem. This responsibility was that of the
armed action of repression carried out by the Pakistan
army.
88. As far as the Indian armed forces are concerned, there
is a definite provision in paragraph (e) for the withdrawal of
armed forces.

94. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretation
from Spanish): I am speaking now with ;t profound feeling
of frustration, as one who, after innumerable meetings of
the Security Council, has heard the same arguments time
and time again. I &rn speaking now with a feeling of
frustration, seeing the Council completely immobilized
while the confrontation between India and Pakistan con.
tinues with great intensity.

89. Finally, a very brief remark about the Government
installed under duress, as the representative of Pakistan
said. I should like to remind him that in operative
paragraph (a) we provide for a transfer of power to the
representatives of the people, lawfully elected in December
1970, that is, elected in conditions where there was-1
suppose and I presume-no duress.

95. The representative of the United Kingdom, after 24
hours of very intense consultations, has just told us that his
efforts are now at the stage of the fifth revision and that
the parties still need to be consulted. I would also add that
the non-permanent members of the Council might be
consulted as well, because we, too, have a thing or two to

90. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): I am sorry I have to take the
floor again, but I feel compelled to do so. The Polish draft
resolution does not use the word “dismemberment”, but
10

say in the crisis which we are trying to resolve, and our
views might very well not coincide with the views of the
five permanent members of the Security Council.

stated: “Decides to follow the question closely and to meet
again should the situation so demand;“. [Resolution
2 793 (XXPT).]

96. This morning we heard a very moving statement by
the First Deputy Minister of Pakistan. Above and beyond
any consideration which we might give to his arguments,
one thing is definite: he is quite entitled to complain about
the absolute paralysis of the Security Council. The Security
Council has taken no decision. It continues to talk and this
is in spite of or even contrary to the freely expressedwill of
the General Assembly. I believe that responsibility of the
non-permanent members of the Security Council is intact
because we have done everything that we can to find a
settlement. What is there so unusual about what we have
called for? What is so unacceptable? We have c&led for an
immediate
cease-fire so that there will not be any more
victims on both sides. We have called for the withdrawal of
troops to both sides of the border, becausewe think this is
an indispensable prerequisite to avoid the kind of tragic
errors which have been committed elsewhere in the world,
and which now four years later are still a matter of regret.
We have asked Pakistan to create the conditions necessary
for the return of the refugees. We said that these are
preliminary
steps, because we believe that later the substance of the problem must be tackled-the so-called
political settlement.
97. We have heard once again that there must be a
political settlement simultaneously. I think there is much
merit in what the representative of Pakistan has said. I do
not know how the Security Council is going to ask one
country to find a political settlement while negotiating
under the occupying forces of another foreign country. No
Member State of the 131 Member States in the United
Nations would accept such a settlement. It is obvious that a
poEtical settlement is needed. It is logical and indispensable
that a political settlement be sought. But first things first;
and first there must be a cease-fire and withdrawal of
troops.

101. I believe that if this Council does not reach a decision
in just a few hours, paragraph 6 of this resolution, adopted
by an overwhelming majority of the Assembly, will have to
be implemented.
102. But let one thing be made quite clear: if the
Assembly meets once again, it will not be once again to
require what it called for more than a week ago: a
cease-fire, withdrawal of troops and the creation of certain
conditions as a preliminary step. The debate in the General
Assembly will go into depth, and then, unfortunately,
responsibility in this affair will be fried. The rights and
wrongs will be establis,fied.
103. The PRESIDENT: There are no more speakers on my
list. May I ask whether it is the wish of members to suspend
this meeting or to adjourn it until tomorrow morning? It
appears that a decision is necessary on whether a vote on
the draft resolution before us is to be taken. I also
understand there are draft resolutions in respect of which
consultations have not yet ended.
104. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): The representative of the
United Kingdom informed us that he was now on his fifth
revision and that he hoped to be in a position to submit his
draft this evening. Taking this into account and also the
statement made by the representative of Argentina, my
delegation would move that we should suspend this meeting
until 10.30 this evening.
105. The PRESIDENT:
proceed to take a vote.

Is there any objection?

I shall

106. Mr. VINCI (Italy): I should like to be quite clear as
to what we are voting upon, for it is not .cIear to me. Could

I have an explanation?

98. It can also be quite justly asserted that a short time
ago some delegations laid great stress on the need for a
political settlement. I realize that. But just becauseone side
has fared better on the battlefield does not mean that a
political
settlement must now be sought with that side
present in occupied territory.

107. The PRESIDENT: May I ask the representative of
Somalia whether he is making his motion under rule 33 of
the provisional rules of procedure?
108. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): I am moving formally for a
suspension and, since there is no objection, I take it that no
vote is required.

99. My delegation continues to be most distressed over
what has happened. We cannot remain passive. While we
continue talking and conferring, convening the Council four
hours after it was scheduled to meet, while consultations
continue to meet with failure, as indeed we all know deep
down that they must because the points of view of all sides
remain irreconcilable, and because if one side does not veto
a resolution, the other side will. Indians and Pakistanis are
dying.
And the entire world is thus made to realize the
Iimitations
of the Security Council and its inability to take
action in this grave crisis confronting the world.

109. The PRESTDENT: It appears from the statement by
the representative of Somalia that he is moving for a
suspension of this meeting until 10.30 tonight under rule
33 of the provisional rules of procedure. Is there any
objection? As there is no objection, it is so decided.
The meeting was suspended at.9.10 p.m. and resumed at

11.45 p.m.
110. Mr. JOUEJATI (Syrian Arab Republic): My delegation feels that at this critical hour it should make an effort
to contribute to breaking a deadlock which not only
endangers two great and brother States of the IndiaPakistan subcontinent, but endangers international peace
and security and almost annuls the role of the Security

100. I believe that if this situation continues we will once
again have to consider the possibility of going back to the
General Assembly. The General Assembly,adopted a resolution by 104 votes. In paragraph 6 of that resolution, it is
11

Council as the highest organ for the maintenance of
international peace. That is why we offer the following
draft resolution, knowing in advance that it might not give
complete satisfaction to any of the parties. But we feel that
in the face of this overwhelming and tragic crisis we ought
to shoulder our responsibility as members of the Security
Council and discharge our obligations under the Charter
regardless of blame or praise. The situation is too serious
for blame or praise.
111. ‘In this spirit we, sincerely hope that the draft
resolution will be viewed with sympathy by all members
and that its motives and objectives will be rightly appreciated. There is no time for speeches.Perhaps I should do
best to read the draft resolution:
[The speaker read out the text of a draft resolution which
wus subsequently circulated as document S/l 0456./

117. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France) (interpretation.
from French): I can add very little to the explanation given
by my colleague from the United Kingdom, who has
introduced our joint *draft to the Council. Our draft is not s
response. The gesture we are making in presenting this draft
is not in response to the repeated, moving, emotional,
anxious and sometimes bitter statements of representatives
who have successively taken the floor today, nor is it any
kind of justification: we do not need one. We are not
neutral, but we are trying to be objective and impartial; and
surely everyone will agree that, as regards my country, in
that area of the world we have no immediate material
interests. We have only our friendship with those two
countries, India and Pakistan, and cultural and trade
relations, like most countries, but there is no question of
any direct influence in those countries. Only one thing
guides us: our desire for peace in that part of the world.
118. In submitting this draft resolution we felt that we
had a triple duty to fulfil. First, we had a duty to the
Council. The Council had to know exactly where we stood,
what we had done, how we were working. We have been
working in the same direction as have many other delegations which have also tried to prepare drafts and to put
forward some valid solutions. So this duty has been one of
providing information which we felt was necessary,

112. We earnestly and ardently appeal to all to give their
best consideration to this attempt at breaking the deadlock
which is not an honour to the Security Council nor to the
international community.
113. The PRESIDENT: The draft resolution which the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic has just read out
is being processed, along with another draft resolution, and
I understand that it will be two hours before either of them
is available, because they have to be translated into the
various languages before being processedand distributed.

119. Secondly, I would say we felt it wasalmost our duty
to defend the United Nations and the Security Council
because Mr. Ortiz de Rozas wasright a moment ago, aswas
Mr. Farah, when they said that we had to get out of this
impasse, that we had to show we were capable of taking a
decision and, as has been said before, we could never resign
ourselves to a failure on the part of the Security Council,
whose duty it is to maintain international peace and
security.

114. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): As I said
earlier, my delegation and the delegation of France have
been engaged in non-stop negotiations in an effort to
achieve a text of a resolution which could be agreedby the
parties concerned, or, at least, which would not raise
insuperable difficulties. Our overriding aim is to bring
fighting and bloodshed to an end, to prevent further human
misery and to provide for peaceful and honourable solutions to outstanding problems. We have been persevering
over these many hours in the hope of producing a draft that
was already agreed. The draft resolution which I am now
introducing on behalf of the delegations of France and the
United Kingdom has not, at this stage, been fully agreed. I
can, however, assure the Council that great efforts have
been made by all concerned to achieve this. We feel that the
time has now come to put before the Council the result of
those efforts so far, and perhaps, since it is going to take so
long to produce the text, I might read what our draft says:

120. Thirdly, we felt we had a duty to world public
opinion, which needs to know that here we are doing our
utmost for peace, that we are doing what should be done in
an effort to put an end to the sufferings of peoples, to put
an end to the hostilities which have caused death and
destruction, and to put an end to a tragedy which does not
benefit any country.
121. Also, we have a duty, above all, to our own
consciences to show that we are attempting the impossible,
that we are not thwarted by temporary failures, that we
have to pursue our efforts until the path of peace opens
before us.

[The speaker read out the text of a draft resolution which
was subsequently circulated as document S/10455.]

122. All these considerations have motivated us, As I said
once in the Assembly, when situations are brought to us
when they are in such an advanced stage of deterioration, it
is difficult for us to remedy them. But we still think that if
everyone lends his weight it can still be done. At any rate
we should not be overly concerned here with the way the
world is divided or the struggle for influence or hegemony.
The Council has a duty to fulfil towards peace.

115. There is not very much for me to say about the draft
resolution except that in speaking in operative paragraph 2
of the “elected . . . representatives” we have had in mind
those representatives elected in the 1970 elections.
116. Our purpose in presenting this draft resolution is, as I
have said, to inform the Council of the position we have
now reached. It is our hope that further progress will be
possible, but we realize that delegations may need time to
reflect and ask for instructions. We are therefore not asking
the Council to take action on this draft resolution at the
moment.

123. The Council had a difficult task before it, as we said
from the outset, since in this conflict there were two
equally essential aspects: an external conflict and an
internal tragedy-an internal drama which had, however,
12

taken on certain international dimensions. This accounts
for our earliest failures. Each and every one of us, with the
best will in the world according to his own temperament,
character and personal philosophy, has perhaps emphasized
one side in this tragedy but left the other side, which is no
less essential, in the shade and somewhat neglected. -And
that is why it wasdifficult for us to vote in favour of a text
to which the other side objected, although we did not try
to hamper any effort. That was the reason for our
abstentions. If there was any chance at all for peace,
however, we felt that we could not go along with the
majority view if it was imperfect and hence unacceptable to
all, particularly the parties concerned.

127. We are deeply convinced that only a combination of
these two inseparably and organically linked parts of the
question under discussion and of the conflict which has
arisen in the Indian subcontinent can constitute a positive
contribution on the part of the Security Council to a
settlement of the problem of stopping the bloodshed and
taking measures to facilitate a political settlement in the
area.
128. The PRESIDENT: I have no more speakers on my
list. The position at present appears to be as follows. The
representative of Poland is not pressing for a vote this
evening and is allowing for further consultations and, if
possible, revision of his draft. The United Kingdom and
French draft resolution has in fact not yet been officially
submitted. I heard it read out by the United Kingdom
representative, but I do not even have a copy before me. In
his statement, he clearly indicated that he is not yet ready,
because it is not complete. The draft resolution of Syria has
likewise not yet been processed. In fact I have no copies
before me, although it has been read for representatives to
hear. I understand that the processing will take no less than
two hours because of the translation into the other
languages.

124. So it has been that for hours, days, even nights, we
have tried to put together, in one single text, the three
major elements which were singled out again today: the
cease&e, the withdrawal of armed forces, and the political
settlement. This is what the Council will find in our text,
not, perhaps, balanced in such a way as to be satisfactory to
everyone, but in a way we believe to be an honest one, in
keeping with the most urgent needs of the situation.
Perhaps there will still be some eleventh hour requirements.
We are fighting not about principles, but still about words.
Valdry said that peace should be made with ulterior
motives. We are not sure that ulterior motives have been
absent from these deliberations, but this is natural; we
criticize no one. We can, however, state that we have no
ulterior motive: our text has been put forward in good
faith. We think that it will be acceptable to everyone and
that it does open the way to peace, and that is why we
appeal to all members. Those who do not believe that they
can give their complete support should not put obstacles in
the way of its adoption but should be satisfied with an
abstention; that is all we ask. It is, however, truly our
conviction that, in the interest of the United Nations, in the
interest of India and Pakistan, it is now time for the
Security Council to produce results.
125.

Mr. MALIK

129. Mr. VINCI (Italy): I should like to draw attention to
the fact that a draft resolution submitted by Italy and
Japan is also before the Council [5/104.51]. We also are not
pressing for a vote on this draft resolution at this stage. .I
might say that we are gratified to see that the initiative
which the delegations of Italy and Japan took has led to a
proliferation of draft resolutions, which seems at least to
have kept the members of the Security Council very busy.
130. I believe that the draft resolutions which have been
presented by the Syrian Arab Republic on the one hand
and France and the United Kingdom on the other have
great merit and certainly deservecareful consideration. The
Council also has before it the draft resolutions submitted
by Poland and the Soviet Union.

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translation from Russian): The So&t delegation will, of
course, study carefully all the draft resolutions which have

131. I should like to say that my delegation has tried very
hard for the last 12 days to find some way in which the
Council could take a decision that would bring about, at
least as a first step, a cease-fire in order to stop the
shooting, the fighting, the killing and the misery of millions
of people. I understand from what the President said that it
will require two hours to have some of these draft
resolutions circulated in the various languages. I believe that
all of us around this table understand at least one of the
working languages. As far as my delegation is concerned,
none of the working languages is our own national
language. 1 think that it would not be very good if we were
to be stopped because of some technicalities. I believe that
we can start working on the basis of the original language of
each text. Since the delegation of the Soviet Union has
introduced a draft resolution which is based on a draft
which some delegations around this table-and I think they
are well known to all members-have taken the initiative of
preparing and circulating informally to other delegations,
we might perhaps start some consultations on that draft,
since other delegations are not pressing for a vote on their
drafts. Several representatives said so eloquently some
hours ago that it. is time that the Security Council should

just been introduced. However, its first impression from the
interpretation is that they do not def@e sufficiently clearly
the relationship between the two main problems, the
cessation of hostilities and a political settlement in East
Pakistan, which the Soviet delegation has already discussed
in detail in its statements, explaining the necessity for a
close organic relationship between these two aspectsof the
problem.
Accordingly, the Soviet delegation wishes to
introduce the following draft resolution:
/The speaker read out the text of a draft resolutionwhich
was subsequentlycirculated asdocumentSflOM7.]

126. The Soviet delegation has explained in sufficient
detail its approach to a settlement of the conflict in the
Indian subcontinent, which is so dangerous to the cause of
peace, and has more than once stressed and introduced
appropriate amendments to the draft resolutions of other
delegations, as well as introducing its own draft, which’
provides for a cease-fire, a cessation of hostilities and,
simultaneously, the adoption of concrete measures to bring
about a political settlement.
13

the draft resolution introduced by the representative of
Syria have come as rather a surprise.

take some decision. I believe that we should suspend this
meeting again to hold consultations, and we still might be
able to arrive at some decision in a few hours’ time, or
possibly less. That, of course, does not mean that we would
leave aside the other draft resolutions which I mentioned
and which require and deserve careful consideration.

136. Therefore, since there are now official texts, I assume
that some delegations, although fortunately not all, will
have to communicate these texts to their Governments with
relevant comments, and obtain by tomorrow instructions
on how to act. The hasty adoption of such a draft as that
submitted by the representatives of the United Kingdom
and France would in my view be premature until we have
reported to our capitals and received appropriate instructions.

132. I therefore suggest that we again suspend the meeting
and resume our consultations.
133. The PRESIDENT: I deliberately did not mention the
draft resolution of Italy and Japan because I understood
yesterday that efforts were being made to consolidate that
draft resolution with other draft resolutions. It appears that
those efforts ended in complete failure. I thought, therefore, that that draft, like some others, had died a natural
death. That is why I did not mention it. However, the
representative of Italy has now stated that his draft is alive,
and it is therefore still before the Council.

13’7. I therefore believe that your proposal to adjourn
until the morning, in order to give delegations time, during
the night and up to 10 o’clock tomorrow morning, to study
the draft resolutions, report to their capitals and obtain
instructions, would be sensible. Positive results can hardly
be achieved in two hours, and we may fiid ourselves in the
same position as we are now. Moreover, it will take two
hours to prepare the text in the appropriate working
languages, and only then will delegations be able to study
the substance of these new proposals thoroughly.

134. If there are no other speakers, perhaps we might
regard the suggestion of the representative of Italy as a
motion to be considered under rule 33 of our provisional
rules of procedure, because he is asking for a further
suspension of the meeting.

138. It would therefore be desirable from every point of
view not to insist on suspending the meeting for two hours,
then begin to study the text at about two o’clock, and then
return and start all over again.

135. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics}
from Russian): Mr. President, your first proposal was to suspend the meeting until the morning. Three
new draft resolutions have been submitted. They had
previously been discussed during consultations, but had not
been introduced formally in their final form. They have
now all been introduced, but, while the representative of
the United Kingdom had declared at the previous meeting
his intention to submit a draft resolution, the proposal and
(translation

139. The PRESIDENT: As there are no other names on
the list of speakers, subject to what members may have to
say, I propose to adjourn this meeting until 10.30 a,m.
Since there is no objection, the meeting is adjourned.
The meeting rose on lhrsday,

16 December, at 12.20 am.

14
Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies1

82250-July

1974-2,050
