UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL
TWENTY-NINTH

RECORDS
YEAR

1768”’

MEETING:

1 !hf I 'W,b 4y

SEP5 - 'i-7

18 APRIL 1974
Q+y

NEW

! .- b.< -:1; 1 _- 3;?*’

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1768) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Page

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 13 April 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11264).............................................

1

S/W. 1768

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Secutity Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SIXTY-EIGHTH

Held in New York on Thursday,

MEETING

18 April 1974, at 3.30 pm.

President: Mr. Talib EL-SHIBIB (Iraq).

understanding that they will be invited to take places at the
Council table at the appropriate moment.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia, Iraq, Kenya, Mauritania, Peru, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Cameroon and United States of America.

At the invitation of the IFesident, Mr. A. E. Abdel
Meguid (Egypt), Mr. A. Y. Bishara (Kuwait),
Mr. J.
Baroody (Saudi Arabia) and Mr. H. Kekmi (Syrian Arab
Republic) took the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber.
3. Mr. STUBBS (Peru) (interpretation from Spanish): It
was almost exactly a year ago, on 21 April 1973 in fact,
that the Security Council adopted resolution 332 (1973), in
which it condemned

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 768)
1. Adoption of the agenda.

“the repeated military attacks conducted by Israel against
Lebanon and Israel’s violation of Lebanon’s territorial
integrity and sovereignty in contravention of the Charter
of the United Nations, of the Armistice Agreement
between Israel and Lebanon and of the Council’s ceasefire resolutions”.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 13 April 1974 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/ 11264).
The meeting was called to order at 4 p.m.

4. In the same resolution the Council called upon Israel
“to desist forthwith from all military attacks on Lebanon”.

Adoption of the agenda

5. Today we are confronted with a new case of Israeli
incursion on Lebanese soil in reprisal for attacks perpetrated against Israeli citizens on Israeli territory.
Our
repudiation of those who perpetrated the bloody assault of
Kiryat Shmona cannot be overstressed; but once again the
Government of Israel has called upon its armed forces to
carry out what is nothing other than a punitive act against
Lebanon. Yet the responsibility of Lebanon for the attack
of 11 April has not been established; and, even if it were
established, it would not justify the acts of Israel.

7he agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated. 13 April 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/l 1264)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken by the Council at the 1766th meeting, and with the
consent of the Council, I propose to invite the representatives of Lebanon and Israel, under the relevant Article of
the Charter and in accordance with rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Council, to participate
in the Council’s discussion without the right to vote.

6. No one denies to States their right to legitimate
self-defence-this
is set forth and provided for in the
Charter of the United Nations-but
we find it difficult to
contend that this case can be described as one of legitimate
self-defence in the terms generally recognized by States in
international law and as set forth in the Charter. Furthermore, we cannot but deplore the recurring nature of these
actions, which ignore a series of Council resolutions of
which I have cited merely the most recent.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. E. Ghorra
(Lebanon) and Mr. Y. fekoah (Israel) took places at the
Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT: In addition, in accordance with the
decision taken at the same meeting, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the representatives of
Egypt, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and the Syrian Arab Republic
to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote,
under the relevant Article of the Charter and in accordance
with rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure. I request
the representatives mentioned to take the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber, on the

7. It is very difficult to avoid the aggravation of the
historical situation now, whereas a few months ago the
moment seemed propitious for negotiations and allowed us
to foresee the possibility of a solution of the problem of
the Middle East. This new disturbing element concerns us
profoundly,
since it increases the deterioration of the
situation on the front that has occurred in the past few
weeks.
1

16. The Austrian Government and people share the sense of
shock and outrage which these tragic events have aroused
all over the world, and indeed no political aim, noble as it
may be, can justify such acts of inhumanity.

8. We have stated that we cannot agree that the incident
of Kiryat Shmona could be adduced as a justification for
the Israeli action. We can only add that, as it was carried
out against the existing background of possible negotiations
that are foreseen with the context of resolutions
338 (1973) and 339 (1973) and the Geneva Peace Conference, it can only lead us to consider it an aggravating
circumstance and one that the Council can hardly accept
with complacence or indifference.

17. Under these circumstances it is certainly a legitimate
question to ask whether the suffering of a people, bereaved
by a quarter century of war and misery and the loss of a
homestead, can really be mitigated by the infliction of
random death and destruction on innocent people. It is
perhaps also a legitimate question to ask whether indiscriminate acts of violence are really the best way to mob&e
international support and sympathy for the cause of the
Palestinian people.

9. The -Lebanese citizens captured by Israel must be
returned and Israel must call off its presumed intentionaccording to its leaders’ declarations to the press-to repeat
these futile and inexplicable.attacks against Lebanon.
10. The Peruvian delegation is ready to support any action
within the Council’s competence to put an end to the
situation created, ”

18. -Gravely disturbed by this new outbreak of violence,
my delegation can only repeat what has been stated on
several occasions in expressing the feelings of the Austrian
Government and people: clear and unequivucal condemnation of all acts of violence.

11. Mr. JANKOWITSCH
(Austria): Mr. President, before
proceeding to the item on our agenda, allow me to associate
‘myself with the warm words of sympathy spoken by you
on the occasion of the death of Ambassador Taylor-Kamara
of Sierra Leone. While my delegation did not enjoy the
privilege of serving under him in this Chamber, we had on
many occasions come to appreciate his outstanding capabilities as a diplomat and his great kindness and ‘warmth as a
human being. May I, therefore, on behalf of my delegation,
express sincere condolences to the Government and people
of Sierra Leone and to all members of the Permanent
Mission of his country.

19. A parallel has been drawn between the events now
before this Council and similar incidents one year ago. Yet,
the particular gravity of the situation is demonstrated by
the fact that the present incidents occurred only a short
time after encouraging progress had been registered in the
Middle East and when an atmosphere of beginning trust and
goodwill on the part of all parties had become manifest. As
was pointed out, furthermore, the situation appears to be
all the more dangerous by the fact that not far from the
scene of the tragic events on the Israeli-Lebanese border
fighting of growing intensity and ominous dimensions
continues to rage on the Golan Heights between Israel and
Syria.

12. We have listened to the debate of the past days in a
‘mood of. distress. and concern. Quite particularly, we have
been saddened by the new tragic loss of innocent human
lives on both sides of the Israeli-Lebanese frontier.

20. In an effort to break the dreadful spiral of terrorism
and reprisals, violence and counter-violence, it appears
imperative to place the events before this Council in a
broader and wider perspective.

13, ’ The reasons for the convening of this Council have
been set out in the letter dated 13 April 1974 from the
representative of Lebanon /S/II264/.
According to that
letter, during the night of 12/13 April’1974 Israeli armed
forces launched, an attack against six villages situated in
‘southern Lebanon. The Council has been informed, furthermore, by the letter of the representative of Lebanon and by
the Foreign Minister of Lebanon, Mr. Naffah, who has
participated in our debate, that, as a result of this act of
aggression,two Lebanesecivilians were killed and others
wounded, while 13 tibanese civilians were kidnapped and
3 1 housesdestroyed.

21. Much hasbeen said in these days about the rights and
duties of States to abide strictly by the rules of international law, the Charter of the United Nations and solemn
declarations of our Organization. These are timely and
useful reminders of mutual responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, and they must
not be discardedeasily.

22. However, an equally heavy responsibility lies with this
Council. In its efforts to safeguard the territorial sovereignty and integritv of Member States which bring grievances before this Council and in its effort to ensurethe
right of every States to be free from military attack, thus
piotecting the life of its citizens, the Council will make an
15. Yet, it would be inconceivable if this Council did not
important contribution to the easingof tension that has
take into account at the sametime the tragedy that has
arisen in the wake of the incidents that have been the
apparently provoked the military action undertaken by
subject of our debate. Everything must be done by this
Israel;~That this new violation of Lebanon’s territorial
Council-and for that matter, by every party concerned-to
sovereignty and integrity should have followed the senseless prevent these events from gaining momentum and escalatmassacreof women and children in Kiryat Shmonais a part
ing further. The searchfor a just and lasting settlement in
of the tragic ‘mechanism’of violence which has beset the
the Middle East must not be adversely affected by a new
escalation of violence, localized as it may appear at the
countries and people of the Middle East for such a long
beginning.
’
time.
14. These events are a matter of deep concern for my
country, which has close and traditional bonds of friendship with Lebanon. We deplore this most recent instanceof
violation of Lebanon’sterritorial sovereignty and integrity
and we deplore threats of further action.

2

quite rightly states that: “The mere presence in Lebanon of
Palestinian refugees, whom Israel has evicted from their
homeland, is not a sufficient and valid ground to impute to
Lebanon responsibility for actions by Palestinians inside
Israel or elsewhere.” Indeed Israel, which for many years
and in violation of the decisions of the United Nations has
been occupying Arab lands, which has driven about
2 million Arabs from their native areas and is pursuing a
policy of terror and oppression against the Arab population
of the occupied lands, does not have any moral or political
right to justify the reprisals-its acts of aggression against
sovereign Arab States-by any references whatsoever to the
Palestinian resistance movement. We firmly and resolutely
oppose Israel’s pursuit of a policy of State terror. At the
same time, we condemn as a matter of principle any
terrorist acts and actions which lead to tragic incidents and
innocent sacrifices. The Council has repeatedly condemned
fhe reprisals by Israel against neighbouring Arab States.
Thus resolution 270 (1969) states in paragraph 4:

23. We all know only too well that we will not be able
here and now to root out all causes of tension and violence,
to alleviate the human plight which is so much at the heart
of all problems of the region. But if a pronouncement by
the Security Council is called for, it must reflect elements
of such an expression of concern. A decision by the Council
must include the reaffirmation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Lebanon, to be respected by all sides;
and it must, as a further essential point, comprise an urgent
appeal to alI parties involved in the conflict in the Middle
East to prevent the use of violence in any form and to exert
all their influence to this end.
24. My delegation is hopeful that such a statement can
come out of this Council and that it can be broadly based.
25. Mr. SMIRNOV (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) (translation from Russian): The Security Council has
met once again to consider the criminal and aggressive
actions of Israel against Lebanon.

reprisal and other grave violations of the
. . . military
cease-fire cannot be tolerated and.. . the Security Council would have to consider fuither and more effective
steps as envisaged in the Charter to ensure against
repetition of such acts.”
“

26. The letters from the representative of Lebanon to the
-Secretary-General
[S/11263]
and the President of the
Security Council [S/l X264/, the statements of delegations
and press reports depict the full horror of Israel’s naked act
of aggression: the intrusion into the territory of Lebanon,
the destruction
of dwellings, the murder of peaceful
citizens and the capture of hostages. These criminal actions
by the Israeli militarists fall squarely within the deftition
of aggression recently adopted by the Special Committee
on the Question of Defining Aggression. They are in
flagrant violation of the Charter, the General Assembly
resolutions on the non-use of force in international relations and on respect for sovereignty, and also of other
decisions designed to ensure peace and security.

31. Against the background of the appreciable and
tangible successes which have recently been won by the
peace-loving forces, peoples and States in the struggle for
the easing of international tension, the failure to reach a
settlement in the Middle East is even more abnormal. The
illegal occupation by Israel armed forces of Arab territories
continues here, relations between Israel and the Arab
countries are still strained to the utmost, and a state of war
exists between them to this day. The situation in the
Middle East rightly gives rise to serious concern.

27. Israel is attempting to justify these actions by alleging
that they are being undertaken in revenge for the liberation
struggle which is being waged by the Palestinian people. On
the strength of this, the Israeli troops crossed the Lebanese
frontier, captured six villages, drove out their inhabitants,
destroyed dozens of houses, murdered some peaceful
inhabitants and took a large group of Lebanese citizens
back to Israel as hostages. The same methods were
employed by the fascist aggressors during the Second World
War. They burned villages and murdered peaceful inhabitants or took them prisoner.

32. In this connexion, we should like to draw attention to
a certain inconsistency in what was said by one of the
speakers here. On the one hand, he stated that international
&tente is removing the peoples of the world from the
danger of an outbreak of war-and we agree with this-but,
on the other hand, he sees in detente and would like to find
in it advantages of some kind for some at the expense of
the interests of others. We emphatically cannot agree with
the latter conclusion. If the peoples of the world have
begun to look to the future with hope-and this is precisely
what is being said in neighbouring meeting rooms-then it is
only because of the first positive steps which are being
taken towards dktente, and against this background the
piratical and aggressive policy of the Israeli leadership looks
even more ugly.

28. The same actions ‘&d the same style of the aggressor:
surely the Israeli militarists know from the history of the
struggle of peoples against oppressors that, so long as
occupation exists, the patriotic struggle against the aggressor will also exist and operate. This struggle will be waged
by individuals, groups and masses of the people until the
original cause has been eliminated-aggression.

33. ‘Ihe responsibility for the situation which has arisen in
the Middle East lies entirely with the Israeli aggressors. The
leaders of Israel should know that adventurism in politics
can produce only apparent successes and that in the final
analysis a heavy price will inevitably have to be paid for it.

29. Therefore all attempts by the Israeli representatives to
justify the reprisals-that
is the incursions of their soldiery
into the territory of sovereign States by way of retribution
for what they allege to be the actions of the Arab fighters
from Lebanese territory-should
be disregarded.

34. Only a long-term and just settlement in the Middle
East, in accordance with the decisions of the United
Nations on the subject, can ensure peace and security for all
States in this region.

30. In this connexion, in paragraph 4 of the letter from
the representative of Lebanon to the Secretary-General
3

35. Speaking of this at a meeting in, Havana, on 29
January 1974, L. I. Brezhnev, General Secretary of the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union, said:

Lebanon sector, that “Israel forces personnel continued to
occupy daily during daylight hours three positions on the
Lebanese side of the armistice demarcation line”, and that
there were 10 cases of firing across this line. The observer
then comments on the firing from the Israeli side. During
this period Israeli military aircraft violated the air space of
the sovereign State of Lebanon 98 times. Ninety.&ht
times
in four days. Shells, bullets and aircraft tly in an unending
stream from the Israeli side to the territory of Lebanon,
nearly every day Israeli patrols penetrate into Lebanese
territory, and on the night of 12113 April lsraeli forces
intruded into Lebanese territory and as a result there were
casualties, material damage and abductions of persons. All
these facts are taken from only one document, one piece of
paper which contains such an enormous number of crimes
by one State against another sovereign State.

“Peace in our view means the restoration of the lawful
and inalienable rights -of the Arab peoples, which’have
been flouted by Israeli aggression, and the constructive
and lasting resolution of the Middle East crisis . . .
“The decisions of the United Nations on the Middle
East should be implemented fully in all their parts and in
the shortest possible time.”
36. We consider that the agreement between Egypt and
Israel on troop disengagement, achieved in connexion with
the beginning of the work of the Geneva Peace Conference,
is a positive step. But it is only a partial measure of a purely
military nature and so far it involves only one of the Arab
countries which have taken part in the hostilities. Of
course, it is impossible to stop there. The Geneva Conference should fulfd its main mission, that of achieving a
fundamental political settlement and of establishing lasting
peace in the Middle East.

40. International public opinion indignantly condemns
these actions of Israel. However, highly placed representatives of the Israeli leadership do not want to heed either
international public opinion or the decisions of the United
Nations, including those of the Security Council. It was
precisely in this context that Israeli Defence Minister Dayan
made a routine statement. As reported in i%e New York
Times of 14 April 1974, he stated that Israel intends to
turn southern Lebanon into a desert. I quote in English
“The people will find it impossible to live there. Their
homes will be destroyed and the whole area will be
deserted.” This unprecedentedly cynical and arrogant statement cannot fail to alert world public opinion and should
be taken into account in the formulation of a Security
Council decision on the complaint by Lebanon which is
under consideration.

37; The joint Soviet-Syrian statement of 13 April 1974,
signed by Mr. Brezhnev, and by Mr. Al-Assad, President of
the Syrian Arab Republic and General-Secretary of the
Ba’ath Arab Socialist Party, again firmly stressed that:
“Peace and tranquility in the Middle East can be
achieved only by the withdrawal of the lsraeli troops
from all occupied Arab lands and the guarantee of the
lawful national rights of the Arab people of Palestine.”

41. In recent years the Council has repeatedly had to
investigate the aggressive acts of Israel’s ruling clique
against neighbouring Arab States. Over the last five years,
the Council has considered questions connected with
Israel’s aggressive actions against Lebanon more than 10
times. It has repeatedly taken decisions condemning Israel’s
military attacks on Lebanese territory and calling on lsrael
“to desist forthwith from all military attacks on Lebanon”
[resolution 332 (I 9 73) para 31.

Further on the statement stressed that:
“The partial measures which are now being taken do
not cover the fundamental key elements of a settlement:
that any agreement on troop disengagement should be a
component part of a general solution of the Middle East
problem, and a step towards a radical and all-embracing
settlement, at the very core of which should be the
withdrawal of Israeli troops from all occupied Arab lands
and the guarantee of the lawful rights of the Arab people
of Palestine.”

42. It can only be regretted that hitherto the Council has
not been in a position to stop Israel’s aggressive actions and
to take effective measures against it, so as not only to put
an end to Israel’s brigandish attacks on neighbouring Arab
States but also .to eliminate the consequences of Israeli
aggression in gene ml.

38. The most recent incursion of Israel’s armed forces into
Lebanese territory represents a continuation of the aggressive policy of the Israeli ruling circles. Israel’s political
history consists entirely of the utilization of methods of
mass and individual terror-from
the bombing of schools
and factories to barbarous raids on peaceful settlements in
neighbouring Arab countries and the destruction in the air
of civil aircraft carrying passengers.

43. We catenoricallv condemn Israel’s terrorist methods in
international politics and its State terrorism.
44. Another noteworthy fact is the propaganda campaign
which has been launched in Israel itself, where it is
ceaselessly trumpeted that “the war has not ended” and
that “the possibility of a new outbreak is quite likely”.
Furthermore, the political and military leaders of Israel are
trying to boost the morale of the Israeli population, which
had perceptibly declined after the October war of 1973,
and to overcome on a wave of chauvinism the internal
difticulties experienced by the country and caused by the
aggressive policy.

39. Every day, every hour, the Israeli militarists are
perpetrating aggression and terrorism against sovereign
States. This is apparent from every report of the Chief of
Staff of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization
in Palestine (UNTSO). One such report, dated 15 April
1974 [S/l1057/Add409],
describes with an economy of
words how during the period from 8 to 14 April 1974
“there was a marked increase in tension” in the Israel4

45.‘) Israel’s provocative .and defiant pulicy, ,the piratikd,
Fascist-like attacks on sovereign States, and its sabotage of
a political settlement of the Middle East conflict are fraught
with dangerous consequences for the cause of peace. It is
no accident that Tel Aviv is finding itself in deeper and
deeper international isolation, and its adventurist,policy is
being subjected to sharp criticism in the United Nations,
the .Security Council, and in other international organizations and in various forums.
8’
46. In considering what the Council should do specifically
in this case, it should be borne in mind that in the past it
has repeatedly condemned Israel for such actions and
warned Israel that, if it continued its armed attacks against
neighbouring Arab States, the question of adopting effective measures in accordance with the Charter would be
considered. This is mentioned particularly in paragraph 4 of
resolution 337(1973)
of 15 August 1973, adopted with
regard to Lebanon’s complaint in connexion with Israel’s
hijacking of a Lebanese civilian aircraft. Surely the time has
come for the Security Council to proceed from warnings to
positive action.

scars that we might have thought were showing signs of
healing. As such, they can only increase tension and make
more difficult the search for peace, as our colleague of
France has rightly said. They amount, at any rate, to a
warning against euphoria, and a salutary reminder of the
problems that still lie in the path of a settlement according
with the provisions of resolution 242 (1967).
*’
I
52. Of all these problems, none can be more acute than
that of the future of the Palestinian refugees, which, of
course, lies at the heart of this dispute between two
countries which, by all logic, ought to be living together as
peaceful neighbours.
53. My own Government has repeatedly expressed its
sympathy and concern over the situation of the refugees,
and it fully recognizes that there can be no lasting
settlement in the Middle East unless and until proper justice
is done to them.
54. My delegation is bound to say, however, with a full
understanding of the frustrations and the hardships they are
suffering, that they do no service to their cause by acting
on the scaleof savagery of their assaulton the innocent
peopleof Kiryat Shmona.

47. Time will not wait. The Council must take effective
measures to halt the acts of plunder and aggression on the
part of the Israeli militarists. The Byelorussian delegation is
prepared to participate further in the Council’s efforts to
work out and implement effective measures to counter
Israel’s systematic and deliberate violations of United
Nations resolutions and of the fundamental purposes and
principles of the Organization.

55. The representativesof Lebanon and Israel have given
us their own accounts of that attack. Their accounts differ
to the extent of leaving us unable to feel completely
convinced that the assailantsentered Israel from Lebanese
territory. If they did, my delegation would sharethe view
expressedby the representativeof the United Kingdom that
the Government of Lebanon might be reminded of its
international obligation to take all reasonablemeasuresto
prevent the organization on its territory of irregular forces
for incursion into the territory of another State.

48. Sir Laurence MCINTYRE (Australia): There is an all
too sadly familiar pattern to the happenings that have led
to the complaint now brought before the Council by the
Government of Lebanon. I like to think that most of us in
this Council had come to believe at the end of 1973 and in
the early months of this year that we had contributed
appreciably towards a break-through in that most intractable of all our tasks, the long search for a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East.

56. At the sametime, and wherever the three assailants
may have come from, the retaliatory action mounted by
the Government of Israel against the villages on the
Lebaneseside of the border must lay itself open to censure
asa violation of the Charter.

49. The cease-fire that brought an end to the October
fighting, the establishment of the United Nations Emergency Force, the launching of the Geneva Conference and
the disengagement of forces in the Suez area-all these
seemed to warrant a measure of cautious hope for
continuing dialogue in an atmosphere of restraint and
forbearance.

57. My Government hasexpressedat various times and in
unequivocal terms its condemnation of all forms of violence
directed againstthe lives and property of innocent people.
As I recall saying in this chamber a year ago: “None of it
can be condoned; it must all be deplored; whatever the
degree of provocation offered from either side.” [I708th
meeting, para. 107.1 And my delegation fully recognizes
that the degree of provocation on this occasion was very
great.

50. It is all the more disappointing, therefore, that we are
having to address ourselves, for the third time in the past
year, to a clash between Israel and Lebanon, again arising
from acts of violence and retaliation involving both of
them. It is depressing to have to be reminded at this time of
words and phrases that we were using here a year ago in
much the same context-expressions
like “escalation of
terror” and “State terror” and “the cycle of violence and
reprisal”.

58. The Council must clearly accept its obligation to do
everything in its power to bring theseexcessesto an end.
This is a time for statesmanshipand moderation and
restraint on the part of all responsibleauthorities in and
outside the Middle East, given all the understandablelegacy
of emotion that 25 years of bitter hostility hasleft behind.
And it is our duty to say soin terms loud and clear.

51. The most melancholy aspect of these latest incidents
and of the consequential complaint that has been brought
before us is that they revive all the acrimony and the
vituperation of past years and thus must tend to reopen old

59. We must alsocondemn all acts of violence and reprisal,
which can only exacerbate tensions and threaten the
precariousprogressmadetowards a settlement over the past
5

few months. Only by such action, and in no way short of it,
can the Council maintain its proper role in the search for
ultimate peace and justice in the Middle East and in the
creation of conditions in which the purposes of the special
session of the General Assembly now meeting at these
Headquarters wiII have true meaning.

67. Even if we accept, for the sake of argument, that those
three unfortunate men had crossed from Lebanon, would it
be fair or rational to hold Lebanon responsible? Would it
be fair to ask any country, especially small Lebanon, with
its limited security forces, to undertake the protection of
Israel, when Israel itself, with its barbed-wire fences,
electronic devices, large security forces and paramilitary
settlements alI along the territories it holds has, as has been
shown in this particular case, demonstrably failed to
achieve that end? Is it reasonable to ask Lebanon, which
shoulders the burden of caring in whatever way it can for
300,000 Palestinians exiled from their homeland, to devote
its resources to protecting the usurper and oppressor from
the wrath of his victims?

60. The PRESIDENT: I have no further names on my list
of speakers. Some representatives have indicated that they
wish to exercise their right of reply, and I propose to call
on them at a later stage. In the meantime, and with the
permission of the Council, I wish to make a statement in
my capacity as representative of IRAQ.
61. The members of the Council have heard the complaint
made by the representative of Lebanon against the Israeli
armed incursion into Lebanon on the night of 12113 April.
They have also heard the arguments of the Israeli representative in his attempt to justify the lawless act perpetrated
by the Israeli armed forces.

68. Only yesterday General Ariel Sharon, one of the
leaders of the Opposition in the Israeli Knesset, criticising
the government security arrangements at the borders,
charged that Israel had been negligent in protecting Kiryat
Shmona and demanded that the Government should not
shirk its responsibility and should not try to put the blame
on Lebanon. Yet General Moshe Dayan, according to
today’s issue of 77re Jerusalem Post, which reported the
debate, insisted in his reply that his Government will hold
Lebanon responsible for alI acts of terror.

62, There is little new in this case. Lebanon had resorted
to the Council several times before, seeking its protection.
In each and every previous case, the Israeli representative
repeated the very same arguments in a desperate attempt to
defend the acts of his Government committed in violation
of the principles of the Charter.

69. Members of the Council are well aware of the fact that
this cycle of violence and violent reprisals has marked
Israel’s policy towards Lebanon for a number of years. On
each and every occasion that Israel has been brought before
the Council to defend its aggression against Lebanon, it has
emphatically stated that that is the only way to put an end
to bloodshed. The months and years that have passed and
the hundreds of lives that have been lost should surely have
convinced the Council of the fallacy of such a claim and the
futility of such a policy, even in revenge. Unfortunately, as
the present event has shown, Israel is not yet convinced.

63. The series of major acts of aggression against Lebanon
began with the blowing-up of I3 civilian aircraft in Beirut
International Airport in December 1968, and culminated in
the raid on Beirut itself with the murder of several
prominent Palestinian leaders in April 1973. In each and
every previous case, except when one big Power abused its
veto right, the Council never failed to live up to its duties
and pronounce itself on those acts. In each and every past
case the Council laid the blame squarely on Israel and
warned it against the repetition of its lawless acts. Today
the Council finds itself facing the same situation.

70. The loss of a single human life is sad and tragic. To be
fair, however, and to be able to put an end to this cycle of
violence, the Council has a duty to consider events within
their proper context. The desperate acts of some Palestinians which have brought such murderous punishment
upon Lebanon and which the Israeli representative is so
fond of labelling as Arab terrorism must be considered in
the light of the unprecedented tragedy of the people of
Palestine and the profound repercussions throughout the
Arab world. For that tragedy the Zionists must bear the
primary guilt and responsibility. But none of us is completely blameless. The words of the eminent British
historian ArnGld Toynbee are worthy of recall on this
occasion. He said:

64. There is no need to review the events that led to the
Lebanese complaint. The representative of Lebanon, in his
opening statement, described what took place on the night
of 12/13 April. The representative of Israel did not dispute
the facts: indeed, he even glorified the lawless acts
committed by the Israeli troops in their raid. In his attempt
to justify those indefensible acts he repeated the self-same
worn-out arguments which had never been accepted by the
council.
65. The main Israeli argument has centred on the claim
that the three persons involved in the Kiryat Shmona attack
had crossed from Lebanon. Members of the Council are well
aware that the only evidence presented in support of that
claim is the statements of the representatives of Israel:
hardly a conclusive piece of evidence.

“The Palestinian Arabs have an understandable vendetta
against the Israelis, but they also have a grievance against
all the rest of us. Half a century of massive indifference to
their wrongs has had the same exasperating effect on
them as a century of similar treatment has had on the
black citizens of the United States, The Palestinians are
now in the mood for sacrificing their lives if by wrecking
the pillar they can bring the roof down on their Israeli
enemies’ heads; and if the crashing masonry were incidentally to stave in the skulls of the rest of the human race,
why should the Palestinian Arabs care? What have the
rest of us done to deserve consideration from them? ”

66. Israel has never requested a United Nations inquiry to
establish the facts; nor did it seek the aid of UNTSO
personnel to corroborate its presumed findings; nor did it
seek the judgement of the Council. On the contrary, Israel
followed its established policy of aggressiveness, took the
law into its own hands and arrogated to itself the dubious
role of policeman, judge and executioner.
6

Professor Toynbee concludes his article by saying:

inhabitants, including seven children and nine women, of an
Arab village within Israel were massacred by Israeli border
guards. The Canadian general in charge of UNTSO said it
was “sad proof that the spirit that inspired the notorious
Deir Yassin massacre is not dead among some of the Israeli
armed forces”. In 1962 and 1963 parcel bombs were sent
to West German scientists working in Egypt. Six persons
were killed. Another German scientist was kidnapped and a
private plane carrying people connected with an Egyptian
military project exploded in mid-air. On 28 December
1968, Beirut Airport. Israel commando units transported
by helicopter attacked the Beirut civil airport and destroyed 13 civil aircraft, causing damage estimated at $22
million. In 1970 the Bahr El Baqr village school in the Nile
Delta was bombed by Israeli aircraft, killing 46 children.
General Dayan’s immediate comment was that that school
should not have been there. From 1967 to 1972 there were
attacks on Arab villages and refugee camps. Since the June
war, Israel has launched repeated invasions with troops and
tanks and repeated bombings and napalm attacks with
aircraft against villages and refugee camps in Jordan,
Lebanon, Syria and Egypt. Over 1,500 civilians were killed
in those attacks. In 1972-73, letter bombs were sent by
Israeli terrorists to Palestinian spokesmen in Europe and the
Middle East, killing four. In 1973 a civilian airliner was shot
down by Israeli fighter aircraft over the Sinai, killing 106
passengers and the crew.

“Today the Palestinian faces the human stone wall, and
it is no wonder if, after beating his head against it in vain,
he seizes a stick of gelignite and blows up himself, the
wall, and his unresponsive fellow human beings on the far
side. What else is he, or any one of us, to do? We have to
fact this fateful question frankly if we are to have any
chance of finding the urgently needed answer to it.”
71. It has become evident to the whole world, from which
Israel has chosen to stand apart, that the end of violence and
bloodshed, wars and destruction in the Middle East can be
achieved only through the restitution of Palestinian rights.
Nothing more is needed, and nothing less will be sufficient
to achieve that noble and just end, which is the primary
concern of the Council.
72. The representative of Israel has treated us to a tirade on
Arab terrorism. Time and again he dwelt on that theme,
which is but a consequence of the Zionists’ doing, in order
to make the Council lose sight of the forest for the trees.
But, members of the Council, let us deal with the Israeli
representative on his own terms. Let us ask him about the
horrendous atrocities committed by the Zionist terrorist
gangs up to 1948 and the establishment of Israel. With your
permission, let us seek his comment on the following
examples.

74. PerhapsMr. Tekoah may be so kind as to tell us in
which Cabinet office, in which parliamentary room and in
which command posts, the perpetrators of those crimesare
now languishing?

73. On 25 November 1940, the steamship Path was
blown up by Jewish terrorists in Haifa harbour, killing 268
illegal Jewish immigrants.. On 24 February 1942, the
steamship Struma exploded in the Black Sea, killing 769
75. If it is futile to wait for Mr. Tekoah’sopinion of those
Jewish immigrants. That incident was described by the
acts of terrorism, let us, at least, read what an American
Jewish Agency as an act of mass protests and mass suicide.
lady had to say about them. In a letter published in i’%e
On 6 November 1944, Lord Moyne, British Minister of
FVashingtmPost on 26 February of this year, Mrs. Donald
State in the Middle East, was assassinated in Cairo by Stern
Sharp writes:
Gang terrorists. In 1946, the King David Hotel was blown
up by Irgun terrorists, killing 91 persons, mainly Arab and
“If it is terrorism when Palestinians force world
Jewish civil servants. ,From October 1946 to December
attention on their plight by desperate,deplorable acts,
1947, letter bombs were sent by Irgun to British cabinet
then it is terrorism when the Israeli army rolls over its
ministers and others. One person, Rex Far-ran, was
northern border and kills 500 Lebanesevillagers in their
murdered. The British Embassy in Rome was badly
homesand fields to ‘teach them a lesson’,shootsdown a
damaged. In 1948 occurred the Deir Yassin massacre of 254
Libyan
airliner with more than 100 civilian deaths, or
unarmed Arab villagers by Irgun and Stem Gang terrorists.
napalmsan Egyptian school, killing more than 50 school
Menachem Begin, the leader of the Opposition Party in
childrenIsrael was the leader of that raid. After 1948, the terror
gangs became an army. The Haganah, the Stem Gang, the
“As for getting off Scot-free, there is the case of
Irgun Zvei Leumi became the Israeli defence forces, the
Menachem Begin, asbloody a terrorist asyou would ever
regular army of Israel. The gang leaders-Menachem Begin,
want to meet, who planned and executed the infamous
Yegal Allon, Yesrael Galili and others-became
Israeli
Irgun massacreof 250 Arab men, women and children at
the village of Deir Yassinin 1948 and tried to hide them s
statesmen, parliamentarians and generals. The terror policy
from the International Red Cross by dumping their /
of the gangs was thus elevated to State policy-methods
unchanged, mentality unchanged and leaders unchanged.
bodies down a well. This waspart of a larger campaignof
Just a few examples of the continuation of the
terror againstArab villages that continued over the years
methods and the mentality will suffice. In 1948, Bemawith the destruction of Karameh, Qibya (75 killed),
dotte, United Nations mediator in Palestine, was assassiNahhalin (14 killed), Khan Yuis (46 killed), El-Buteiha,
(50 killed), Qalqilya (49 killed), El Tawafiq, Sammu (18
nated by Stern Gang terrorists in Jerusalem.From 1948 to
1967 Arab villages were obliterated. During that period,
killed), and others. And where is MenachemBeginnow,”
385 Arab villageswere systematically obliterated within the
the lady asks? “In prison? In Kuwait? Why, no, he is
head of the Likud Party in Israel, challengingGolda Meir
territory of Israel. In 1953, Qibiya, a Jordanianvillage was
attacked by half a battalion of Israeli troops, killing 42
for leadership of the country; and he appearedrespectvillagers. Leader of the attack: no less than the present
ably on American TV interviews and at socialfunctions in
General Ariel Sharon. In 1956, Kafr Kassem.Forty-seven
this country.
7

“How about Friedman Yellin, head of the Stem gang
that assassinated the Swedish UN. Mediator, Count Fofke
Bemadotte, for proposing the return of Arab refugess to
their lands in 1948. After a brief token imprisonment,
Yellin was elected to the Israeli Parliament. Death is
tragedy, no matter who dies. And Arabs die just as
painfully as Israelis, or Americans, or Japanese, or Italians
or Nigerians. As long as we permit the devastation of the
Palestinian people to continue uncorrected, each of us is
guilty of contributing to every act of terrorism,”

is happening in Beirut as far as the freedom of operation
and organization of the Arab terrorist organizations is
concerned? Is it a secret that their headquarters are in
Beirut? Is it a secret that their bases are located in various
parts of Lebanon, especially the southern region of the
country? Is it a secret that their agents travel freely .from
Beirut in various directions into all parts of the world,
carrying Lebanese passports and suitcases with bombs and
explosives to kill innocent people? Is it a secret that they
send letter bombs to innocent citizens of various countries,
some of them represented at the Security Council table? Is
any additional evidence required to that already presented
by me in the course of previous meetings, evidence not only
gathered from facts reported by me but even based on
statements made by Lebanese Government leaders, by
leaders of Lebanese parties in the Parliament in Beirut?

76. Recalling its resolutions 262 (1968) and 270 (1969),
the Council in resolution 280 (1970) repeated its solemn
warning to Israel that
“if [the Israeli premeditated military actions against
Lebanon) were to be repeated the Security Council
would, in accordance with resolution 262 (1968) and the
present resolution, consider taking adequate and effective
steps or measures in accordance with the relevant Articles
of the Charter to implement its resolutions”.

82. If any other additional evidence is required by the
representative of the Byeiorussian SSR, may I add the
following. Kamal Jumblatt, leader of the Lebanese Progressive Socialist Party, a personality well known in the
Soviet Union, a gentleman who has paid several visits to
Moscow, a man who does not hide his support for Arab
terrorism carried on from Lebanon-even
he found it
necessary to say the following only yesterday, 17 April
1974:

77. Needless to say that that was not the first occasion on
which the Council solemnly warned Israel for its military
actions against Lebanon. But what effective measure has
the Council taken since then? Now, it would seem, is the
time to put an end to Israel’s contempt and defiance of the
Council’s authority. The time has now come for the
Council to reassert its power and its will to act. It is high
time now that the Council, instead of issuing more
warnings, should decide upon specific and appropriate
measures, to take adequate steps to bring about a decisive
end to the cycle of violence that has plagued the Middle
East since the creation of Israel, mainly as a result of Israeli
premeditated acts of aggression, intimidation and terror. If
it is our will to halt the vicious cycle of violence and
bloodshed, then it is our duty to see to it that Israel shall
respect and abide by the will of the international community .

“I oppose operations directed against civilians and in
pati’cular children. I am not one of those who believe
that the cause justifies the means. Certain Palestinian
organizations were not faithful to the promises that
Lebanese territory will not be used as a departure-point
for fedayeen operations.”
Now what else has to be said at this Security Council table
to prove not only that those who murdered 18 innocent
civilians in a little Israeli townlet only one kilometre from
the Lebanese border came from Lebanese soil, but that
Lebanon is in truth a centre of terrorist activities in the
Middle East and in other parts of the world.

78. Speaking as PRESIDENT. I call on the representative
of Israel who wishes to exercise his right of reply.

83. Is it not clear. Mr. Representative of the Byelorussian
SSR, that by permitting the existence of such-centres of
armed attacks, of acts of aggression against a neighbouring
State, Lebanon is in fact, to use the term used by the Soviet
representative, aiding these attacks against Israel, Israeli
territory and Israeli civilians, and, according to the Soviet
statement quoted by me, is therefore guilty of these
continuous acts of aggression perpetrated from Lebanese
territory.

79. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I have asked to speak in order
to exercise my right of reply to the representative of
Byelorussia, a country which is encouraging Arab aggression
against Israel, axid to the representative of Iraq which will
go down in history as the country where innocent Jews
were hanged in a Baghdad square and where the population
was called upon by the Iraqi Government to feast and revel
in that barbaric spectacle.
80. On 31 December 1968 the representative of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics in the Security Council, at
that time also representing the Byelorussian SSR, said in a
debate concerning Israel’s action against terror warfare
from Lebanon: “ . . . support given by a State to armed
bands [to enter] another State must be regarded as an act
of aggression. . . . However, no convincing arguments were
adduced by Israel to show the responsibility
of the
Lebanese Government. . . . The Lebanese Government disclaims all part in that action.” /1462nd meeting, para. 511

84. These observations obviously apply also to the
grotesque legal theory which we heard from the representative of Iraq, that a Government is not responsible for
what goes on within its territory, that Lebanon cannot be
held responsible for permitting the continuation, for years
now, of the open operation of terrorist bands on and from
its soil against a neighbouring State Member of the United
Nations.
85. The representative of the Byelorussian SSR spoke of
liberation of occupied territories. We know who the
liberators are. The entire world knows who gentlemen like
Arafat and Habash are. We still remember when they used

81. Has not enough evidence been accumulated since 1968
to establish very clearly what is going on in Lebanon, what
8

to say: “It does not matter whether our Fedayeen kill men,
women or children as long as they kill Jews”.

representative of ‘the Byelorussian SSR who has the
audacity to come before the Council and to say that the
massacre of Kiryat Shmona is an act of liberation, but that
Israel’s response to it is comparable to the Fascist actions of
the Second World War. Not the killing of 18 innocent
civilians, not the murder of defenceless men, women and
children is an act comparable to Fascist Nazi barbarism, but
the destruction of bricks after the inhabitants of the 20
houses have been evacuated from them.

86. These are statements in the records of this very
Security Council. These are the leaders of the movement
which the representative of the Byelorussian SSR chooses
to define as a liberation movement: killers of children,
murderers of defenceless innocent human beings. And it is
these people, these assassins, that are being received, with
honour, in Moscowand in Minsk. It is these murderers who
are being received for medical treatment in Soviet hospitals.
Soviet scientists are being sent to mental homes. Innocent
Jews begging to leave for Israel are being incarcerated in
labour camps. But murderers of children are being treated
in Soviet hospitals-

92. The General Representative of the International Union
of Resistance and Deportees Movements had the following
to say on 15 April 1968 about this kind of blasphemy:
“‘We denounce those who insult the memory of the
Jewish dead, of the camps and the resistance, by
comparing the children of Israel of today with the Nazi
oppressors or by likening the terrorists who attack
innocent men, women and children to the heroes of the
European Resistance.”

87. Mr. SAFRONCHUK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translation from Russian): I wish to speak on a point
of order.
88. The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative of the
USSR on a point of order

93. At its plenary session in Brussels, held from 3 to 7
April 1968, with the participation of distinguished delegations from countries like Belgium, France, the United
Kingdom, Austria, Cyprus, Denmark, the United States,
Luxembourg, Israel, Italy, Norway, and the Netherlands,
the International
Union of Resistance and Deportees
Movements adopted the following resolution:

89. Mr. SAFRONCHUK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translation from Russian): I should like to draw the
President’s attention to the fact that the representative of
Israel is abusing the right of reply and is not speaking to the
point. He is engaging in gross interference in the internal
affairs of the Soviet Union and is also making comments
which bear no relation to the agenda of this meeting.

“No one can compare the spirit of resistance with the
terrorist activities and odious and blind crimes intended
to provoke fear and insecurity, to give rise to violence,
when all possibilities are openly offered for an open
discussion, or try to compare with the resistance against
Nazism the fanatics surrounded by former Nazi criminals
who merely prolong the Hitler genocide and thereby offer
an insult which is felt deeply not only by the citizens of
Israel, who courageously fight for their right to life, but
by all those who resisted and who remain true to
themselves.”

90. The PRESIDENT: I with to draw the attention of the
representative of Israel to the fact that he should confine
himself to matters on the agenda of this meeting. He may
proceed now.

91. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Continuing to exercise my right
of reply to the wide-ranging statements made by the
speakers to whom I am responding, I should like to add
that the official representative of the Palestine Liberation
Organization-the
umbrella association of all the terrorist
94. I would add to that statement and to that resolution
organizations, the organization headed by Arafat, received
that the comparison made by the representative of the
SO joyously
and honourably in the Soviet Union-a man
called Said Hammami, wrote the following letter to 77zhe Byelorussian SSR with Fascists, with Nazis, is an insult not
only to those who spoke as they did on behalf of the
Times of London, a letter which was published in that
international resistance movements and deportees, not only
newspaper on 16 April 1974, and had the following
to the children of Israel, not only to the entire Jewish
comment about Kiryat Shmona, the murder of the innopeople, who lost 6 million brothers and sisters in the Nazi
cents, an act called here by the representative of the
holocaust; it is an insult also to the Byelorussian SSR and
Byelorussian SSR an act of liberation:
to its people and to its resistance fighters, among them
“The death of 18 Israelis and 3 Arabs in that settlement
many Jews, who fought heroically against Nazi occupation
last Thursday carries different lessons to different parties.
in the Second World War.
To the Palestinians, especially those in refugee camps, it
has one obvious meaning: if the world is going to forget
95. Why does the representative of the Byelorussian SSR
about us, we are going to ignore it and carry on our
come here with such eagerness to speak at such length in
suicide missions.”
the language of slander and calumny? Perhaps the answer is
to be found in a cablegram which reached me only today
This is the kind of movement we are dealing with. This is
and which reads as follows:
what we in Israel have to confront. I have spoken at
previous meetings about the denial by the Palestine
“With great pain we received the news of the terrorist
Liberation Organization and its various branches of Israel’s
attack on the peaceful residents of Israel killing women
fundamental right to be independent and sovereign, the
and children. Our hearts go out to the people during this
denial to the Jewish people of its basic right to self-deterdifficult time. We are without rights in the Soviet Union
mination and national liberation. And here we have the
and are treated like prisoners. They are withholding our
9

right to emigrate. Obviously
destined to suffer much.”

the Jewish

“Iraq’s election is a travesty of the Charter of the
United Nations. It further debases the Security Council,
the General Assembly and the entire Organization. Article
23 of the Charter clearly stipulates that in the election of
non-permanent members of the Security Council due
regard should be ‘specially paid, in the first instance to
the contribution of Members of the United Nations to the
maintenance of international peace and security’.

people are

96. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
Soviet Union on a point of order.
97. Mr. SAFRONCHUK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translation jkom Russian): I again appeal to the
President urgently to call the representative of Israel to
order and to warn him that he should adhere strictly to the
procedure and agenda of this meeting and not refer to
questions which bear no relation to the matter under
discussion.

“For the last 25 years, since the Arab invasion of Israel
in 1948 in defiance of the United Nations, Iraq has
pursued war against Israel, refusing to sign the armistice
of 1949, which had been sponsored by the Security
Council, and actively supporting terror warfare against
Israel, and joining in the Egyptian-Syrian aggression of
6 October 1973. Throughout this period Iraq has openly
proclaimed its objective to be the total destruction of a
Member State and the denial to the Jewish people of
Israel of its right to self-determination and freedom.

98. The PRESIDENT: I wish to be as fair as possible to all
the speakers, but I must again point out to the representative of Israel that he is straying from the item under
consideration and ask him to confine his remarks to what is
under discussion. He may now proceed.

“The election of Iraq to this Council, only a few days
after it had resumed active aggression, again illustrates the
shortcomings and failings of the General Assembly and
the Security Council in matters concerning the Middle
East.” [I 747th meeting, paras. 71- 741

99. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Continuing to exercise my
right of reply to statements which ranged from the item on
the agenda to the internal mood in Israel, to problems of
war and peace facing the Middle East and the world at
large, I should like to be permitted to end my statement
without any further interruption, from whatever source.

104. Today I would add that the Government of Iraq,
whose representative presides over these deliberations, is
not representative of the population of Iraq. He certainly
does not represent the 2.5 million Kurds who are being
subjected to air and ground attacks, including the use of
gas, in an attempt to deprive them of their national rights.

100. The cablegram which I just read out is signed by the
following citizens of Novosibirsk:
Alexander Roizman,
Raya Roizman, Isaac Poltinnikov, Irma Bernstein, Victoria
Poltinnikova and Gimel Manuel Feinberg-citizens
of the
USSR. Therefore I shall end my reply to the representative
of the Byelorussian SSR by saying simply: as long as you
encourage Arab aggression against Israel, as long as by your
acts and pronouncements
you give succour to the
murderers of innocent Israeli children and women and men,
as long as your country provides weapons to kill defenceless
Jewish civilians, as long as it provides SAM VII missiles
which turn up in Rome aimed at international civil aircraft,
your advice on how Israel should defend itself is not only
inappropriate but completely worthless.

105. How, Iraq, a party to the conflict in the Middle East,
not only presides over the Security Council but has no
qualms whatever about defiling this high office and jumping
into the ring, even before certain other members of the
Council, to revel in the sword dance of belligerency and
hatred in macabre glorification of the Kiryat Shmona
massacre. The world should fully understand this situation.
It should be reminded what Iraq is and what it stands for.
Iraq’s Foreign Minister stated in an interview published on
28 January 1973: “One mistake cannot be corrected by
another. Israel must be eliminated.”

101. The fundamental right of every people, of every
State, is also the fundamental right of the people of Israel
and of the Jewish State, and that is the right to selfdefence, to self-preservation
and to survival. It is in
accordance with this right that Israel will continue to act to
protect its territory and its citizens.

106. Reacting to resolution 338 (1973) of 22 October
1973, the resolution which called for a cease-fire and for
peace negotiations in the Middle East, the Iraqi govemmental news agency issued-on the same day-the following
statement:

102. In my opening statement on 15 April /1766th
meeting/ I declared that all were aware of the inherent
parliamentary imbalance prevailing in the Council and in
other organs of the United Nations in discussions regarding
the Middle East situation. Nothing could have demonstrated that fact more convincingly than today’s statement
by the representative of Iraq.

“The Government of Iraq has announced that Iraq does
not regard itself a party to any resolution, step or
arrangement in armistice agreements, cease-fire, negotiations and peace with Israel which have been made or will
be made in the future.”
107. Only a few weeks ago, Iraq caused the following to
be introduced into the report of the Credentials Committee
of the Diplomatic Conference on the Reaffirmation and
Development of International Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts, held at Geneva-and I quote from
the report of the Credentials Committee:

103. On 21 October 1973, I declared in this Council:
“ . . . I did not mention something which took place in
our Organization last week and which directly concerns
the Security Council. I refer to Iraq’s election on 15
October to membership of the Security Council of the
United Nations.
,

“The delegate of Iraq . . . added that he considered the
existence of Israel as a permanent aggression against Arab
10

land and, consequently, since he did not recognize the
effects of that aggression he could not recognize the
legitimacy of the so-called credentials of its representatives.”

i16. I do this for two reasons.The first one is to remind
members of the Council that they are dealing with a
Lebanesecomplaint concerning an aggressionlaunched by
Israel against Lebanon and that the Lebanesedelegation
expects a pronouncement from the Council on this particular complaint, no matter what the other considerations
may be that were raised by some of the representatives
sitting on the Council today regarding an operation that
took place outside the jurisdiction of Lebanon. The second
reason that I have referred to the agendais to point out
that the representative of Israel is usingour complaint, as
he has been accustomedto doing, to wage a campaignof
slander and vituperation againstLebanon and againstsome
Member States sitting on the Security Council. He is using
this forum, as he has done in the past, for propaganda
purposesto exploit the sympathy of peoplesregardingwhat
happened in Kiryat Shmona by going back and reminding
us of the whole tragic life that the Jewish people hasgone
through. He is speakingin the nameof all the Jews-not of
Israel, not of the Israeli people, but of the Jewishpeople, in
order to throw slander at the Arab States, at their
supportersand at Lebanon.

108. Iraq’s reaction to the Kiryat Shmona massacre of 11
April came in the following statement by Radio Baghdad
on the day after the massacre: “This operation emphasized
once again the ability of the Arab people to force its will
and to continue the armed struggle.”
109. Let the world know, therefore, that the Lebanese
complaint is being discussed in this Council in circumstances which verge on a travesty of equity and law. It is
not surprising at all that in this atmosphere Arab representatives permit themselves to make here some of the most
warlike pronouncements heard in recent months.
110. Today is Martyrs’ Day, commemorating the victims
of the Nazi holocaust. Today, Jews everywhere pay a
tribute to the memory of 6 million of their brothers and
sisters, mercilessly
annihilated, among them almost
2 million children. It is on this day that the representative
of the heirs of the Nazi attitude towards the Jewish
people’s rights chose to justify the killing of Jewish children
in Israel.

117. Returning to our complaint, I shouldlike once more
to remind the Council of the following. At the last meeting
I referred to the fact that we have United Nations observers
in Lebanon and that theseobservershave not reported to
the Council any infraction on the part of Lebanon. The
observers are unbiased; they are there in the Council’s
name, fulfilling a mission on its behalf. The Council put
them there to observe-to observeand report back to it. We
have askedthe Council to do that in good faith becausewe
wanted to co-operate with the Council and with the
international community in order to promote conditions of
peaceand security in the area.

111. Efforts are being made now to advance the cause of
pacific settlement in the Middle East. This is the time that
the President of the Security Council has chosen to express
support for continued belligerency against Israel.
112. These facts strengthen the view that Iraq is not
suitable for membership on the Security Council, and even
less for the presidency of this body. My delegation calls,
consequently, on members of the Security Council to
remove Iraq from presiding over the Council’s present
deliberations. This is the least that the Council should
properly do under the present circumstances.

118. Since the beginning of 1974, Israel has daily committed acts of aggressionagainstLebanon, asshown in the
reports submitted by the Chief of Staff of UNTSO to the
Secretary-General,in documents from document S/l 1057/
Add.1, dated 1 January 1974-long before the Kiryat
Shmona incident-up to document S/l 1057/Add-409,
dated 15 April 1974, and subsequent ones. Since the
beginning of 1974 we have submitted more than 100
complaints to the United Nations observersin which we set
forth the violations of Lebaneseair space and territorial
waters by Israel. We also submitted complaints regarding
infiltration of Lebanon’s territory and the temporary
occupation by Israel of Lebaneseterritory. Israel has also
attacked with its artillery and mortar guns many of the
Lebanese villages at the border. All these complaints
submitted by Lebanon have been confirmed by the United
Nations observers. In addition, all the aforementioned
reports by the United Nations observersdo not mention
any particular instance of infiltration from Lebanese
territory into Israel.

113. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council are well
aware that the Israeli representative has raised some
contentious matters that are completely out of the scope of
this discussion. Some of his remarks were addressed to my
Government and to me. I would certainly have raised a
point of order had I not been sitting in this Chair; however,
I allowed him to continue his tirade, to which I shall reply
at the proper time.
114. The next representative who wishes to exercise the
right of reply is the representative of Lebanon, on whom I
now call.
115. Mr. GHORRA
(Lebanon): I wish to draw the
attention- of the Council to document S/Agenda/I768,
dated l’/ April 1974, item 2 of which reads:

119. Furthermore, the air space of Lebanon is being
violated every day. Is that done to observethe activities of
the fedayeen? What does that have to do with the incident
of Kiryat Shmona? Is this to be tolerated? Is the constant
shelling of our border-townsand towns a matter connected
with the Kiryat Shmonaoperation? Israelisin the past have
attacked Lebanesetowns. They have attacked the Pales-

“The situation in the Middle East:
“Letter dated 13 April 1974 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/ 11264).”
11

tinians in their own camps in Beirut and in the Palestinian.
refugee camp of Nahr el Bared, all the way in the north of
Lebanon, for the sake of killing and for the sake of
murdering. They killed them at night in their beds. These
are the self-appointed representatives of all the Jewish
people of the world. I am sure that decent Jews all over the
world abhor such acts of barbarity commited by Israel
against Lebanon and against Innocent people. We have
already lost 150 of our citizens, men, women and children.
These people are not non-persons. They are people like you
,and me.

o’clock the same thing. At 11 o’clock the verdict of the
Israeli Government came and pointed the finger of guilt
towards Lebanon.
,.
122. Well, that was a concoction. The whole thing was a
story put up, made up later on In order to sell this big Iie to
the world, to exploit the sympathy of the people and. to
find a culprit and to take revenge against someone. We have
to pay a price. Why do we have to pay a price? Because the
Israeli Government is in difficulty with its own people;
because the people in Israel are furious with the policy of
its Government which was not taking enough security
measures for the protection of the people. The Government
was resigning; the people were in turmoil; the Government
had to divert the attention and the emotions of the people
by pointing the finger of accusation against Lebanon and
directing its anger at the peaceful country of Lebanon.

120. And Mr. Dayan promises us some more. Mr. Tekoah
had the audacity to put in the records of the Security
Council the threats of Mr. Dayan, but after he expunged
from them some of their ominous references. I should like
the record to show some of his statements very clearly. I
shall refer to 77zeNew York Times of 14 April 1974, which
reports Mr. Dayan as follows:

123. I should like to remind the members of the Council
of the declaration issued on the Middle East and the
question of Palestine by the Fourth Conference of Heads of
State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries meeting in
Algiers from 19 to 21 March 1974. The Bureau of the
Conference stated, in its paragraph 3, the following regarding the Middle East and the question of Palestine:

“The people will find it impossible to live there”, ‘the
Defense Minister said’. “Their homes will be destroyed
and the whole area will be deserted.”
He added:

“The non-aligned countries note ‘with concern that
Israel has not drawn the lessons it should have drawn
from the October war. Though the October war has
destroyed the military Zionist arrogance, Israel’s leaders
still continue to pursue a policy of aggression, annexation
of territory and deprivation of the .Arab people of its
fundamental rights and sovereignty over its territory.”

“If we cannot live in peace on our side of the border,
then eventually the entire southern part of Lebanon
won’t be able to live in peace.”
“Lebanon”, he said, “will find itself in a situation like
what happened in the Jordan Valley in the past when the
Jordanian Government was forced to abandon the whole
area.”

Further, in paragraph 5, sub-paragraph (b), the declaration
stated that one of the fundamental prerequisites for peace
was

Israel has a record of aggression and murderous acts and of
turning fertile lands, rich lands, into wastelands. The report
continued:

“the restoration of the Palestine people’s national rights,
foremost among which is the right to return to its
homeland and exercise its right to self-determination”.

“Mr. Dayan added:
“ ‘We tried to do this in a civilized manner* “-1 have
referred and commented on the kind of civilization tha&
Mr. Dayan and his Government are bringing to our midst
in the Middle East-adding that if some persons had been
killed, as the Lebanese radio reported this morning,-“ ‘it
wasjust by sheer accident’.”

124. The Palestinian people who have lived in Lebanon for
25 years have suffered long enough. They are entitled to a
resolution and a solution of their problem. Israel must get
that message. It failed to get the message from the war of
1973. It continues its expeditions and its campaign of
terror against Lebanon and its peaceful citizens. But some
of the Israeli people seem to have got the message. Now in
Israel, they are talking about what they call yiridu. I refer
to i%e New York Post of 8 April 1974, which stated that
yirida is a Hebrew word which means literally going down.
But what it means is to emigrate from Israel. It is the
opposite of uliyu-going up to Zion, to immigrate to Israel.
Yet ever since the October war more and more Israelis are
talking about yirida. A survey conducted by the newspaper
Haaretz demonstrates that 11.6 per cent of the Israelis are
considering leaving the country. Leaving the country
because of what? Because of the kind of security, the kind
of peace the leaders, the Zionist pioneers, have promised
the Jews who have immigrated to Israel. This message is
demonstrative of the temper of the people in Israel, who
have been led and misled by leaders who have established
the policy of Israel on the basis of war. And Mr. Tekoah has

Naturally, Mr. Dayan’s forces were not there to kii; he sent
hordes of his troops there only to destroy without killing,
as if the destruction of homes of peaceful peasants and
townspeople did not entail any killing or any injury in its
wake.
121. I referred at our last meeting to the concoctions of
the Israelis trying to build a case that three persons who
perpetrated the act of Kiryat Shmona came from Lebanon.
Mr. Tekoah, in his statement before the Council, mentioned
the fact that an Israeli patrol followed the footsteps of
these persons and discovered that they had gone to Kiryat
Shmona and that by the time the patrol reached Kiryat
Shmona the operation was already in progress. I mentioned
that already at 9 o’clock radio Israel was saying that they
did not know where these perpetrators came from. At 10
12

the audacity to come again and again and hurl the
accusation at us that Lebanon, Beirut, are the centres of
international gangsterism, of international terrorism. Why?
Because we harbour there, we have given refuge to,
300,000 Palestinians-and I insist on the figure of300,OOO
Palestinians-who
are living in Lebanon. For 25 years we
have witnessed their tragic life; we have suffered with them.

its threats against Lebanon. These are minimal demands
that we make of the Council.
130. The PRESIDENT:
The next name on my list of
representatives wishing to exercise the right of reply is that
of the representative of the Byelorussian SSR, on whom I
now call.
131. Mr. SMIRNOV (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) (translation from Russian): In exercising my right of
reply, I should like to make several points. Firstly, our
delegation considers it inadmissible that the representative
of Israel should use his right of reply every time to slander
the policies of other States-the policies of States members
of the Security Council-in
order to expound Zionist
propaganda in the Council and in United Nations bodies.
Not only is Israel acting in a piratical manner in relation to
neighbouring Arab States, but its representatives want to
bring the methods of piracy and terrorism into the Council.
The representative of Israel has demanded the removal of
certain members of the Council and the replacement of its
President. Who gave him the right to do that? Although
Israel is supported by some individual members of the
Council, that still does not mean that Israel can indulge in
piracy in the Council. The delegation of the Byelorussian
SSR categorically protests against such conduct by the
representative of Israel in the Security Council.

125. Beirut and Lebanon, a capital and a country known
to be a centre of education, culture, international contacts,
freedom of information, tourism and trade, are being
turned-according
to Mr. Tekoah and the Israeli propaganda
machine-into a terrorist centre of the world. That, as I said
before, is a charge worthy not only of laughter but of
disdain. A country like Lebanon, where we are building a
society on the basis of tolerance and on the basis of
harmony among various communities, is being accused by a
representative of a country based on exclusivism as a
country of terror. It is being accused by the representative
of a country which was born out of terror and which has
conducted a campaign of terror for the last 25 years against
the Arab peoples and the Arab States.
126. Mr. Tekoah mentioned the other day that until 1967
everything was going very nicely; everything was lovely;
there were no incidents on the borders of Lebanon; no
actions, no reprisals. But Mr. Tekoah forgets a very historic
fact: that on 5 June 1967 Israel launched its murderous
assault and aggression against the Arab States and occupied
some of their territories-and
it occupies them to this day.
That cycle of violence to which Israel had resorted in the
pad was repeated again in 1967, and that set the whole
Arab people-and
first and foremost, the Palestinian
people-in motion in their struggle against the aggression of
Israel. On 28 December 1968, out of the blue, for no
reason at all, Israel attacked the airport of Beirut and set in
motion that cycle of violence and terror against Lebanon.

132. Secondly, the representative of Israel did not like the
comparison made between Israel’s piratical actions in
relation to the peoples of neighbouring Arab States and the
actions of the Fascists against the peoples of many
countries during the Second World War. The delegation of
the Byelorussian SSR insists on this comparison. It is not
we who are to blame for this comparison, but the policy of
Israel, which has armed itself with some inhuman Fascist
methods in the struggle against the Arab peoples in this
area. They have merely affixed a new label to these
actions-not “Fascist” but “Zionist”.

127. In the past I have asked and advised Mr. Tekoah to
go and tell his Government and his people that they have
one course if they want to live in peace and harmony with
the peoples of the Middle East: that is to scrap their plans
of aggression and to set themselves on a course that will
lead them to peace-the course of refraining from their
attacks and from their threats to use force.

133. The representative of Iraq cited a whole list of the
genuinely Fascist methods which Israel has employed
against the Arab peoples in this area. I endorse this list and
would simply like to ask one question: why was it that
literally from the first days and even before Israel’s
formation, before the adoption by the United Nations of
the decision to create the State of Israel, actions similar to
Fascist actions, organized by Zionist circles in that area,
had begun and were continued?

128. Lebanon, as is known to everyone around this table,
has in the past done everything in its power to promote
conditions conducive to peace in the Middle East. We have
helped and encouraged every effort and every initiative
taken in that direction. Lebanon could not be accused of
being a party either to terror or to wars. Lebanon has set
itself the goal of serving the cause of peace and of being a
useful Member of the United Nations; and on that basis
we act.

134. On 9 April 1948, Jewish terrorists committed a
massacre in the Arab village of Deir Yassin and most of its
inhabitants perished, Including women and children. What
is this-is it Fascism or Zionism? The answer is that they
are the same. The style is the same-the style of the
aggressor.

129. Finally, I should like to state our position very
clearly before the Council today. We have come to you for
justice. I have mentioned that resolutions alone do not
satisfy us; that action by the Council should be taken to
restrain Israel from carrying out its policy of aggression
against Lebanon. We hope that the Council will find the
way to warn Israel against the repetition of its attacks
against Lebanon, to condemn very strongly its action and

135. In the course of the hostilities which began on 15
May 1948, Israeli troops drove out the Arab population en
masse and seized their property. The American writer
O’Ballance writes: “It was precisely the policy of the Jews
which made the Arabs abandon their homes. Later, when
the war was at its height, they began to drive out those
Arabs who had still remained in their villages.”
13

136. The former commander of the Arab Legion, the
British General Glubb, writes in his memoirs- that in
Jerusalem the Jews warned the Arabs through loud
speakers: “The road to Jericho is still open. Flee from Israel
while you are still alive.”

144. The PRESIDENT: 1 call on the representative of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, who wishes to speak in
exercise of his right of reply.
145. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translation from Russian): In connexion with
the Israeli representative’s reference to the Soviet representative’s statement in the Security Council during consideration of a similar complaint by Lebanon about Israel’s
aggressive actions against it, we should like to stress that
since the time when that statement was made nothing has
happened which could alter our opinion that Lebanon, the
people of Lebanon and the Government of Lebanon bear
no responsibility for the actions of any persons or groups of
persons against Israel. This was once again convincingly
demonstrated both in the letter of 12 April from the
representative of Lebanon, in Ambassador Ghorra’s statement at the 1767th meeting, on 16 April, and in his
statement today. In particular, the letter /S/11263/ states
that:

137. Such accounts are legion. Is this not similar to Fascist
methods of operation? Is this not Fascism? During the
Palestinian war, the Israeli troops destroyed a considerable
number of Arab dwellings so that the Arabs could not
return to them. Is this not Fascism? Is this not similar to
the activities of the Fascists? The Palestinian was led to a
situation in which the Arab State proclaimed by a decision
of the United Nations was not in fact set up, and a major
part of it was annexed to Israel by force. Are these not
Fascist actions?
138. According to UNRWA data, by 31 May 1967 the
number of Arab refugees had reached 1,344,576. According
to the estimates of the same Agency, the Israeli aggression
in 1967 created more than 350,000 other refugees. That
made nearly 2 million refugees.

“Reports submitted by the United Nations observers to
the Security Council through the Secretary-General do
not contain any contention that any infiltration has taken
place from Lebanon into Israel. This also has been
confirmed through the consultations that the Lebanese
authorities had with the observers regarding their observation, who did not record any activity or infiltration
during this week along the Lebanese border.”

139. We know very well what refugees are in relation to
Fascist aggression. Are these not similar to Fascist
methods? I repeat, it is not we who are to blame for this
comparison: the policy of Israel, which has armed itself
with Fascist methods, is to blame. As reality has shown, Tel
Aviv in its relations with its neighbours is placing its
reliance on force, is doing everything possible to avoid a
settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict and is sabotaging the
efforts being made by the peace-loving countries and forces
to that end.

It also mentions other facts which quite clearly demonstrate that the Government of Lebanon and the Lebanese
people cannot bear any responsibility for the actions of
persons who are not Lebanese.

140. The representative of Israel is trying to teach other
members of the Security Council how they should conduct
themselves. He has apparently forgotten that the Council
has met to consider Israel’s aggressive measures against
Lebanon and to demand an end to the policy of international brigandage practised by Tel Aviv.

146. Why should we fail to believe or cast any doubt
whatsoever on the statements of responsible representatives
of the State of Lebanon, and why should we believe the
unsubstantiated assertions of the representative of Israel
here? The representative of Israel is trying everything
possible, but entirely unsuccessfully, to refute the statements of the Lebanese representatives, and in doing so he is
referring quite unjustifiably to earlier statements made here
by the representative of the Soviet Union.

141. Finally, the attempts of the representative of Israel
to cast aspersions on the Byelorussian SSR-which lost a
quarter of its population during the Second World War in
struggling for its liberation and thus, together with all the
peoples of the Soviet Union, made a substantial contribution to the rout of fascism-are unworthy and sacrilegious. Two and a half million of my compatriots gave
their lives for the survival of today’s citizens of the
countries of Europe and of the whole world, including
Israel.

147. The Soviet delegation would like to express its
indignation and anger at the attacks made by the Israeli
representative, unprecedented in their arrogance, on you as
the President of the Security Council and on your country.
We should like to express our solidarity with you, and also
to assure you of our unswerving support. It seems to us
that, in making such insolent and, I would say, provocative
attacks against members of the Security Council, sovereign
States and their representatives, the representative of Israel
has gone beyond all tolerable limits. We feel that, if he is
going to act in this way in the future and indulge in
slanderous attacks against members of the Council and
against the President of the Council, the Council will be
entitled to consider the question of depriving the representative of Israel of the right to speak, or not granting it to
him, in the discussion of this question.

142. It is the duty of the Security Council finally to
compel Israel, whose representatives once solemnly swore
to respect the provisions of the Charter, to renounce its
adventuristic and obstructionist policy in questions concerning a Middle East settlement.
143. The delegation of the Byelorussian SSR repeats that
it has so far taken an active part in the work of the Security
Council in its consideration of the complaint made by
Lebanon, and it will continue to participate actively SO as
to put an end to Israel’s aggressive and piratical acts against
the peoples of the neighbouring Arab States.

148. The PRESIDENT:
Lebanon.
14

I now call on the representative of

149. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): Iri the concluding remarks
I made a little while ago, I stated that my delegation
expects from the Council a condemnation of the Israeli
attacks against Lebanon and a warning to Israel to desist
from any further use of force or threats of force against
Lebanon. But, I failed to put as one of our minimal
demands the return of the 13 persons who were abducted
by Israel and who remain in Israel. That is one of the most
important things that we insist upon. We demand that those
people be returned immediately to Lebanon. I should like
the record to show this.
150. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

demned to death in gas chambers and crematoria were met
with at the gates of the concentration camps. But it is
enough simply to recall the name of the Fascist party, to
which the representative of the Byelorussian SSR has
referred so many times today. The name was the National
Socialist Party of Germany. It was as socialist as the terms
borrowed by you from them reflect the truth of the
situation in the Middle East. Just as their use of the term
“socialist” was an insult to us, trying to build a socialist
society in Israel, it is an insult to you and to your people,
and it is a shame that a representative of the Soviet Union,
whether it is the USSR or the Byelorussian SSR, should
come here and repeatedly insist on such odious comparisons.

I now call on the representative of

151. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): The representative of the
Soviet Union read from a document, a letter submitted to
the Secretary-General by the representative of Lebanon and
then asked the question why should we not trust what is
written in that letter-a letter, by the way, in response to
complaints made by Israel regarding the massacre at Kiryat
Shmona. The answer is very simple. The answer was given
not by me but by the then President of Lebanon, who said
on 1 July 1969:

1.55. The representative of Lebanon reiterated his previous
statements. It was nothing new. There are so many replies
which could be given to every single point made by
him-not
in my words, not in my arguments, but in
statements made by his own leaders. I have done this
previously. I added a statement by a Lebanese leader from
an entirely different group, highly considered in the Soviet
Union.
156. Today, in response to his reiteration of the accusations of Israel’s alleged intentions, purposes and designs on
Lebanon, I should like to read a brief statement by His
Beatitude the Patriarch of Antioch and the entire East,
who, on 28 September 1972, declared, according to the
Lebanese newspaper El Bairak, and in an interview given to
that particular daily, later reprinted by another Beirut news
paper El Jarida:

“Lebanon had stressed in the Security Council that
there were no saboteur bases on its territory so as to
obtain a condemnation of Israel by the Council.”
152. I had the opportunity only the day before yesterday
to indicate that Lebanon speaks with two voices, one here
when its representative demands, calls for, suggests, the
adoption by the Security Council once again of a one-sided
inequitable condemnation of Israel’s defence action, and
another voice, the voice of its leaders, including its
President, its Minister of Defence, its Prime Minister, leaders
of the opposition, parliamentarians, who openly speak of
the new vocation of Lebanon-developed in the course of
the last few years, and not immediately after the 1967
hostilities, as the representative of Lebanon suggested-the
vocation of being the centre of international terrorism and
banditry. Lebanon became such a centre when some other
Arab Governments decided that it was most convenient to
have terrorist operations out of Lebanese territory rather
than from their own soil.

“The Israelis do not want Lebanon. I know them well.
No one knows them better than I do. I was in contact
with them over a long period when I was head of the
Patriarchate of Tyre in the south. I have in my possession
information which proves that, through international
institutions, Israel has frequently tried to explain to those
responsible in Lebanon that Israel wishes Lebanon no
harm, provided that the fedayeen withdraw from the
country. But how does the proverb go: ‘To whom can
one read your psalms, 0 David? ’ ”
157. Ambassador Ghorra’s solicitude for Israel and the
people of Israel and the size of its population is almost
touching. He referred to the percentage of Israelis who are
considering emigration from Israel. It is interesting that
these percentages are lower than the percentage of citizens
of a country like the United States who are considering
emigrating from the United States.

153. As for the brief statement by the representative of
the Byelorussian SSR I saw him reading from what
appeared to me to be a book, and at certain moments I
thought this must be either Kafka or at least Orwell.
Because it is clear that apparently in his view right is wrong,
wrong is right. Justice becomes injustice. A liberation
movement like zionism-the love of Zion, the struggle for
centuries of the Jewish people to attain equality with other
nations, freedom, independence, sovereignty-is
an antiliberation movement, but the murder of innocent civilians,
men, women and children, is liberation.

158. Now what does it prove? As far as I remember, a
typical country of immigration, like Australia-a
distinguished member of the Security Council-has
approximately 15 per cent of its immigrants leaving the country,
going back to the places from which they had come. What
does it prove? The true situation is that there have been
more Israelis that have been studying abroad, teaching
abroad, working abroad, trying to return to Israel in recent
months, including Israelis from this very country, than ever
before. The fact remains that immigration to Israel continues, that the struggle for the right of Jews in certain
parts of the world-where
they are still being prevented

154. In speaking in that manner, it was he-and I am very
sorry to say this-who was following in the footsteps of the
Nazis, because all of us, I think, still remember what they
did. And I am not referring to the slogans on the
concentration camps-how
they used terms like “Labour
makes free”. That was the inscription which those con15

from exercising their fundamental human right to ioin their
families and their people in Israel-is still co&u&g.

163. The representative of Lebanon -:again spoke .>of
Lebanon, ‘a peaceful country; Lebanon which tries to build
a society : based on tolerance. Perhaps too ‘much tolerance
-too much tolerance towards gangsters and murderers. And
this is ..your .fault. And for this fault we hold you
responsible. No matter what you say, and no matter what
certain’ members of this Council have’.said, under inter&
national law and the Charter of the United Nations the
Lebanese Government is responsible for what is going on in
its territory, is responsible for the existence of terrorist
bases which perpetrate murderous attacks against innocent
civilians in Israel. And no words, nothing at all, can
whitewash this responsibility.

159. How weak the Lebanese representative’s case in the-,
present debate is was demonstrated again by the fact that
the one argument used by him repeatedly, today and at
previous meetings, in order to try to prove that the
murderers at Kiryat Shmona had not come from his
country, are references to Israeli radio broadcasts. I repeat
what he said and I hope that this time he will listen closely
and understand that he has proved the very opposite of
what he tried to show.
160. He said that according to the Israeli reports footprints crossing the Israeli-Lebanese border were discovered
early in the morning of 11 April. True. These footprints
were followed. It is not easy to follow footprints on rocky
ground, on hilly ground, and the representative of Lebanon
probably knows the southern part of his country, the
northern part of mine. These footprints were followed to
Kiryat Shmona. True again. By the time the patrol arrived
in the little townlet the shooting was already going on. True,
Ambassador Ghorra. At that time, the Israeli radio broadcast for the first time that there was shooting going on in
Kiryat Shmona and that people, innocent people, were
being murdered. Perhaps in his country it is possible to
know in advance who is killing whom and from where the
killers have come. Not in mine.

164. Ambassador Ghorra said “Lebanon is not a party to
terror”. It is more than that. It is a party to a governmental
agreement signed officially in Cairo with the terrorist
organizations-I have quoted from it-giving the terrorist
groupings freedom of action on and from Lebanese
territory. It is an accomplice. It must be held responsible
for the continuation of such acts of aggression, such savage
atrocities. It will be held so responsible.
165. The PRESIDENT:
Lebanon.

I now call on the representative of

166. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): Now we hear again, in
rebuttal, the new concoction, the big lie, that has been put
forward by Israel and that has been repeated over and over
again, that there was evidence that the three perpetrators of
the action of Kiryat Shmona had gone from Lebanon. The
Israelis claim-and there is nothing to substantiate their
claim-that the wire was cut somewhere on the Lebanese
border and that through that cut the three had infiltrated
and that the Israeli patrol had followed the footsteps of
those three in that rugged country, which I know very well,
where footsteps could be lost very easily. They claim they
followed those footsteps to Kiryat Shmona and that after
they matched the shoes of the victims who were in the
building still, they matched the shoes of those three persons
with the footsteps and they discovered that <the three
people had come from Lebanon. What a big he. It takes
gullible people to believe such a story, only gullible people.
Photographs were taken in Beirut of the three people.
Because photographs were published in Beirut, as they were
published throughout Lebanon, we have evidence that the
photographs were taken in Beirut before the three persons
set out on their mission. What evidence. I do not think
Mr. Tekoah wants to go so far and insult the intelligence of
people by trying to make them believe that this is evidence.

161. So the first radio broadcast, as correctly stated by
him, at 9 o’clock in the morning, simply gave the tragic
news of the attack in the little town. And this was repeated,
as he pointed out, at 10 o’clock. It wasonly in the 11 o’clock
broadcast, when the report of the border patrol was
received about the footprints and the fence cut by the
murderers, who had crossed from Lebanon into Israel, it
was only when that report was sent on to the authorities,
and from them to the radio station, that for the first time
we were in a position, on the basis of evidence available, to
announce that the murderers had come from Lebanon. This
was corroborated not only by the facts that their shoes
matched fully the footprints, but also by the statements
which were being issued in Beirut at the time when the
Israeli radio was still not attributing any responsibility to
the Lebanese .Govemment. Beirut was already issuing
announcements, and sending them all over the world, that
an organization based in Lebanon had organized and carried
out the savage slaughter. At that very time, that organization in Beirut knew already who the murderers were and
issued a statement giving details of their names and their
biographies, and published a photograph of the three
-taken where? In Tel Aviv, or in Beirut before their
mission? -a photograph which has been published all over
the world in the meantime.

167. The fact that we have freedom of information in
Lebanon, that communiques are issued in Lebanon-is that
proof to hold the Government of Lebanon and the
Lebanese people responsible for an action that took place
outside our jurisdiction?
Every newspaper in Lebanon
publishes even statements by Israelis, stories by Israelis.
They publish even stories and news coming from Israel. We
have complete freedom of the press. Even Mr. Tekoah’s lies
here in the Security Council will be reported in the
Lebanese press. We have no restrictions on our press. We
believe in freedom of the press and we respect it. It is
something sacred in Lebanon. Referring to some declarations made some time ago in different contexts in relation

162. After all this development we still hear that it is not
clear where these assassinshad come from. After all this
evidence, we still hear that the Government of Lebanon is
perhaps not responsible for the situation which has obtained in its country for years now and that every visitor to
Beirut is aware of, that every correspondent who wishes to
go there can report on. Are not the facts clear and
incontrovertible?
16

‘_

that Iraq should sit& it. But we tell Mr. Tekoah that Iraq
was elected by 116,Members of this Organization out of
125 which voted. We obtained the second highest vote in
that election. This is the fact-and not his distortions-and
it ii a fact we are proud of. We sit on this Council by the
will of the world community, not by his whims and his
desires. We sit among the nations of which we are .a part
and of which we are proud to be a part.
,

to.different circumstances by this or thatreligious leader or
political leader of Lebanon does not prove that we had
anything to do with the Kiryat Shmona incident.
Mr. Tekoah is leading the Council into a completely
different matter. We are here to discuss an act of aggression,
planned without any provocation from the Government.
and people of Lebanon, an act of aggression planned and
carried out by the Government of Israel and its armed
forces. This is the matter we are discussing here. We are not
discussing statements that were published in such a newspaper at such and such a time. If you wish, I can keep you
here until midnight. I have hundreds of quotations here. If
you wish me to start, f will quote from Israeli newspapers.

176. We have joined the multitude-not
like you,
Mr. Tekoah, in your self-glorifying statement of two days
ago in which you told us that you and what you call the
Jewish people refuse to join the multitude. We are part of
this multitude, we want to remain in it, we want to work
with it.

168. Our case is very clear. From the hour of 12.45 a.m.
on Sunday, 12 May 1968, until now Israeli aggressions have
not stopped against Lebanon in one form or another,
Kiryat Shmona or no Kiryat Shmona. It is time for the
Security Council to put an end to this matter, and that is
what we have come here for.

177. You have also told us that you are different but
equal. Well, by your conduct today, you have certainly
proved to be quite different. But, quoting your Orwellian
saying, How equal do you want to be?
178. I shall now refer to one or two facts that have
incensed Mr. Tekoah. He was particularly angry at me, at
the representative of the Byelorussian SSR and at the
representative of the USSR. But in fact he not only has
slandered our delegations but has insulted every delegation
represented at this table. Only at our last meeting he
informed us that the Governments whose representatives
are sitting around this table do not really represent their
public opinion. He was speaking to the representative of the
USSR when he asked:

169. Mr. SMIRNOV (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) (translation from Russian): The representative of
Israel accused the representative of the Byelorussian SSR of
repeating himself in the Security Council. Certainly the
Byelorussian delegation has repeated and will continue to
repeat: stop the aggression, leave the occupied territories,
and implement the decisions of the Council.
170. Over the last five years the Council, in considering
the complaints of only one country-Lebanon-has
repeated more than 10 times its condemnation of Israel for
its aggressive actions. Israel is to blame for these repetitions,
and not the Council. We are prepared not to repeat
ourselves. Comply with the resolutions of the Council,
liberate the occupied Arab lands, and the members of the
Council will not repeat themselves.

“Do they realize, for instance, that in all democratic
countries, even in those whose Governments, for reasons
of material expediency sometimes do lean towards the
Arab States, the peoples, as demonstrated in public
opinion polls, are squarely on Israel’s side? ” /I 767th
meeting, para. 161.1

171. The PRESIDENT: I realize that it is very close to
7 o’clock and the hour is late, but I feel that I should beg
the indulgence of members of the Council to take a few
more minutes to answer some of the statements made by
the representative of Israel.

To have the temerity to come to representatives of
democratic Governments and tell them that if they uphold
the cause of justice and right and support an Arab positiori
in this Council or in the Assembly they are leaning for
materialistic gains is, members of the Council, I contend,
the height of cheek.

172. Let me say first of all that I will completely ignore
the statements directed at me as President of the Security
Council. I leave my conduct as President to the members of
the Council to judge. It is their opinion and only their
opinion that I value, not that of the representative of Israel.

179. He is also incensed by the fact that his action and the
actions of his Government are likened to the Nazis. He
should not be so angry. It was not the representative of the
Byelorussian SSR who established the similarity; in fact, it
was one of the great friends and supporters of the Zionist
movement, none less than the late Sir Winston Churchill.
Let me quote what he said on 17 November 1944,
following the assassination of Lord Moyne in Cairo. Prime
Minister Winston Churchill made the following statement to
Parliament:

173. Speaking as representative of IRAQ, I should like to
answer some of the points he raised about my Government.
174. First of all, he spoke about legality and legal
arguments. Had that statement come from any other
representative it would have been ,worthy of listening to
and of consideration; but coming from a Government
which has made a record of its scorn of the Security
Council, of its intransigence and refusal to abide by its
decisions and those of the Assembly and other international
bodies, this is absurd and borders on the ridiculous.

“If our dreams for zionism are to end in the smoke of
assassins’ pistols and our labours for its future are to
produce a new set of gangsters worthy of Nazi Germany”
-these are the words of Sir Winston Churchill, not of the
representative of the Byelorussian SSR-“many
like
myself will have to reconsider the position we have
maintained so consistently and so long in the past. lf

175. He has said that Iraq should not be on this Council
and that he had shown concern in the General Assembly
17

there is to be any hope of a peaceful and successful future
for zionism, these wicked activities must cease and those
responsible for them must be destroyed, root and
branch.”

182. I do not wish to take much more of the Security
Council’s time except to refer to something that the Israeli
representative has once again used completely out of
context.

They have not been destroyed either by root or by branch.
Menachem Begin, the leader of the most murderous Zionist
gang, is making a bid to become the Prime Minister of Israel
and will have a chance then to instruct Mr. Tekoah so that
he can heap more insults on the members of the Council.

183. Mr. Tekoah quoted from Oppenheim and Lauterpacht as justification for Israeli aggression against Lebanon
in the guise of self-preservation. He neglected to continue
the quotation in full, so I shall do that for him. It reads:
“The reason of the thing, of course, makes it necessary
for every State to judge for itself, in the fust instance,
whether a case of necessity in self-defence has arisen. But,
unless the notion of self-preservation is to be eliminated
as a legal conception, or unless it is used as a cloak for
concealing deliberate breaches of the law, it is obvious
that the question of the legality of action taken in
self-preservation is “suitable for determination and must
ultimately be determined by a judicial authority or by a
political body, like the Security Council of the United
Nations, acting in a judicial capacity. The refusal on the
part of the State concerned to submit to or abide by the
impartial determination of that question must therefore
be deemed to be prima facie evidence of a violation of
international law under the guise of action in selfpreservation.“1

180. Now, Mr. Tekoah, your actions-not people’s bias or
people’s unfairness-have
brought you isolation from the
world. Less than a month ago, the Government of the
Republic of Guyana, a small, peaceful, third-world country,
decided to sever its relations with your Government. Here
is its reasoning, and I quote from a communiqud issued by
it on 21 March:
“While recognizing that since the commencement of the
war of liberation of 6 October 1973 certain new concrete
and positive elements have emerged, facilitating the
movement towards a just and equitable resolution of
some of the issues, the Ministry qf Foreign Affairs stated
that the sequence of events, as they have unfolded since
the adoption of Security Council resolution 340 (1973)
of 25 October 1973, sponsored by the non-aligned
countries, did not indicate that Israel had either abandoned her efforts at legitimizing the acquisition of
territory by force or had genuinely pursued the path of
peace in full acknowledgement
of the imprescriptible
right of the Palestinian people.”
That is the view of a small country
what Israel’s policies are.

of what Israel is and

181. Mr. Tekoah spoke also of humanity. Let me inform
you of something I came across in a letter from an Israeli,
Reuben Radhadzu from Fatzabab, a letter published on 27
February 1974 in your newspaper Ha’olam Hazeh; I shall
read part of the translation from Hebrew. He says:
“In just three days, approximately four months after
the war, I saw with my own eyes in a captured and
damaged tank two whole bodies of Egyptian soldiers. The
tank did not stand on the front line; it was brought a long
way from there to a huge yard near a large base in Sinai.
High-ranking commanders decided upon and carried out
tbis operation and no one bothered to remove the bodies
and to hand them over to the Egyptians.”
I know this situation is difficult

This is the answer to the case that you have presented to us,
Mr. Tekoah.
184. In my capacity as PRESIDENT
on the representative of Israel.

185. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I should like to refer to one
point only in the statement of the representative of Iraq.
He spoke about insults to the Council. I should lie to
suggest that for a representative of Iraq to quote from
Winston Churchill is an insult to the Council. I should like
to suggest that for him to quote remarks regarding one
particular incident from the leader of the Allies who fought
the Nazis at a time when Iraq was doing its very best to
remain on the other side of the frontline and to collaborate
with them, is an insult to the Council. I suggest that to do
that in respect of a people which not only suffered, as the
Jewish people did, at the hands of the Nazis, but-even as
Iraq continued to oppose the Allied effort during the
Second World War-fought
with Winston Churchill, under
Winston Churchill, against the Nazis in the Middle East, is
an insult to the Council.
186. Even today the Nazi collaboration of Iraq is not
forgotten in his country. Thus, for instance, on 7 May 1972
the national militia completed a course-and this would not
be considered of any particular interest were it not for the
nickname given to that particular course, which was “The
May 2nd class”. Why did the present Government of Iraq
find it necessary to refer to that date today? On the 2nd of
May 1941 Nazi elements in Iraq toppled over the existing
mandatory Government in order to make certain that the
pro-Nazi sympathies of many in Iraq should be expressed

to imagine. He continues:

“For an army like ours, holiness of its dead being one
of the comer-stones, this army shows terrible neglect
bordering upon cruelty when dealing with enemy dead.
“Soldiers posted nearby tell me that there are other
vehicles there with bodies in them. There is no reason to
suppose that this is not known to the local commanders.”
That is one example of Israel’s humanity
civilized conduct.

of the Council, I call

1 L.F.L.
Oppenheim, International Law: A Deatise, 7th ed.,
H. Lauterpacht,ed (London, Longman’s,
Greenand Co., 1955).

and of Israel’s

vol. I, pp. 266-267.

18

\

they have evicted from their homes-“and taking note of
the declarations and explanations made by the representative of the Government of Israel before the Ad Hoc
Political Committee in respect of the implementation of
the said resolutions . . .”

also in pro-Nazi policies and actions. The revolution was
short-lived. The leaders left Iraq and went to Berlin in order
to continue their struggle against Winston Churchill and
their collaboration in the annihilation of the Jewish people
by the Nazis. And today the Iraqi Government, represented
here in the Council, makes of these collaborators, pro-Nazi
leaders and war criminals, heroes. That is an insult to the
Council.

189. Your membership, Mr. Tekoah, is conditional and
you have not honoured or fulfilled your conditions. YOU
are highly qualified, if anyone is, for dismissal from this
Organization.

187. indeed, it is an insult to the United Nations that we
have reached a point whereby, because of bloc votes, a
Government which continues openly to consider itself in a
state of war with another State Member of the United
Nations, a Government which has refused since 1948 to
sign any armistice or cease-fire with that Member State, a
Government which continues actively to participate in
aggression against another State Member of the United
Nations, has been elected to this Council and today presides
over its deliberations.

190. As PRESIDENT,

I call on the representative of Israel.

191. hlr. TEKOAH (Israel): To the list of insults by the
representative of Iraq to the Security Council and to the
United Nations, I would only add two points. Indeed, it is
an insult to all States Members of the United Nations for a
Government which has rejected all resolutions calling for
peace with Israel, another State Member of the United
Nations, for a Government which has tom to shreds the
Charter of the United Nations in relation to Israel, to speak
here of resolutions and the Charter of our Organization. It
is also an insult to this Council and to all Members of the
United Nations when the representative of a Government
falsifies his own country’s history. Iraq joined the United
Nations, the Allies, in the last few days of the War, after a
deadline had been set by the United States, Great Britain,
France and other Allied nations to the effect that unless
and until those that still had not become members of the
great alliance for freedom did so they would not be able to
participate in the establishment of those instrumentalities
under which the world has been trying to tread its course
since the Second World War. It was only under that threat
of exclusion, it was only after the pro-Nazi Government
was overthrown by the British allies, by Winston Churchill’s
troops, that Iraq found it necessary, under duress almost, to
say that it too would like to become part of the future.
Now that history is all too fresh in the minds of all of us. It
is an insult when the representative of such a country
comes here to falsify it.

188. The PRESIDENT: I shall take only two minutes to
reply, as representative of IRAQ, to the diatribe of
Mr. Tekoah. I would say first of all that he has not in the
course of his reply answered any of the questions that I
have raised. He has indulged, as usual, in a propagandistic
exercise to divert us from the issues with which we are
dealing. He can falsify records as he chooses, but he cannot
deny that Iraq was a member of the united nations that
waged war against the Axis and put everything within its
ability into seeing that the war effort would succeed and
would result in victory. Also he can hardly deny that we
were members of the United Nations when it met in San
Francisco to draw up the Charter and that we are a
founding Member of the United Nations. If anyone shames
the United Nations by its presence it is Israel, which is the
only country in the world with a membership that is
conditional. I should like to quote from the record the very
conditions on which Israel’s membership to this Organization was accepted and which Israel has violated for 25
years. General Assembly resolution 273 (III) states the
following:

192. The PRESIDENT: Speaking in my capacity as the
representative of IRAQ, I would say that I shall not take up
any more of the Council’s time because the debate would
degenerate into further diatribes. I shall leave comment on
Israel’s respect for United Nations resolutions-and especially Security Council resolutions-until
Mr. Tekoah
responds at the end of our debate to whatever the Council
will decide upon, as he normally does.

‘Noting furthermore the ‘declaration by the State of
Israel that it ‘unreservedly accepts the obligations of the
United Nations Charter and undertakes to honour them
from the day when it becomes a Member of the United
Nations’,
“Recalling its resolutions of 29 November 1947 and 11
December 1948”-and Mr. Tekoah knows very well what
they -refer to; they refer to the obligation of Israel to
repatriate or compensate the Palestinian people whom

TThemeeting rose at 7.15 p.m.

19

.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

Unite 1 Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may
be obtained
your bookstore

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire
ou adressez.vous
B : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes. New York ou Geneve.
ICAK

IIOJIYVMTb

HJAaHHR

ODraHu3aquu

H3P[AHZIR

OPI’AHUBAWfH

06-beAuHeHHblX

OKbEAHHEHHbIX
HawiR

Nations,

a RHHXCKHLIX

samex
HauuR,
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estin
buidoras
en todas partes
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Secei6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

in United

HAltHa

K~IXHT~

H arenzcraax
ao acex panousx
mupa. Haaonnre
cnpaaxH
xnnaoio~
narasmie
mm nmunte
no anpecy:
Oprauu3auna
CeKqWR
no nponaace nsAannB.
Hbm-Hopx
HIIW Weaeaa.

3KHax

Lltho

*IOIKHO

New York

Price:

$U.S.

NACIONES

Mara-

06 nsiqamiax
063.enauenuhrx

s

UNIDAS

en venta en librerfas
y casas distria su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones

2.00

74-82001-May

1989-2,200
