United Nations

S/PV.6709

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6709th meeting
Thursday, 26 January 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Sangqu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Musayev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Berger
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Menan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Letter dated 17 January 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2012/42)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-21580 (E)

*1221580*

S/PV.6709

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.

Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
West Africa, Mr. Saïd Djinnit.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
Letter dated 17 January 2012 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2012/42)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Chad, Mali and Niger to participate
in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Lynn Pascoe, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/42, which contains a letter dated
17 January 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Pascoe.
Mr. Pascoe: I appreciate the opportunity to brief
the Security Council on the inter-agency assessment
mission dispatched by the Secretary-General to look
into the impact of the Libyan crisis on the Sahel
region.
The mission, led by Mr. Sam Ibok, Deputy
Director of the Africa II Division of the Department of
Political Affairs — who is seated right behind me —
took place from 7 to 23 December. It included
representatives of the African Union, the International
Organization for Migration and United Nations entities
working in the humanitarian, development, political,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding, counter-narcotics and
counter-terrorism fields.
The mission had working sessions in Mali, Niger,
Chad and Mauritania. It also visited Abuja, Nigeria,
where it met with senior officials of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and
with Nigeria’s Minister of Defence to discuss regional
efforts to counter terrorism. The team also made stops
in Dakar, Senegal, for guidance and debriefing with the

2

The mission found, especially among the civil
and political leaders of the region, a remarkable
openness to engage on the nature and enormity of the
challenges confronting the countries. It was clear
throughout that most of the challenges pre-dated the
Libyan conflict. On the question of returnees from
Libya, the topmost priority for the countries visited
was to feed and to reintegrate the vulnerable returnees
and to help the affected communities cope with the loss
of remittances.
Underlying structural challenges and a looming
food crisis in the area compound those immediate
problems. There were strong appeals for the United
Nations, working in tandem with the African Union
and others, as well as with the new authorities in
Libya, to find a mutually satisfactory framework for
rebuilding relationships between the Sahel region and
the countries of transit and destination.
The mission also found that the leaders of the
Sahel region understood the need to protect the rights
of both the migrants and the host communities,
especially in the light of recent abuses. It held
extensive consultations on how to promote the security,
economic and employment conditions for managing
labour and migration issues within the region.
The mission also recognized that greater efforts
needed to be made to identify the criminal and militia
elements that are reigniting the embers of past
rebellions, using weapons that had been smuggled into
the region from Al-Qadhafi’s arsenal during the
fighting in Libya. The Council will recall that Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ian Martin
informed the Council yesterday that there is little
evidence so far that man-portable air defence systems,
or some of the other heavy weaponry, have been
smuggled out of Libya in significant numbers to the
subregion (see S/PV.6707).
The recommendations of Mr. Ibok’s mission fall
into three categories.
The first is support and capacity-building for
ongoing national initiatives to address the immediate
humanitarian, socio-economic and security challenges
in the region, as well as for enhanced efforts by the
United Nations country teams, especially in building a

12-21580

S/PV.6709

more coherent approach for the implementation of
humanitarian and development programmes.
The second is support for existing regional
mechanisms, including capacity-building and enhanced
coordination arrangements, on issues related to the
control of borders and information-sharing on crossborder activity, such as the smuggling of weapons and
human trafficking. This would include regional
mechanisms to address the growing activities of
terrorist organizations that are building networks that
reach out from the Maghreb and the Sahel zone to
terrorist groups like Boko Haram that are not
traditionally part of the region.
The third is support at the international level. The
United Nations, in cooperation with the African Union,
needs to mobilize greater international support for the
Sahel region to address the challenges of human
insecurity and underdevelopment, as well as terrorist
and security issues. Regional actors have made clear
that there is an urgent need to deal with the upsurge in
terrorist groups and the growing threat they pose.
However, in their view, it is critically necessary to also
address the socio-economic situation, including youth
unemployment, the food security crisis looming over
the horizon and underdevelopment. They have called
for more comprehensive efforts to address the problem
of drugs and weapons-smuggling, as well as the
smuggling of other products, such as petroleum
foodstuffs, to fund terrorist organizations.
Recent developments in the region reinforce the
concerns consistently expressed to the mission by its
interlocutors. The security situation in Mali has
significantly worsened following heavy fighting on
17 and 18 January between Government forces and
Tuareg militias in northern Mali in an area close to the
borders with Niger and Algeria. The Tuareg fighters,
members of the self-proclaimed Azawad National
Liberation Movement, assert that they are seeking to
drive the Government out of several towns in the North
where Tuareg communities are dominant. The attacks
come at a particularly sensitive time for Mali, with the
approach of presidential and legislative elections and a
major constitutional reform referendum. This is further
complicated by the drought throughout the region and
the worsening food situation currently affecting Mali,
Niger and Chad.
In neighbouring Niger, President Mahamadou
Issoufou voiced concern on 22 January over the danger

12-21580

of similar violence occurring in his country, and
affirmed his Government’s determination to avert the
spread of Tuareg attacks to Niger. Although no recent
attacks have been reported, there is growing concern
that the resurgent Tuareg rebellion in Mali could in fact
spread to Niger. The security equilibrium in the
northern regions of Niger and Mali is especially
volatile due to the enhanced presence and heightened
activity there of the Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb
group and other criminal networks that use these vast,
poorly guarded and largely desert territories as safe
havens and training grounds for their illicit operations.
If we are to be able to deal with the challenges in
the Sahel region and to have a comprehensive, longlasting impact, we will need to put in place a
mechanism that would bring together all the affected
countries and major outside actors in a coordinated
manner to discuss the issues and devise solutions.
Other countries in the neighbourhood outside the Sahel
region certainly need to be brought into the security
and development discourse.
As we all know, one of the obstacles to increased
cooperation is structural. African and United Nations
efforts to deal with the problems of the region are
spread over many groupings and organizations. For
example, Nigeria and Niger belong to ECOWAS, Chad
is a member of the Economic Community of Central
African States, and Mauritania and Algeria are in the
Arab-Maghreb Union. In addition, none of the existing
United Nations presences in the region — the United
Nations Office for West Africa, the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa and the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya — has a mandate
that covers the broad region of the Sahel and the
multiple challenges confronted by the countries
concerned. Despite these limitations, we have been
encouraged by the readiness of all the countries inside
and outside the region, as well as regional
organizations and the United Nations system, to work
together to develop a more comprehensive and
coherent approach.
Let me conclude by emphasizing the urgency of
the deteriorating security and humanitarian situation in
the Sahel. It is critical that the international community
respond to the strong and consistent calls of the
concerned countries to support ongoing initiatives. As I
have noted, some of the problems are directly related
to the fall of the Al-Qadhafi regime in Libya, but the
mission’s interlocutors emphasized that most of the

3

S/PV.6709

problems are long-standing ones, and current draught
conditions make it obvious that the overall situation
could deteriorate quickly. On 29 January, at the African
Union summit, a ministerial-level meeting is planned
to review this situation and to develop approaches to
deal with the many problems of the region. The report
of the December mission will be discussed at that
meeting. We will endeavour to keep the Council
informed of developments in the region as time
progresses.
The President: I thank Mr. Pascoe for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to those representatives of
the Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his briefing
on the report of the assessment mission to the Sahel
(S/2012/42). The report provides a basis for discussing
the challenges facing the region in the aftermath of the
Libyan crisis.
Pakistan is extremely concerned at the report’s
conclusion that the humanitarian and economic
challenges confronting the Sahel region have been
exacerbated by the fallout from the Libyan crisis. The
influx of returnees has placed an added burden on the
already strained situation of host communities that had
been facing food insecurity, shrinking economic
opportunities, and lack of health and social
infrastructure. This has also resulted in the loss of
remittances that were so vital to the economies of these
countries.
Although the report does not quantify the
economic impact of these factors, what is apparent is
that the countries of the Sahel have become unwitting
victims of the Libyan crisis. Therefore, there is an
urgent need to redress the economic impact of the
crisis on these countries through an appropriate
assistance package.
As regards the security impact of the Libyan
crisis on the Sahel region, the report confirms our fears
that large quantities of weapons and ammunition may
have been smuggled into the region from Libya, which
could further fuel the activities of criminal and terrorist
groups. Although there is still no confirmed evidence,
man-portable air defence systems (MANPADS) may
also have found their way into the region. If that were
the case, these weapons could fall into the hands of

4

terrorists, with potentially devastating consequences.
This should be a matter for alarm to the countries of
the region, as well as to members of the Council.
It is obvious that, despite the caution advocated
by some members of the Council as the crisis was
unfolding in Libya, its implications were totally
overlooked. The region has now been left to deal with
its aftermath. Immediate steps must be taken to address
the problem of the proliferation of all types of
weapons. In this regard, we look forward to the report of
the Panel of Experts on Libya, pursuant to paragraph 5
of resolution 2017 (2011), in particular concerning
MANPADS.
The report further highlights the fact that there
has been an increase in terrorist activity and organized
crime in the Sahel. The possible establishment of
linkages among various terrorist groups could be a
destabilizing factor for the region. We support steps
being taken at the national and regional levels to
counter that trend. There is also a need to build the
capacities of these countries to deal with these
challenges.
The need for better coordination between various
mechanisms for addressing the crisis in the region is
underscored in the report. We would appreciate
receiving more details about how the existing United
Nations presence is assisting the Sahel countries. On
the whole, it would have been better if the mission had
restricted the scope of its work to the impact of the
Libyan crisis on the region, which is of immediate
concern to the Security Council. The long-term
development problems and their solutions require more
detailed analysis and examination by relevant agencies.
The Security Council is not the appropriate body to
discuss those aspects.
In conclusion, we would like to highlight one
recommendation in the report that is intriguing to us.
The report talks about the application of the principle
of “hot pursuit”. We are not aware if there is any such
agreed principle in international law, and its
appearance in a United Nations document is not
understandable. We believe that the introduction of any
such notion will have negative implications, not only
for the stability of the region but also for the
development of legal norms. We would therefore ask
the Secretariat to remove that recommendation from
the report.

12-21580

S/PV.6709

Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his statement and for
the assessment work that has been carried out by the
United Nations, in close cooperation with the African
Union and on the basis of the needs expressed by the
authorities of the States of region.
The assessment report’s (see S/2012/42)
presentation of the impact of the Libyan crisis on the
Sahel region leads to two observations: first, about the
seriousness of the large number of security and
humanitarian challenges in the region and, secondly,
about the need for the United Nations to adopt a more
integrated approach to help the States of the region to
overcome those challenges. Let me turn first to the
challenges for the region.
In both the humanitarian and security fronts, the
States of the Sahel region face recurring problems that
require addressing with greater coordination and
solutions focused on the underlying issues. Population
movements, which often include migrants returning to
their countries of origin following the crisis in Libya,
as well as the spread of weapons in the region are, as
has been pointed out, additional destabilizing factors in
an already fragile region.
While the problems of the Sahel clearly predate
the Libyan crisis, they have nevertheless not been the
object of sufficiently effective responses. Among the
underlying problems are recurring food crises, acts of
terrorism by Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and
Boko Haram, and trafficking in weapons, drugs and
even human beings — the common denominator being
that they all concern issues that cross borders and, to
varying degrees concern all the countries of the Sahel.
Quite often, States lack the resources to address
problems beyond their borders that contribute to
destabilization in their region. In that regard, it is
especially relevant that the Security Council address
the question of the Sahel in all its aspects, which is
something it has never done.
Given the cross-border threat of those threats, it
is crucial that the States of region carry out cooperation
in the areas of security and development, in particular
when it comes to border controls. Solutions must first
of all come from the States themselves. The latest
ministerial conference held in Nouakchott this week
shows that this process is under way. The international
community should act to help by supporting the
Governments of the region and providing assistance for

12-21580

their initiatives. The matter of the crucial role of
coordination leads me to my second point, namely, the
role of the United Nations.
We are convinced that the United Nations has a
role to play in the Sahel. At this moment, no regional
organization in Africa brings together all the countries
concerned by the problems of the Sahel. Only the
United Nations, by virtue of its universality and
neutrality, includes all the States of the Sahel and
neighbouring States of the region. It is therefore
essential that the United Nations adopt a more
integrated approach internally to help the States of the
region in the areas of security and development. It
should do so by aligning its agencies, funds and
programmes to work in the same direction. Moreover,
we believe that such a strategy should not entail the
establishment of additional bureaucratic mechanisms.
Optimally, it should rely on, and strengthen, existing
structures. In that regard, we call on the Secretariat to
keep the Council informed of efforts made in that
regard.
I should also like to recall that in 2011 the
European Union devoted significant short- and longterm budgetary resources to a strategy for the Sahel
that provided for many concrete partnership projects
focused on development, security and political dialogue.
The European Union is therefore committed. It has
appointed a coordinator and is currently placing every
tool at his disposal, while making national ownership
the guiding principle. In its approach, the United
Nations should take into account the European Union
initiative, so as to avoid pointless duplication. Only in
that way, will we be able to ensure that the efforts of
the United Nations are adapted to the realities on the
ground and the efforts of other partners in the
international community.
In conclusion, I should like to point out that
France has just circulated a draft statement to the press,
which we hope will later be adopted in order to
demonstrate the commitment of the Security Council
on this issue.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for scheduling
this briefing on West Africa and the Sahel. I would also
like to thank Lynn Pascoe for his briefing on the
security situation in the region. I welcome the renewed
international focus on this issue, which the Council
will discuss again next month.

5

S/PV.6709

The issues affecting the countries of the Sahel are
complex and have many root causes. Indeed, as Mr. Ian
Martin told the Council yesterday (see S/PV.6707),
many predate the Libyan conflict. Addressing those
problems will require a coordinated response. We are
grateful for the work of the assessment mission in
bringing together States and regional bodies to share
knowledge and discuss solutions. The nature of the
challenges facing those countries means they will not
be resolved without their working together. In that
spirit, and despite recent differences, it is also vital that
the United Nations, the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) stand
together with the countries of the Sahel.
The Council must focus its efforts where our
expertise lies, that is, on issues of peace and security.
We must bring to bear the expertise of the rest of the
United Nations family in delivering humanitarian
support to affected States.
It is clear that the Libyan crisis has impacted on
the different countries of the Sahel to different degrees.
However, weapons proliferation, illicit trafficking of
goods and food insecurity are common challenges to
them all. I would like to make three points on those
issues.
First, there has undoubtedly been an upsurge in
weapons proliferation across the Sahel. The main cause
of that has been the gradual return to Mali and Niger of
Tuareg rebels who fought for the Al-Qadhafi regime.
The role of ECOWAS is crucial in mitigating the
impact of that proliferation. I encourage ECOWAS to
continue its efforts to deal with the challenges posed by
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons, and
to aid those displaced by the crisis to return home.
Secondly, on trafficking of illicit goods, it is clear
that, regardless of events in Libya, the Sahel is seen as
an attractive location for traffickers due to the low
risks of monitoring and apprehension by State bodies. I
welcome the regional judicial platform as a mechanism
for cross-border judicial cooperation, as well as the
national efforts of the affected States. But more
bilateral support for capacity-building is needed if
those countries are to develop the relevant institutions
for tackling this issue.
Thirdly, in a region that suffers from food
shortages on an annual basis, the crisis in Libya has
been an exacerbating factor. We call on all
Governments in the region to facilitate continued

6

access for all humanitarian actors. In turn, the United
Nations must, with its development partners and
regional organizations, ensure that it coordinates its
response appropriately and works with regional
Governments to address long-term drivers of food
insecurity.
Finally, the United Kingdom is committed to
working with the Nigerian Government to support their
efforts towards the effective implementation of a
comprehensive strategy to tackle security threats in
Nigeria. The British Government has condemned the
recent terrorist attacks in Kano, where more than
200 people were killed, and is deeply concerned by the
increasing number of attacks in Nigeria claimed by the
Islamist sect Boko Haram.
Attacks have predominantly affected northern
Nigeria, and targets over the past year have included
Government institutions, security forces and places of
worship, as well as international organizations. Those
included an attack on a United Nations building in
Abuja in August 2011, which killed 23 people.
The United Kingdom has shared expertise on
counter-terrorism
policy,
doctrine
and
legal
frameworks, and has provided assistance with specific
capabilities, such as managing the consequences of
terrorist attacks. We will continue to support Nigerians’
efforts to counter terrorism in their country and the
region.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Like others, I
want to thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe
for his briefing. I would also like to place on record
our appreciation for the Secretary-General’s initiatives
to depute an integrated technical assessment team to
study the impact of the Libyan crisis on the Sahel
region for the mission’s comprehensive report (see
S/2012/42).
Military operations carried out ostensibly for the
protection of civilians have clearly resulted in millions
of civilians in West and Central Africa and the
Maghreb being adversely affected. The report has
brought out in considerable detail the multidimensional
adverse impact of the conflict in the security, economic
and humanitarian areas. In a relatively short period of
time, the countries of the Sahel region have had to
contend with an influx of nearly half a million
returnees, as well as with a large inflow of arms and
ammunition. Given that each returnee supported in
excess of seven individuals back home, some 3 million

12-21580

S/PV.6709

people have lost their source of livelihood. The loss of
remittances and high unemployment among young
people have further exacerbated food insecurity and the
nutrition crisis.
As the report notes, in some areas terrorist groups,
including Al-Qaida, are filling the humanitarian vacuum.
Additionally, the loss of tourism, the suspension of
investment, increased expenditure on defence and the
strain on basic social services such as health and
education have all stretched the resources of
Governments in the region.
Most of the countries in the Sahel region have
limited institutional capacity and resources to deal with
such a multitude of problems. In addition, several
problems, such as the proliferation of arms, terrorism,
illicit drug trafficking, border management and others,
have a regional dimension and need to be tackled
through regional cooperation.
We therefore support the recommendations made
by the assessment team and believe that a
comprehensive strategy needs to be developed and
implemented at the national, regional and international
levels. The primary focus of such a strategy should be
to support the capacity-building of national institutions
in the security and socio-economic fields. The
countries concerned should implement all legal and
administrative measures to combat terrorism and
organized crime in accordance with resolution 1373
(2001) and other relevant regional and international
instruments. United Nations agencies, including the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force,
should extend technical and financial support for the
implementation of those measures.
At the same time, development assistance to and
cooperation with the countries of the region should be
expanded to support the Governments’ multisectoral
reintegration initiatives, with a strong focus on conflict
prevention, social cohesion and protection, as well as
on livelihood support for returnees. Employmentintensive development programmes will go a long way
towards reintegrating returnees with the local
communities and preventing them from becoming an
easy catch for terrorist groups.
It is also necessary to support the regional
initiatives of the Economic Community of Western
African States (ECOWAS) and the Economic
Community of Central African States. Technical

12-21580

support should be extended to them to develop
coherent strategies for transnational problems. In that
connection, we welcome the steps being taken by
regional and subregional organizations such as
ECOWAS, which include regional plans of action to
address illicit drug trafficking, organized crime and
drug abuse, and we believe that their reach should be
expanded to cover all countries in the Sahel that have
been affected by the Libyan conflict. The African
Centre for the Study and Research on Terrorism should
also be strengthened to provide for cooperation among
member States and regional mechanisms.
The African Union (AU) was sidelined in the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). The
consequences of that conflict are, however, being
suffered by the countries of Africa. The lesson to be
learned from this is clear. The United Nations must
partner with the AU in the resolution of African
conflicts. With respect to the strategy for addressing
the impact of the Libyan crisis on the Sahel, the United
Nations must integrate its plans with the efforts of the
AU. The relevant United Nations agencies should
support the regional and subregional organizations and
should assist them with capacity-building and in
monitoring their implementation. The United Nations
offices in the region, including the United Nations
Office for West Africa, the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa and the United Nations Office
to the African Union should look into practical and
concrete ways to strengthen the efforts of national
Governments and regional institutions in order to
enhance coherence and coordination.
The onus is on the Council to ensure that the
Libyan crisis does not further exacerbate the fragile
security and socio-economic conditions in the Sahel
region.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Pascoe for his thorough
briefing. We recognize the great significance of the
assessment mission, and in particular, as the author of
the report (see S/2012/42) said, the fact that the
mission took place in cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations.
We carefully analysed the document and the
recommendations it contains, which confirm that the
consequences of the Libyan crisis, the real scope of
which is only beginning to come to light, are a serious
threat to security and stability in the entire region.

7

S/PV.6709

Moreover, the negative effect is also evident beyond its
borders and not only on the African continent.
We are especially concerned by the uncontrolled
spread of weapons in Libya and beyond its borders as a
result of the conflict. The theft of weapons, including
man-portable air defence systems (MANPADs), from
Libyan army warehouses and their further
trans-shipment abroad, sharply increases the risk of
terrorism. That is one concrete but not exhaustive
example among those that are cited in the report before
us today.
That situation persists even as the Libyan
authorities have no opportunity to fully control the
situation in their country or to prevent weapons from
falling into the hands of terrorist elements. We recall
that, according to current assessments, as many as
5,000 MANPADs are unaccounted for. We must
therefore conclude that, given the regional realities —
military and political instability, socio-economic
problems, lack of border control and smuggling — it is
only a matter of time before Libyan MANPADs appear
in the hands of terrorists and on the black market.
Resolution 2017 (2011), adopted upon Russia’s
initiative, is aimed at preventing those risks and
threats, and lays the foundation for collective action by
the entire international community. In that context, in
interacting with regional players and in solving the
problems that confront the countries of the Sahel in
this post-hot phase of the Libyan crisis, it is necessary
to exploit the potential of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) to support the initiatives of the
Sahel countries in countering threats to their security.
Of course, full and effective implementation of
resolution 2017 (2011) is very important. We look
forward to the timely preparation of the report of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), which we hope will contain specific, resultsoriented recommendations. Also, bearing in mind
separate groundwork in the report of the assessment
mission, it is our view that Secretariat entities,
including the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and other United Nations agencies, will
make a significant contribution to preparing materials
for the Sanctions Committee.
The Sahel mission identified one other very
serious problem — the mass exodus from Libya of
migrants from African countries, which complicates
the already complex socio-economic situation in the

8

region. Migrants in motion can become easy prey for
criminal groups, especially those advocating extremist
views. We need an urgent programme to reintegrate
migrants. That is a complex challenge for the Sahel
countries and regional agencies.
The concerted efforts of regional authorities and
the support of the international community, in
particular that of the United Nations, are important to
countering the threat. Coordinated action by the United
Nations system, based on national priorities, is
essential.
In developing a strategy to combat the
consequences of the Libyan crisis, a critical and
decisive role must be played by States of the region.
With respect to the report’s idea of establishing
some type of framework mechanism to help Sahel
countries deal with security problems, decisions in that
regard must be taken by the States of the region
themselves, with due respect for their sovereignty.
Finally, the threats unleashed like a genie from a
bottle by the Libyan conflict are the fruit of the use-offorce scenario elected by some members of the
international community to resolve the Libyan conflict
and of the arbitrary interpretation of the provisions of
resolution 1973 (2011), which is an object lesson for
us all.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by thanking Mr. Lynn Pascoe for
the report he has introduced (see S/2012/42) and, at the
same time, underscore the joint work carried out by the
United Nations and the African Union through the
assessment mission and the preparation of the report
before us. It is clear proof of the necessary cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
The aspirations of the Libyan people to make
their country into a democracy based on the rule of law
and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
for its citizens ran up against the despotism of Colonel
Al-Qadhafi’s dictatorship. Unfortunately, the crisis
unleashed by the violent response of the regime
negatively affected not only the Libyan population but
also neighbouring countries and the region in general.
The numerous manifestations and dimensions of
the impact of the Libyan crisis on the countries of the
Sahel region continue to be of concern. Therefore, we
believe it necessary to take prompt action in support of
the efforts and initiatives of States and regional and

12-21580

S/PV.6709

subregional organizations to resolve the security
problems related to the situation.
The report of the assessment team offers specific
recommendations, a careful analysis of which will
enable us to move forward in formulating initiatives
and programmes based on the principle of national
ownership, the establishment of a clear division of
responsibilities
among
stakeholders,
effective
coordination and coherence in activities, and the
identification of clear priorities.
A return to normalcy in Libya and a prompt
economic recovery are critical if the actions of the
Organization in the Sahel region are to be effective and
conducive to finding sustainable solutions. The entire
United Nations system, in particular the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, must remain committed to
achieving a prosperous and peaceful Libya, which in
turn will be a factor of stability and well-being for the
entire region.
As pointed out in the mission’s report, the crisis
in Libya further exacerbated an already precarious
security situation in the Sahel region. A number of
factors that threaten the stability of the countries in the
subregion have deteriorated. The Organization as a
whole must act to provide immediate assistance in
order to resolve current problems and at the same time
contribute to long-term solutions to structural problems.
Returnees and the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons are among the main repercussions on
which we need to focus our attention. As emphasized
by the authorities of the countries of the Sahel region,
the priority must be on establishing, developing and
improving the capacities of national institutions and
regional mechanisms to resolve these problems.
The human rights of returnees must be respected,
and they must be given economic alternatives that will
enable them to reintegrate themselves in their home
countries. At the same time, we must promote an
improvement of social conditions in the communities
so that the impact of returnees on the economies of the
countries in the region will be minimized, paying
particular attention to the relationship between security
and development.
The proliferation of small arms and light weapons
is a concern that requires decisive international
cooperation to achieve a sustainable solution.
Strengthening border control by providing technological

12-21580

and financial resources; establishing effective judicial
cooperation agreements; the monitoring, marking and
tracing of small arms and light weapons; exchange of
information and assistance in implementing applicable
international norms in this area are specific areas
where we must prioritize our action in order to prevent
an exacerbation of these risk factors that could further
threaten the security of the States in the region.
The magnitude of the threats to security in the
countries of the subregion described in the report
requires the adoption of initiatives that recognize the
nexus between development and security in the
countries of the subregion. Such strategies will also
require the leadership of national authorities and close
cooperation with the international stakeholders, in
particular the United Nations through its offices to the
African Union, in Western Africa and Central Africa,
as well as such regional and subregional actors as the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States.
Mr. Berger (Germany): First of all, I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
briefings to the Security Council on the situation in the
Sahel. I would also like to welcome the report of the
assessment mission to the region (see S/2012/42).
The report confirms a worrying picture of the
situation in the Sahel region and related security,
economic and humanitarian concerns. Responding to
the crisis, Germany is currently carrying out financial
and technical cooperation projects in the region in the
amount of approximately $10 million. We are
particularly concerned that the underlying structural
problems pre-dating the conflict in Libya — mainly
underdevelopment, migration and climate-related
effects — have not or not sufficiently been addressed.
A first analysis of the existing national and
regional measures to tackle those issues shows the
need for enhanced cooperation among the affected
States in the region and a better coordination of the
international community’s assistance. Measures to
overcome those shortcomings should address both
immediate requirements and the structural deficits.
They should include support for the ongoing initiatives
of Governments in the region and the strengthening of
existing regional mechanisms.
Continuous dialogue with countries like Algeria
and Nigeria in security matters is important.
Cooperation mechanisms with the new authorities in

9

S/PV.6709

Libya should be further strengthened. All international
activities to destroy and control weapons in Libya, to
which Germany contributes, are highly relevant.
Renewed interest in regional cooperation among the
Maghreb countries might also offer new perspectives.

border organized crime and terrorism in the region. The
negative impact of the Libyan situation will continue to
grow, posing a sustained threat to peace and stability in
the region. China expresses its grave concern in this
regard.

At the same time, the coordination of the
different and ongoing United Nations activities in the
region should be improved. Such measures to address
different shortcomings should also be conceived in
consideration of the European Union Strategy for
Security and Development in the Sahel. That Strategy,
which focuses mainly on Mali, Mauritania and Niger,
combines development and security issues and will be
funded with an additional €150 million. The Strategy
will be implemented in close cooperation with the
Economic Community of West African States and the
African Union.

In order to eliminate those negative impacts, the
countries of the region have made positive efforts to
assist their own nationals to return and integrate into
local communities, and have worked to strengthen
border control and cooperation in justice and law
enforcement. The Economic Community of West
African States and other subregional organizations
have made full use of existing mechanisms in
coordinating the relevant efforts of the countries in the
region. Chine expresses its appreciation in this regard.

In that regard, we welcome the fact that the
African Union participated in the United Nations joint
assessment mission, and we appreciate the work done
by the mission. We feel that in the future, the United
Nations Office for West Africa, which is already
working closely with many countries of the region,
could increase its focus on security threats in the whole
Sahel area.
In order to create added value to initiatives
already under way, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General could contribute to encouraging
regional cooperation among the Sahel countries in the
fight against terrorism and organized crime, in close
coordination with concerned African regional
organizations, especially ECOWAS, and other
international partners.
Finally, I would like to welcome the inclusion of
the topic of the impacts of climate change on the
security environment in the report of the assessment
mission. We support the draft press statement
submitted by the representative of France.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe
for his briefing.
The Libyan conflict has had a serious impact on
the political, security, economic and humanitarian
situation in the Sahel region. The large-scale return of
foreign nationals has created heavy economic and
social burdens for the countries in the region. The
proliferation of weapons has further encouraged cross-

10

In the process of addressing the Libyan issue, the
concerns of Africans should receive due attention.
Africa’s views should be duly respected. The negative
impact of the Libyan conflict should not be shouldered
by Africa alone. The international community should
provide active assistance to the countries and
organizations of the region, seriously consider and
effectively implement the relevant recommendations of
the report of the assessment mission (see S/2012/42),
and in that process enhance communication with the
countries and regional organizations. Relevant United
Nations agencies should give full play to their
respective expertise to gain more international support
for the region.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his briefing. The
United States would also like to thank Special
Representative Djinnit for his continued leadership in
the United Nations Office for West Africa and in the
Sahel region. We greatly appreciate the work that went
into the United Nations inter-agency mission to the
Sahel and its subsequent report (see S/2012/42).
The report provides a significant number of
recommendations for our collective consideration, and
while they are all worthy of deliberation, today I will
focus specifically on those that relate to arms
proliferation and terrorism, the humanitarian situation
and food insecurity.
While there have been measured successes, we
remain concerned about the threats posed by the illicit
trafficking of arms and by terrorism, and we welcome
the recommendations on those challenges put forth in
the report of the assessment mission. We concur that

12-21580

S/PV.6709

we must address the situation at the national, regional
and international levels through an overarching
framework that includes all of the affected countries.
The United Nations, along with the African Union and
other relevant organizations, could play a greater role
in coordinating those efforts.
We will continue to promote improved regional
efforts to combat arms proliferation and terrorism, and
we will tailor our assistance to facilitate that process.
For example, we are fully committed to working
actively in the Global Counter-terrorism Forum Sahel
regional capacity-building working group, which we
co-chair. Additionally, we are engaged in capacitybuilding efforts to fight terrorism through the Trans
Sahara Counter-Terrorism Partnership, which is
designed to support partner efforts to contain and
marginalize terrorist organizations.
Terrorist operators in the Sahel region, such as
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM), continue to
concern us. AQIM has demonstrated its ability to carry
out criminal activities and attacks against soft targets
across significant distances. AQIM has also solidified
camps in isolated areas in northern Mali. We are also
deeply concerned about violence attributed to Boko
Haram.
Sahelian countries are making progress in their
counter-terrorism capabilities. Algeria, Mali, Mauritania
and Niger have increased pressure on AQIM and
developed more effective regional responses to deal
with the threat. Additionally, Chad has increased
efforts to disrupt AQIM attempts to transit its territory.
We recognize that the Libyan crisis has brought a
new set of cross-border challenges relating to security,
including increased illicit weapons trafficking, that
pose a threat to the stability of the region and must be
addressed. We are concerned about the porous nature
of the border between Chad, Niger and Libya, and the
risk of weapons — including man-portable air defence
systems (MANPADS) — moving across those borders.
Those weapons in the hands of terrorists could further
destabilize already fragile areas of the Sahel and
surrounding regions.
My Government, in cooperation with the United
Kingdom, the Netherlands, Canada, France, Italy and
Germany, is currently expanding assistance efforts for
weapons security, which will help to survey and
inventory all known weapons and ammunition storage
sites in Libya and destroy MANPADS and other

12-21580

weapons and munitions, as approved by the Libyan
authorities. We urge regional Governments to support
the Government of Libya’s efforts to identify, secure
and destroy loose MANPADS and other light weapons,
which are at risk of being smuggled across the Libyan
border into the Sahel region. Furthermore, we fully
support the efforts of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya to engage on this issue, including its
critical work with Libyan and other relevant officials
on border security.
The report of the assessment mission cites a
growing concern regarding the humanitarian and
economic impacts the crisis has had on the Sahel
region. The impacts are serious and demand the
continued attention of the international community. We
are interested in hearing ideas for how the United
Nations and regional organizations can strengthen their
efforts to alleviate these challenges and prevent further
humanitarian crises from emerging.
The United States has worked to facilitate the
return of African migrants from Libya. Last year we
provided more than $27 million through the
International Organization for Migration (IOM) for
returnees from Libya. We note that the report
recommends support for IOM’s continued efforts to
assist Governments of the region with the reintegration
of their citizens, and we urge Governments to help in
this time of need.
Regarding food insecurity, we agree with the
report’s recommendation that greater steps need to be
taken to address the deteriorating food situation in the
region in both the short and long terms. UNICEF is
warning that more than 1 million children across the
Sahel may face severe malnutrition in 2012. We
recognize that the return of individuals from Libya into
the Sahel only exacerbates the issue. Families now
have more mouths to feed in a situation where food
security is becoming more problematic and remittances
have decreased.
The United States is mobilizing resources to
address the food shortfalls. Last year, we provided over
$23 million in humanitarian assistance to affected
communities in the Sahel for agriculture and food
security, economic recovery and nutrition programmes.
In addition, we provide close to $77 million a year for
food assistance, economic recovery and livelihood
support in the Sahel. At the end of last year, the United
States made an additional $58 million pledge to the

11

S/PV.6709

World Food Programme (WFP) in Chad and a
$7.5 million contribution to WFP in Niger, as well as
over $2 million to Catholic Relief Services in Mali, to
meet the emergency food needs of more than half a
million people in the region.
We must all keep in mind the potential
humanitarian crises that could emerge should the region
become destabilized and terrorists able to operate with
impunity. My Government is working with the leaders
of the Sahel countries to address that challenge through
a number of political, social and economic reform
efforts, including managing successful democratic
transitions and countering terrorism, and we look
forward to the Council’s continued vigilance on these
complex issues.
Mr. Cabral (Portugal): Let me start by thanking
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his briefing
and for outlining the main aspects of the report of the
assessment mission (see S/2012/42). The report is in
our opinion a very good basis for a serious reflection
on the nature and scope of the problems affecting the
Sahel region, as well as on how to ensure multisectoral
and integrated responses from the international
community.
As the report clearly states, problems in the Sahel
pre-date the Libyan crisis and have, for some time now,
deserved the attention of the international community.
As a clear example of the linkage between security and
development, the situation in Libya has not altered the
nature of the crisis in the Sahel, even though it has
exacerbated existing challenges in States with limited
response capacities, mainly through the sudden influx
of large numbers of returnees and the proliferation of
weapons and ammunition.
Out of its concern over the risk that proliferation
of weapons and ammunitions presents to the stability
and security of both Libya and the Sahel, the Security
Council adopted resolution 2017 (2011), which tasks
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) to submit a report to the Council on the
proposals to counter this threat. The report is expected
in March.
In resolution 2022 (2011), the Security Council
reinforced the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) mandate in this field. We believe that
the integrated concept that guided the assessment
mission should also apply to these various initiatives

12

and ensure that they complement each other in the
most effective way.
The report identifies a number of national and
regional measures that could improve the situation
throughout the region and address a number of
concerns. Libya is still in a post-revolutionary transition
phase. We hope that the stabilization of the country, its
economic recovery and regional reintegration will have
a positive impact throughout the Sahel.
Therefore, it is essential that the international
community and the Council support the Libyan
authorities in successfully addressing a number of
pressing concerns and challenges. Among those are the
adoption of a migration law that also tackles the many
issues afflicting African migrant workers in Libya; the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
armed groups, together with the creation of professional
security and military forces; and the establishment of
an effective border management system. Another
important step would be for Libya to participate in the
various regional initiatives dealing with cross-border
and transversal problems in the Sahel region.
On the specific case of organized crime and
terrorism networks, the report already includes useful
data on existing trends. However, we must further
develop our understanding of the linkages and overlaps
between different forms of organized crime, and
between organized crime networks and terrorist groups
operating in the region. Are they necessarily
juxtaposed? Are there conflicts over resources? How
have the recruitment strategies of terrorist groups
evolved recently? We believe that these and other
questions call for integrated threat analysis, linking
concerns related to conflict prevention, State-building
and terrorism-prevention efforts.
The United Nations system should, in our
opinion, take a more proactive, rather than reactive,
approach to extremism and terrorism issues, making a
more creative use of existing tools, including the
special political missions. We very much endorse the
approach chosen to link the various dimensions of the
problem and to address the root causes of instability in
the Sahel region. Some of those problems require quick
responses, as they may potentially expand beyond the
region or aggravate an already serious humanitarian
and security situation, but others require long-term
strategies and instruments.

12-21580

S/PV.6709

We think, therefore, that any follow-up to the
report should clearly identify which measures may have
an immediate effect — for instance, on humanitarian
assistance, arms proliferation or border control — and
which ones work essentially in the long run, especially
those aimed at economic recovery, youth employment
and capacity-building. Such measures will help us in
understanding how the different types of measures can
best be employed and combined to promote sustainable
development and security in the region.
The problems identified here are also crossborder and therefore cannot be tackled by national
responses alone. We value the efforts of individual
countries, but the emphasis should be clearly placed on
the development of regional capacities. There are
already regional action plans approved by regional
organizations — namely, the African Union and
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) — which should be put into practice to
deal with the problems affecting the Sahel. We should
also encourage bilateral and multilateral ad hoc
arrangements between Sahel countries for pooling
resources of border control and combating terrorism
and organized crime. In this respect, we believe that
United Nations regional offices — the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa — and the relevant United
Nations missions in the region can play a key role in
bringing together the relevant actors and promoting
concrete initiatives.

and the wider West African region, scheduled for
February under the Togolese presidency. On our side,
Portugal stands ready to continue to contribute to
international efforts, here in New York and in other
forums in which Portugal participates, aimed at
promoting a more collaborative and integrated
approach to the challenges faced in the Sahel region.
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs Lynn Pascoe for his briefing.
The situation in the Sahel region was of great
concern to my delegation even before the impact of the
Libyan crisis last year. We therefore welcome the
initiative of the Secretary-General to dispatch a
mission to the Sahel to assess the impact of the Libyan
crisis and the security situation in the Sahel region.
We also welcome the support that the assessment
mission received from the countries of the region,
particularly the authorities of the five countries visited
and from relevant regional organizations, particularly
the Economic Community of West African States and
United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA). We
commend the commitment of the Governments of the
countries affected by the Libyan crisis, which are
already taking steps to address the security and
humanitarian challenges.

Coherence among the various initiatives of
international support for the Sahel region should also
be among our central concerns. I would mention, in
particular, the European Union Strategy for the Sahel,
which seeks to link the security and development
dimensions through a number of measures that, to a
large extent, coincide with those mentioned in the
report. Creating mechanisms of coordination that
encompass this and other international initiatives
would certainly contribute to avoiding duplication and
to a more efficient use of international support.

The Sahel region has become a corridor in which
illegal activities — including drug trafficking, the
trafficking of small arms and light weapons, terrorism
and transnational organized crime — are on the rise,
exacerbating existing socio-economic challenges in a
region in which most countries are listed as least
developed countries. In addition, the Sahel region is
facing extreme drought and flooding as a result of
climate change. For all these reasons, my delegation
believes that the United Nations should support all
efforts to assist the countries in the Sahel that share
these cross-border challenges and seriously consider the
situation in the Sahel, including the recommendations
of the assessment mission.

Continued instability in the Sahel has
implications that go far beyond the countries most
directly affected. Therefore, from the perspective of the
United Nations continued involvement in monitoring
the situation and the impact of these challenges in the
Sahel and in the wider region that stretches from the
Atlantic to the Indian Oceans, we look forward to the
Council debate on transnational challenges in the Sahel

Regarding the humanitarian situation, Guatemala
is concerned that, according to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
20 million people in the Sahel require humanitarian
assistance, particularly in Mauritania, Niger, Burkina
Faso and Chad. We believe that early warning systems
to prevent a food and nutrition crisis need to be
strengthened. It is important that all donor countries

12-21580

13

S/PV.6709

maintain their support for humanitarian activities
provided through OCHA, and for the strategy on
preparedness for a food crisis in the Sahel, launched by
the inter-agency standing committee in Dakar on
15 December 2011.

of immediate importance, at the national, regional and
international levels, and thus contribute to
strengthening the capacity of the United Nations
system to assist countries of the Sahel region on
security issues.

As to the security situation, we are concerned by
the proliferation and illicit trafficking of small arms
and other weapons, drug trafficking, and the expansion
and actions of terrorist groups. Guatemala agrees with
the conclusion of the report (see S/2012/42) that most
countries in the Sahel region cannot address on their
own the threat of transnational organized crime, in
particular the activities of such terrorist groups as
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and Boko Haram.

Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): Like other speakers,
I would like to welcome Mr. Pascoe and thank him for
his briefing.

Of course, we support the strengthening of
existing security mechanisms and strategies at the
regional level. What is new here is not the illicit
trafficking of small arms and light weapons, which was
already taking place in the region, but the type of
weapons that are in circulation now — no longer just
small arms but also heavy weapons such as shoulderfired surface-to-air missiles, whose greater destructive
power increases the risk to the entire region. The
weapons reported to be coming out of Libya are, given
the proximity of the borders, circulating throughout the
Sahel region and could easily fall into the hands of the
criminal and terrorist groups operating in the area.
We deem it urgent to effectively implement
Security Council resolution 2017 (2011) and for
UNOWA and the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya to continue their communication and cooperation.
We should also continue to support the countries
of the Sahel region in complying with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council aimed at combating
terrorism, in particular resolutions 1373 (2001) and
1624 (2005), and implement the United Nations Global
Counter-terrorism Strategy, adopted in 2006.
In conclusion, the economic crisis, migration,
drug trafficking, arms trafficking, organized crime and
terrorism have been exacerbated by the crisis in Libya
and could take root in the Sahel region, creating a
lethal scenario of insecurity and instability at a time
when the region is facing an economic contraction
brought on by various factors.
We therefore believe that the Security Council
should consider the recommendations of the report of
the assessment mission, especially those identified as

14

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
initiative to deploy the United Nations inter-agency
assessment mission to the Sahel region, as well as for
the comprehensive report (see S/2012/42) that the
mission has submitted. We are encouraged by the fact
that that initiative was widely appreciated and that the
mission found among the civil and political leaders of
the region a remarkable openness to engage on the
challenges confronting them.
The analysis carried out by the mission with
respect to the political, security, humanitarian and
socio-economic implications of the crisis in Libya for
neighbouring countries are illustrative of the need to
strengthen cooperation, including through the
development of a common approach to the Sahel
region. We agree with the mission’s view that any
immediate long-term strategy to mitigate the impact of
the Libyan crisis should take into account the root
causes of the problems in the region. The
recommendations of the mission in that regard require
serious consideration.
It is commendable that the countries of the region
have established a number of national and regional
programmes and mechanisms to address the security
concerns in the region. At the same time, as the
mission concluded, most of the countries in the region
cannot overcome threats in isolation. Therefore, the
initiatives undertaken by the Governments of the
countries affected, as well as the efforts of the African
Union and the Economic Community of West African
States and other relevant organizations, should be
supported by the United Nations and the broader
international community.
Serious attention should be given to appeals from
Sahel countries, which need capacity-building and
funds to counter the threats and address the challenges.
The destabilizing effects on the region of the illicit
proliferation of small arms and light weapons requires
particular consideration, apart from the direct impact
on the security situation in the countries of the Sahel.

12-21580

S/PV.6709

Nor should we underestimate the risk of the spread of
weapons beyond the region, with the potential of their
falling into the hands of terrorists and separatists in
other parts of the world.
We would also like to support the mission’s
recommendation on the need for inter-community and
inter-religious dialogue, which, in our view, takes on
additional importance against the background of the
efforts being made towards peace, security and
stability in the region.
It is obvious that success will be dependent on
greater coherence among all stakeholders. It is
therefore important and commendable that, in spite of
the varied regional membership, all of the countries are
willing to work in a more coordinated manner.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for
his detailed and, as usual, very clear briefing.
This first Council debate on such a sensitive area
as the Sahel is very important to the stability and
security of a number of African subregions. It is very
timely, given the alarming events that have taken place
recently in the Sahelo-Sahara region. The analyses and
recommendations contained in the report (see
S/2012/42) presented by the Under-Secretary-General
outline key modalities for supporting national, regional
and international efforts aimed at finding sustainable
solutions to the many challenges facing that area.
Given that it is located both in the Maghreb and
in the Sahelo-Sahara region, Morocco is naturally
directly concerned by the threats emanating from the
Sahel region and is therefore following very closely the
developments in that part of our continent.
The up-tick in the number of attacks and
kidnappings carried out by Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb, the increase in the number of terrorist attacks
perpetrated by Boko Haram, the re-emergence of old
rebel movements, the proliferation of all types of
weapons and trafficking of all kinds all are sources of
concern on which all the States of the region and the
rest of the international community must seriously
focus.
The security challenges emanating from the
Sahelo-Sahara region are not new. For several years
now, that region has been facing an unprecedented
resurgence in the activities of transnational organized
crime networks and terrorist groups.

12-21580

More recently, the major transatlantic drugtrafficking networks have gradually transformed the
Gulf of Guinea and West Africa into a transit and
redistribution area, from which hard drugs are shipped
through certain Sahel countries, destined for Europe
and for countries in the Maghreb countries and the
Middle East. The dangerous developments in the
Sahelo-Sahara region are the result of the confluence
of many interlinked structural and cyclical factors.
The situation is the result of the difficulties faced
by the States of the region in securing their borders and
of the increased poverty in certain areas of the Sahara,
which provides an incentive to resort to criminal
activities for survival purposes. That combination of
factors has enabled rebel armed groups, secessionist
movements and many transnational organized crime
networks and terrorist groups, including Al-Qaida, in
the Islamic Maghreb, to take up residence there and
create grey areas.
The situation was recently exacerbated by the
Libyan crisis, whose effects continue to be felt in many
Sahelo-Saharan countries in terms of security but also,
and especially, at the humanitarian and socio-economic
levels.
A number of commendable initiatives at the
national, bilateral and regional levels were undertaken
with a view to providing solutions to the challenges in
the Sahel well before the Libyan crisis. Unfortunately,
those initiatives have not enabled us to date to address
the problem in a holistic, inclusive and coordinated
manner.
The time has come for enhanced regional
cooperation on the part of all States in the region. We
hope that the international community, led by the
United Nations, will devote greater attention to the
situation by providing solutions to the structural
problems relating to secessionist armed movements or
groups, which perpetuate the existence of the grey
zones, thereby facilitating the proliferation of terrorist
and criminal activities.
United Nations bodies and agencies in the region
have a key role to play in building the capacities of
States of the region to combat terrorism and
transnational organized crime.
Given the alarming facts linked to the
proliferation of weapons, it is clear that regional
cooperation is necessary among the countries of North

15

S/PV.6709

Africa and between that subregion and West Africa.
Moreover, the strengthening ties among transnational
organized crime networks, in particular, drug networks
coming from the Atlantic Ocean and armed or terrorist
groups in the Sahel, are a serious threat to international
stability and security.
The international community should also give
special attention to the humanitarian and socioeconomic challenges facing the States of the Sahel, in
particular owing to recurring food security problems
and in the light of the recent return of migrant workers
from Libya to their country of origin.
My country supports the recommendation in the
report of the assessment mission that the United
Nations should develop an integrated strategy that
addresses the security, humanitarian and development
challenges in the Sahel region in a consistent and
comprehensive way in the medium and long term. My
country fully supports the idea of creating a regional
cooperation platform for the Sahel region, as set out in
the report. That cooperation mechanism should be
transregional in nature and scope, involving all
countries of the Arab Maghreb and the Sahel, as well
as any other relevant country of West or Central Africa,
with the cooperation of the United Nations and
international partners.
Finally, my delegation fully supports the draft
press statement proposed by France on this issue.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): The
Togolese delegation thanks the Secretary-General for
his timely initiative to dispatch an assessment mission
on the impact of the Libyan crisis on the Sahel region.
It welcomes the report (S/2012/42) of the mission that
Mr. Lynn Pascoe has just presented. The inter-agency
composition of the mission demonstrates the importance
that the United Nations attaches to the topic under
consideration in the context of regional and
international peace and security.
Over the past two decades, the once stable Sahel
region has become an area where insecurity is rife
owing to acts of terrorism and trafficking in drugs,
weapons, goods and humans — in short, all the
elements of organized crime. Since the region borders
West Africa, the scourge has rapidly spread there.
While the leaders of the region took bold measures to
combat that scourge, the Libyan crisis arose and
exacerbated the situation. The true impact of that crisis
has been clearly established by the assessment team,

16

since it identified several sectors that have suffered,
such as the political, security, humanitarian and
development spheres. In short, all the foundations of
the State have been affected.
In addition to the foregoing issues are the already
chronic and recurrent problems of the region, such as
drought, famine and malnutrition. The Libyan crisis
has therefore exacerbated the region’s problems. The
return of migrant workers to their countries and
provinces of origin completely impoverished, people
fleeing the fighting, refugees in neighbouring countries
and the freer movement of all types of weapons in the
region are new challenges now facing the Sahel
countries and the entire region.
One such challenge remaining is the population
growth of countries, which has a direct consequence on
housing, schooling and the availability of farmland. To
that, one can add the terrorist acts of the Organization
of Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and Boko Haram,
as well as increased transnational organized crime.
Together, those challenges put political pressure on
Governments and have a direct and dangerous impact
on the peace, security and stability in the countries
concerned.
In the view of the delegation of Togo, all those
issues require prompt action to prevent the Sahel region
from sinking into complete insecurity, which would be
very damaging to its development. In that regard, the
recommendations made by the assessment team to
prevent the spread of conflicts, the destabilization of
States and worsening humanitarian problems deserve
close attention. In that regard, the international
community should provide economic and financial
support to the countries of the region and help them to
develop economic and social reintegration programmes.
It is generally recognized that when States face
serious insecurity issues, respect for human rights takes
second place. The efforts of the United Nations should
also address the human rights component and urge
Governments to fully respect such rights in combating
insecurity and terrorism.
The States of the region are making great
individual efforts to deal with the situation.
Strengthening the capacity of security personnel,
increasing border controls and other targeted measures
are part of that committed struggle. However, Togo
believes that regional and international cooperation
should be one of the effective tools for combating the

12-21580

S/PV.6709

situation. The ease with which criminals and other
highway bandits communicate and move from one
country to another requires the establishment of
multifaceted cooperation in order to make it possible
for the various initiatives undertaken to achieve the
anticipated goals.
To that end, my country welcomes the ongoing
cooperation among the Economic Community of West
African States, the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa in the context of combating those new
threats to peace and security in the region.
By acting together, the international community
can overcome organized crime in the Sahel. Togo
firmly believes that the Security Council should play a
decisive role to that end in the coming months. Togo
also supports the draft press statement that the French
delegation has proposed to the Council.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of South Africa.
We wish to thank Under-Secretary-General
Mr. Pascoe for his briefing statement on the report of
the inter-agency assessment mission on the impact of
the Libyan conflict and how it has been handled in the
neighbouring Sahel region (see S/2012/42).
The report confirms South Africa’s long-held
view that the manner in which resolution 1973 (2011)
was implemented in the Libyan conflict was going to
have dire consequences for the countries in the region.
South Africa is deeply concerned that the proliferation
of lethal arms in Libya, and in the Sahel in general,
will no doubt take a long time to address in a
comprehensive manner. There is no denying the fact
that the region has for some time had its own
challenges, but the manner in which the outbreak of the
conflict in Libya was approached further compounded
the problems of the region.
Of further concern to South Africa is the increase
in criminal and terrorist activities in the region, as
evidenced in the recent concentration of terrorist
groups and extremists in the region. The amassing of
arms and ammunition is a real concern in that regard
and the heightened activities of groups such as Boko
Haram are further testament to that.
What started as a conflict in one country has now
spilled over to become a regional problem with
unprecedented
consequences. The
international

12-21580

community should therefore take responsibility and not
leave the people and Governments of the region to deal
with these challenges, including the scourge of
terrorism, alone.
We support the recommendations for a multipronged approach to the problems at the national,
regional and international levels, in particular
regarding the need for close cooperation and
collaboration between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU). This would be a practical
application of cooperation and coordination envisaged
under resolution 2033 (2012), which was adopted
recently by the Council.
It is unfortunate that the zeal of some members of
the international community to resolve the Libyan
crisis militarily ignored our warning of consequences
too dire to contemplate, which have now placed that
region and Africa in their current quagmire. We should
avoid easy answers and claiming that the Sahel has
always faced such challenges, when in actual fact it is
well known that they were not previously of this
magnitude.
It is clear from the report that the joint
collaborative efforts of the United Nations and the AU
were well received by the leadership and peoples of the
countries visited by the assessment mission. South
Africa has repeatedly emphasized the need for a
strategic political process to resolve the crisis in Libya
and beyond that would include the central role of the
AU. The report shows that clear political will exists
among the States of the subregion to find common
solutions to their common problems.
Looking forward, we would urge the United
Nations system to address these challenges in a
coherent and integrated manner, working in partnership
with these countries in accordance with their national
and subregional structures. The international
community, through the coordination provided by the
United Nations system, has an important role to play in
facilitating support and technical assistance in the
various areas identified in the report. These systemic
interventions, managed in an integrated and coherent
manner, will constitute an investment in the long-term
stability of the subregion.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I call on the representative of Niger.

17

S/PV.6709

Mr. Boureima (Niger) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you most warmly, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for January. I also wish to thank you for
having organized today’s briefing on the long-awaited
report of the assessment mission on the impact of the
Libyan crisis on the Sahel region (S/2012/42).
I also wish to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for having yet again demonstrated the special
interest he takes in Africa as a whole, and the Sahel
region in particular. Furthermore, we thank Mr. Lynn
Pascoe for his excellent briefing.
We believe that the assessment team is to be truly
commended. Indeed, its report clearly identifies not
only the problems that have been caused or
exacerbated in the Sahel region by the Libyan crisis,
but also the appropriate measures for addressing them.
The mission has also made some relevant
recommendations to the national authorities of the
region and to the international community as a whole.
The mission, while noting national and regional efforts,
nevertheless stresses the need for significant
international support in order to achieve positive
results in mitigating the effects of the Libyan crisis on
the region and in combating the rampant scourges
there.
It has been recognized since the 2005 World
Summit that there is a link between development and
security, and we therefore need a comprehensive and
integrated approach to meeting these challenges, in
particular in the Sahel region, which suffers problems
of such scope and origins that the international
community is compelled to dedicate the resources — in
particular, the financial resources — necessary to
resolving them. At the same time, while recognizing
the efforts of many of our partners, we truly hope for
more solidarity and commitment on the part of all.
Niger is doing its utmost at the international and
regional levels. For instance, on 22 and 23 January we
held an international forum on security and
development in the Sahelo-Saharan region of Niger in
order to raise awareness of our security and
development strategy there. The strategy is
accompanied by a budget, with which we call on the
international community to assist.
The President:
representative of Mali.

18

I

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Daou (Mali) (spoke in French): Like my
colleague and friend from Niger, I should like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your outstanding presidency
of the Council, and to express my delegation’s pleasure
at taking part in this meeting.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his initiative to
deploy to the countries of the Sahel an inter-agency
assessment mission on the impact of the Libyan crisis
on the region. My country greatly appreciates the
sustained attention that he devotes to the Sahara-Sahel
region, which has for some time experienced a security
situation that is both complex and worrisome.
Mali, which was one of the countries that hosted
the United Nations mission, takes note of the report
(see S/2012/42) that has just been introduced by the
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs. We also
take note of the recommendations made by the
assessment mission aimed at supporting national,
regional and international initiatives. Nevertheless,
allow me to make some additional comments.
I would like first to underscore that the report
repeats erroneous statements made by insignificant
individuals and small groups who have scorned the
spirit of openness and dialogue espoused by Mali’s
highest officials and opted for violence as a way to
pursue their claims. Mali is an old nation and a land of
hospitality, dialogue and tolerance. Mali is also a
country that respects cultural diversity, democratic
principles and individual and collective rights and
freedoms. However, the Government of Mali will
tolerate no act aimed at eroding the unity and integrity
of its national territory.
As clearly underscored by the report, the Libyan
crisis has had serious repercussions on neighbouring
countries, especially those of the Sahel region,
including Mali, which has had to face huge numbers of
returning indigent migrants and heavily armed former
combatants.
It goes without saying that the presence of armed
groups serves to fuel old ambitions, just as the spread
of weapons and munitions of all sorts have exacerbated
insecurity and severely tested peace, stability and
security in the Sahara-Sahel strip.
Mali is fully aware of the scope and complexity
of the current challenges. We remain convinced that
responding to them entails not just strengthening the

12-21580

S/PV.6709

military presence in the affected regions in order to
combat terrorism, cross-border crime and all manner of
trafficking, but also protecting people and their
property, improving basic infrastructure and public
services and promoting development efforts at the local
level. The many initiatives put in place by the
Government are a response to that. Those include the
special programme for peace, security and
development in northern Mali and the shared
governance programme for peace and security in Mali.
At the regional level, we should welcome the
fruitful cooperation that exists between the countries
concerned. I would like to underscore that it is they
that have the primary responsibility to ensure peace,
stability and security in the Sahel.
In conclusion, I would like to highlight here the
urgent need for the United Nations and the African
Union to help mobilize increased international
assistance for affected countries of the Sahel in order
that they can strengthen their capacities to overcome
the current challenges.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chad.
Mr. Tchingonbe Patchanne (Chad) (spoke in
French): As this is the first time that my country takes
the floor, I would like to take this opportunity to wish
you a happy new year, Mr. President, as well as to all
our colleagues here. I also wish to commend the efforts
made by the team of experts that carried out an
assessment mission on the impact of the Libyan crisis
on the countries of the Sahel region.
As the Council is aware, thanks to its huge oil
resources, before the crisis Libya was a country that
drew migrant workers of various nationalities. My

12-21580

country, Chad, is one of the countries of the Sahel
region with a large number of its nationals living in
Libya. Today, more than 80 per cent of them have been
able to return to their country thanks to the support of
the International Organization for Migration, which I
would like to thank for its dedication to humanitarian
concerns.
Chad attaches great interest to the conclusions
and recommendations of the mission, and we welcome
the fact that the Secretary-General decided to establish
it. We would also like the Council to devote to the
report all the attention it deserves, so as to prompt the
international community to lend its support to the
countries of the Sahel region in order that they can win
the war against underdevelopment, famine, poverty and
insecurity.
With regard to the circulation of weaponry in the
Sahel region and the threat it poses to its countries, His
Excellency President Idriss Deby Itno sounded the
alarm even before the fall of the Al-Qadhafi regime.
Nevertheless, the situation continues to be one of
concern given the long border separating our two
countries, over which it is difficult to exercise control.
All those challenges that the countries of the
region must face are made worse by the impact of the
Libyan crisis.
The President: I would like once again to thank
Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his briefing to the Council today.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

19
