S/PV.7777*

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7777th meeting

Sunday, 25 September 2016, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Schwalger . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(New Zealand)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Seck
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

* Reissued for technical reasons

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-29803* (E)
*1629803*

S/PV.7777

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. De Mistura.
Mr. De Mistura: As the Secretary-General has
said, these are indeed chilling days for Syria, and for
the people of Aleppo in particular. The past week has
been one of the worst ones in Syria during the nearly
six years of this devastating conflict. Earlier in the
week, I had to deeply regret the fact that the meeting of
the International Syria Support Group (ISSG) did not
yield the results we were hoping for, and actually saw
an outcome that put in jeopardy the agreement reached
in Geneva by the two co-Chairs on 9 September, which
we believed, and want to continue to believe, was meant
to reinvigorate the concept and the implementation of
the cessation of hostilities.
The ISSG meeting took place in the middle of news
that the Government of Syria had declared an offensive
in eastern Aleppo — now de facto besieged. It came
on the footsteps of two unrelated, but compounding,
tragic events. One was the incident in Deir ez-Zor,
the second one was the attack on a humanitarian
convoy. I can only reiterate the concern expressed
by the Secretary-General on the first incident, which
was acknowledged as a tragic mistake by the United
States, and our shared deep outrage about the deadly
attack on the humanitarian convoy. But no incident,
irrespective of whether it can be attributed or not,
justifies what is taking place before of our own eyes,
that is, the unravelling of the cessation of hostilities and
the simultaneous unleashing of unprecedented military
violence, which is affecting innocent civilians as well.
2/24

25/09/2016

Let us recall briefly that, following the
9 September announcement of the agreement between
the Russian Federation and the United States, which
was a complicated agreement that took long time
and required long evening and night discussions, the
renewed cessation of hostilities that came into effect
three days later did indeed reduce violence. Even
Aleppo witnessed a reduction in military activities.
We heard of families coming out of their shelters and
houses to celebrate Eid on the streets. People started
to become cautiously optimistic. But there was still
sporadic shelling inside the city and some airstrikes in
the countryside, but at a lower level.
Then, on 18 September, airstrikes resumed on
Aleppo city, when five districts were hit, reportedly
by five severe airstrikes. When the Government
unilaterally declared the end of the cessation of
hostilities on 19 September, we began to hear reports
of the use of barrel bombs and airstrikes in eastern
Aleppo, where, I want to remind everyone, 275,000
people are currently de facto trapped. Fair enough,
there are 1.6 million people on the other side of Aleppo.
But they are not isolated, like those in eastern Aleppo.
Only minutes after the Government’s announcement,
our own team in Aleppo clearly heard the sounds of
shelling and bombardment begin. They happened to
be there because we had sent them to accompany and
assist the truck convoy that was possibly meant to leave
Turkey in order to get to eastern Aleppo via the Castello
Road, .
As the Secretary-General has reported to the
Council, on the evening of 19 September as well there
was a horrific attack against a humanitarian convoy
travelling to Oram Al-Kubra, killing 20 humanitarian
Syrian workers and drivers, including the team leader,
and destroying 18 out of 31 clearly identified trucks.
We condemned that attack in the strongest terms, as
did many members around this table, who have offered
condolences and have been calling for an inquiry and
accountability for those who committed that act.
Since that fateful day, we have seen the situation
in eastern Aleppo deteriorate to new heights of horror.
Amid intensive airstrikes reported on Friday, following
the announcement of the beginning of a Government
offensive — an announcement made by the Government
itself — the community in opposition-controlled
eastern Aleppo even called off their own Friday
prayers. Information received by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
16-29803

25/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East

indicates dozens of airstrikes on Friday and Saturday,
which hit residential buildings across the de facto
besieged eastern Aleppo, reportedly causing scores of
civilian deaths and injuries, including those of many
children.
First responders appear overwhelmed and unable to
respond to many of the sites. We have seen reports of
three of the four centres operated by the White Helmets
in eastern Aleppo being hit. As numbers of casualties
are rising, rescue workers struggle to remove people
from under the rubble. Even tools that might have
been able to mitigate some of the suffering of civilians
have reportedly been destroyed in the attacks against
the civil defence stations. Information received from
sources on the ground suggest the following numbers to
date, allegedly due to airstrikes on areas held by armed
opposition groups. We cannot verify them, but these are
the figures we are seeing at the moment: 213 fatalities
in Aleppo province, 139 fatalities in eastern Aleppo
and 74 fatalities in rural Aleppo, all including dozens
of women and children.
How many airstrikes? Obviously, we have no
independent capacity to verify that. Sources on the
ground tell us that they no longer have the capacity
to count them accurately, given the chaos in Aleppo
city and the fact they often take place at night and
with remarkable new intensity. We heard the word
“unprecedented” used to describe the quantity, scale
and type of bombing. We have seen reports, videos
and pictures of the reported use of incendiary bombs
that create fireballs of such intensity that they light
up the pitch darkness in eastern Aleppo, as though it
were actually daylight. We now hear of bunker-busting
bombs being used, and see pictures of large craters in the
ground much larger than in previous aerial bombings.
If it is confirmed, the systematic indiscriminate use
of such weapons in areas where civilians and civilian
infrastructure are present may amount to war crimes.
Civilians across town must be asking themselves where
on Earth it is now safe to be in that tormented city.
We have also seen reports of armed opposition
groups firing hellfire rockets. Do members know
what they are? They are basically gas canisters full
of nails, stones and iron, which are being launched in
a rudimentary way across the other side of the line.
These do in fact kill civilians, including one which hit
the Al-Maari school in Hamidiya neighbourhood on
22 September. On 19 September, the area close to the
United Nations hub in western Aleppo was hit by two

S/PV.7777

mortar shells coming from the opposition, killing one
civilian.
There are ongoing reports that medical centres
are being targeted, including an alleged strike on an
ambulance and medical triage centre in an area held
by armed opposition groups in south-western Aleppo,
which also caused fatalities among medical staff once
again. We hear of streets so filled with rubble — huge
piles of rubble — due to these new types of bombs that
ambulances cannot even pass through them.
As I mentioned at the beginning, up to 275,000
people in eastern Aleppo — and, frankly, they cannot
all be terrorists — have now been under a form of de
facto siege for almost 20 days, since the Al-Ramouseh
corridor was closed and after the Castello Road was
blocked on 7 July. Since that closure, the humanitarian
situation has taken a turn for the worse. In essence,
supplies are running out. World Food Programme
(WFP) stocks inside eastern Aleppo amount to only
12,000 food rations, which means sufficient supplies
for 60,000 out of 275,000 people. There is no prospect
for replenishing them, since both roads are blocked.
Bakeries are being hit and bread is available only
for three days a week, which could decrease again in
coming days. There is a lack of fuel for general public
use, thereby reducing availability for transport services,
private wells and household use, especially for cooking.
As the Security Council is aware, the United Nations
and WFP had planned to send a convoy to eastern
Aleppo at the beginning of the renewed cessation of
hostilities. WFP mobilized a convoy of 40 trucks — I
have the pictures here — which have been ready and
waiting to go every morning at 5 o’clock, loaded with
supplies sufficient to provide full food rations for
approximately 35,000 people, and wheat flour assistance
for an additional 130,000 people of the 275,000. We all
know what happened. The convoy never moved because
it never received sufficient guarantees — frankly, let
us be honest — from either side, and the cessation of
hostilities broke down. Complicated arguments were
raised by the Government, such as driving licences
suddenly becoming crucial in the conflict. On the
opposition side, arguments were made asking for all
sorts of impossible conditions in order to make sure
we would have the guarantees. Obviously, there was
hesitation on both sides to see the convoy moving, and
we saw the result of that.

16-298033/24

S/PV.7777

The situation in the Middle East

Currently, 2 million people have no access to
running water through the public network, after intense
fighting stopped the flow of water from the two key
pumping stations that service the population in both the
eastern and western parts of the city. On 22 September,
the Bab Al-Nairab water pumping station, which serves
the eastern part of the city, was reportedly hit by
airstrikes. In retaliation, Jaish Al-Fateh turned off water
to 1.5 million people in the western part of the city.
There is therefore no water, in a grave tit-for-tat type
of move. Luckily, water is now back on more regularly,
we hope, after difficult last-minute negotiations led
by UNICEF. However, people in eastern Aleppo still
remain at risk due to interruptions to safe drinking
water. Water from wells, which used to be plentiful,
has become highly contaminated due to the conflict.
People, particularly vulnerable children, are at risk
of catastrophic outbreaks of water-borne diseases.
God forbid: that is the last thing we need at a moment
like this.
If nothing else, from a humanitarian point of
view, we ask the Security Council, first, to press for
a cessation of the violence and for the protection of
civilians and civilian infrastructure; secondly, to press
for weekly 48-hour pauses in the fighting to ensure at
least that the United Nations and its partners can reach
eastern Aleppo, without preconditions from either the
Government or, frankly, from the opposition; and,
thirdly, to press for medical evacuations. There are
several urgent cases in eastern Aleppo at the moment.
Returning to the military situation on the ground,
we have seen several accounts of almost every event.
There are reports of the Government announcing its
intention to retake all of Aleppo city. Shortly after
the agreement announced in Geneva by Russia and
the United States at almost midnight on 9 September,
President Al-Assad visited what was left of Darayya
and announced his intention to “liberate every inch
of Syria”. Furthermore, we saw reports that indicated
that the reported objective of Government and proGovernment forces was to “squeeze out terrorists
without civilian casualties” and to maintain a corridor
for fighters to leave eastern Aleppo. However, what we
are seeing is civilians dying in large numbers.
The last few days have seen intense military clashes
on major front lines, including Handrat, Sheikh Said,
Old Aleppo, Old Ramousa and Hammadiah districts.
Yesterday, Government forces said they had taken over
Handrat district, north of the city, a claim that armed
4/24

25/09/2016

opposition groups now dispute. Whatever the case, it
is a fact that there has been heavy fighting there. There
were contradictory statements from the opposition as
to whether counter-offensives were being led by the
Al-Nusra Front or by Fateh Haleb Operations Room of
Free Syrian Army groups. We have seen information
from other sources that tells us that more than half of
the fighters present in eastern Aleppo are Al-Nusra. We
have also seen reports alleging the intentional placement
of firing positions close to social infrastructure and
inside civilian quarters. We have seen that in other
conflicts, but it is not a reason for anyone to destroy the
whole building.
The one constant in this violently unpredictable
conflict is that neither side will win, and therefore both
ultimately will lose. Above all, the Syrian people are
going to lose; they are losing their lives day by day. All
we can expect in Aleppo if the Syrian Government is
intent on retaking it completely — and this is a military
analysis done by people far more competent than us — is
a slow, grinding, street-by-street fight over the course
of months, if not years, whereby the ancient city will
be almost completely destroyed. In the face of these
illusions of imminent victory, I must reiterate what we
now believe to be an almost self-evident truth, but a
truth that does not seem to be actually implemented:
a so-called military solution or victory in Syria is
impossible, including in Aleppo.
Syrians on all sides are still making clear their
demand for a ceasefire and a credible political solution.
But trust is seriously broken. On 9 September, in
Geneva that night, I remember very much both Sergey
Lavrov and John Kerry being concerned about it, saying
they could not go on making statements that did not
have follow-up. But I want to believe — because I am
still a naïve United Nations official — that they really
meant what they said and that they really negotiated
hard, comma by comma, because they wanted it work.
But frankly, the international community and the
Syrians are swiftly losing any remaining hope, and the
international community is losing any credibility with
the parties, unless we salvage what was agreed upon. A
tiny window of opportunity still exists, and we want to
believe that it does, for the Russian Federation and the
United States to help the Syrians and the region step
away from the brink of more years of a bloody conflict
risks becoming even worse.
On Wednesday (see S/PV.7774) I reported to the
Security Council that the Secretary-General had asked
16-29803

25/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East

me to present to the sides a framework of proposals as
a starting point for negotiations in resumed talks, as
requested by the ISSG co-Chairs. I am ready to do just
that. But the ISSG and the co-Chairs, and the Council
itself — and as suggested in an important comment
made by the Chinese Foreign Minister at the ISSG
meeting on Thursday — the Council has a responsibility
to ensure the relaunching of the cessation of hostilities
and its implementation without delay, with all the risks
and difficulties that entails.
We all know that this conflict cannot be resolved
through negotiations without the help and assistance
of the co-Chairs and the region. I am therefore asking,
indeed urging, both of them to go the extra mile to see if
they can save their agreement of 9 September, and do so
at the eleventh hour. The agreement not only provides
some basis for the resumption of talks, it also provides
a broader framework for how to combat terrorism — we
have no doubts about that, and I want to believe we all
agree on that — and to de-conflict the region more
generally, as well as for grounding the Syrian air force,
as that too was part of the agreement.
My appeal to the Council today is the following:
please, develop a common course of action to enforce
a cessation of hostilities in Syria. I am still convinced
that we can turn the course of events. We have proved
that more than once before. We have come a long way
to date to allow the small but tangible achievements of
the cessation of hostilities to be buried under the dust
of Aleppo’s rubble.
I have been repeatedly asked by many,
“Mr. De Mistura, why do you not resign at this
point? Frankly, all this is leading nowhere and this
will send a strong signal.”
No, I will not, because any sign of my resigning
would be a sign that the international community was
abandoning the Syrians. The United Nations will never
abandon the Syrians, and neither will the Council. We
do not need that kind of sign, which would make news
for five minutes. And then not only would Syria be
abandoned by everyone, but so too the hope that the
international community does want to end the conflict.
The President: I thank Mr. De Mistura for his
briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of
the Council.

S/PV.7777

Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy De Mistura for being here and for his
refusal to give up.
We have convened the Security Council today
because the Russian Federation and the Al-Assad
regime have launched an all-out air and ground offensive
against eastern Aleppo and its 275,000 civilians. Russia
and Al-Assad have reportedly launched more than 150
airstrikes over the past 72 hours, killing at least 139
people and injuring hundreds more and laying waste
to what is left of an iconic Middle Eastern city. These
are people who have suffered horribly in the five and a
half years of war, yet they call the attacks from the air
“unprecedented in quantity and quality.” The Al-Assad
regime is explicit: it believes only in a military solution.
It says it is going to conquer militarily every last square
inch of Syria. And it does not care what is left of Syria
in pursuing that military solution.
Instead of pursuing peace, Russia and Al-Assad
make war. Instead of helping get lifesaving aid
to civilians, Russia and Al-Assad are bombing
humanitarian convoys, hospitals and first responders,
who are trying desperately to keep people alive. Russia
will argue today, no doubt, that those attacks are
meant to fight terrorism and that the people killed in
this offensive are terrorists or terrorist sympathizers.
That is absurd. Look at the facts. In the first 24 hours
of their assault on eastern Aleppo — an assault, I
would note, whose first strikes were carried out in the
middle of meetings here in New York in which Russia
was saying it wanted to recommit to a cessation of
hostilities — Russia and the regime struck not one,
not two, but three of the four bases used by the White
Helmet volunteers in eastern Aleppo.
The White Helmets are first responders who
bravely rush to the scene of bombings to dig through
the rubble for survivors. Every day, they save lives by
driving ambulances and fire trucks and, where there
are no roads left, running on foot to the homes, schools,
hospitals and markets that Russia and Al-Assad have
attacked. The White Helmets continue to do that even
though they know that the regime routinely carries out
now-infamous double-tap airstrikes — in which they
strike a target, wait for first responders to arrive and
then strike again. A month ago, the world was shocked
by the dazed stare of 5-year-old Omran Daqneesh as
he sat in the back of an ambulance after his home was
bombed. He was rescued by White Helmets. But because
of Russia and Al-Assad’s attacks these past few days,

16-298035/24

S/PV.7777

The situation in the Middle East

fewer kids like Omran are going to be rescued. Those
buried alive in rubble in eastern Aleppo are much more
likely to die in rubble.
Another target that the latest Russia/Al-Assad
offensive struck at its outset was the Bab Al-Nairab
pumping station, as we have heard, which supplies
drinking water to the people in eastern Aleppo. As a
result, two months after the Al-Assad regime cut off
eastern Aleppo from deliveries of food, medicine and
humanitarian aid, residents will now be at risk of disease
and infection as they drink whatever dirty, untreated
water they can find. I would note that an opposition
group also turned off a nearby pumping station that
supplies water to some of the more than 1.5 million
people in western Aleppo, which we condemn. Water
should never be used as a weapon of war, and Aleppo’s
residents should not be forced to drink water that makes
them sick, wherever they live. This is obscene.
Eastern Aleppo remains under siege as we convene
here today. It seems the only items making it into eastern
Aleppo these days are barrel bombs and incendiaries,
which witnesses report seeing dropped by Al-Assad’s
forces and Russian forces. The combined impact
on civilians of relentless airstrikes and blockades is
crushing. Fuel for diesel generators, the main source of
electricity, is running out. Within a week, there may not
be enough power to keep producing bread. Hospitals,
which have already relocated emergency rooms to
basements and bunkers in an attempt to protect their
patients from routine airstrikes, can barely keep the
lights on. Because the electricity is so often knocked
out, doctors have learned to conduct operations by the
light of their cell phones. Yet each new airstrike brings
them more and more maimed civilians, who they are
forced to treat with fewer and fewer supplies.
Look at the photos that people in eastern Aleppo
posted online in the past two days: Syrians slumped in
blood-spattered hallways; men, women and children
covered in rags and lying in pools of blood in makeshift
hospitals; unconscious babies who need someone to
pump oxygen into their lungs manually when generators
fail. And if those victims need specialist treatment, they
cannot get it. Even worse, they cannot leave eastern
Aleppo. They are trapped — savagely, medievally.
The United Nations assembled a convoy of trucks to
deliver aid to eastern Aleppo more than a week ago, but
it remains blocked by the fighting, unable to drive into
that inferno.
6/24

25/09/2016

Russia, of course, has long had the power to stop
this suffering. The United States worked with Russia
for eight painstaking months to develop an arrangement
that included a renewed commitment to the cessation of
hostilities. Just last week, the United States sponsored
two ministerial meetings of the International Syria
Support Group aimed at halting the violence and
returning to a cessation of hostilities. We did so not
because we think Russia has acted in good faith in
Syria; we know as well as anyone that Russia has
consistently said one thing and done the opposite. We
did so because we know that there can be no peace in
Syria if Russia is determined to keep fighting this war.
We believe that we must do everything in our power
to find a way to halt the violence and get on the path
to a political transition, which is the only way to end
this conflict. That is why, even now, we will continue
to look for any way possible to restore the cessation
of hostilities.
But it is common sense: a one-sided cessation of
hostilities cannot hold. You cannot carry out a massive
military offensive and say you are for peace. That
might work on Russia Today, but it does not work when
the world has reams of evidence proving exactly what
Russia is doing. Last Wednesday, Russian Foreign
Minister Sergey Lavrov sat in this Chamber and
declared that, when it comes to Syria,
“Russia has consistently advocated an exclusively
peaceful solution.” (S/PV.7774, p. 6)
Yet given when the offensive began, it is not
unreasonable to think that Russian and Syrian forces
were literally loading the incendiary munitions and
barrel bombs onto their aircraft as Minister Lavrov
spoke here of making peace. The next day, after Russia
and the regime began to rain its bombs down on civilians
in eastern Aleppo, Minister Lavrov told the press that
plans for a cessation of hostilities must be saved. This is
Russia’s approach to saving the cessation of hostilities?
As the United Nations has said repeatedly, including
today, these airstrikes on residential neighborhoods
may well be war crimes.
Russia today will no doubt again accuse the United
States of causing all of this chaos. They might point to
the single airstrike in which the counter-Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant coalition appears to have struck a
Syrian military position — a strike that we immediately
acknowledged and committed to investigating in full.
Russia will likely try to divert from its own actions by
16-29803

25/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East

invoking United States actions elsewhere in the past.
What members can be sure that Russia will not do
today, or any day, is accept any responsibility for its
actions. What members can be sure that Russia will not
do is tell the truth.
I urge my fellow members of the Security Council
to look at the remarks that they have brought today
and to ask themselves, “Does what I am about to read
reflect the gruesome facts on the ground? Does it speak
candidly to who is unleashing this appalling violence?
Would I feel comfortable reading these remarks to a
Chamber packed with the residents of eastern Aleppo
being besieged by Al-Assad’s forces and by Russia?” If
not, I urge them to speak directly to Syria’s grim reality
and the people who must live with it day in and day out.
This is not the day or the time to blame all sides or
to draw false equivalencies. It is not the time to use the
passive voice that is so common here in the Security
Council. It is not the time to say that “airstrikes took
place” or that “civilians were killed”. It is time to
say who is carrying out those airstrikes and who is
killing civilians.
Russia holds a permanent seat on the Security
Council. That is a privilege and it is a responsibility.
Yet in Syria and in Aleppo, Russia is abusing
this historic privilege. And while members of the
Council — certainly including the United States —
have a deep interest in having constructive ties with
the Russian Federation, history will not look kindly on
those Council members who stay silent in the face of
this carnage.
Russia would have the Council live in upside-down
land, where bombing first responders, cutting off
humanitarian aid and supporting a murderous regime
is billed as counter-terrorism. Let us be clear. There are
terrorists in Syria — lots of them —and all of us have
an interest in destroying them. They pose a threat to all
of our citizens. That is why the United States leads a
67-country coalition that has rolled back 40 per cent of
ISIL’s territorial holdings in Iraq and Syria, and which
each week liberates more desperate civilians. That is
why the United States negotiated the recent agreement
with Russia, signaling that we were prepared to work
with Russia to fight Jabhat Al-Nusra and ISIL in Syria.
Nobody has to convince the United States of America
of the danger posed by terrorists. Our citizens are often
priority targets all around the world. But when Russia is
espousing fiction, we have to call that out. What Russia

S/PV.7777

is sponsoring and doing is not counter-terrorism; it
is barbarism.
Let me conclude. On Friday, footage emerged of the
aftermath of one of the many recent airstrikes in eastern
Aleppo. In the video, first responders dig through the
rubble of what was once a building, throwing aside
chunks of concrete, and then suddenly one hears on the
video the piercing scream of a child — a child literally
submerged in concrete and rubble. The first responders
then begin to dig more frantically, until the head and
blue and white shirt of the little girl emerges — a girl
crying out in pain and in terror. Eventually, tenderly,
the first responders remove the rubble from around her
and pull that girl – five-year-old Rawan Alowsh – from
the wreckage, her body covered in white dust. It feels
like a miracle, watching her come out alive.
And yet, everyone else in Rawan’s immediate family
was reportedly killed in that airstrike: her mother, her
father and her four siblings, all killed. What chance
does Rawan have in this world? What chance does she
have with no family, but also with not even a single
sign that her attackers have a shred of empathy in them?
When violent attacks against civilians are surging;
when norms of civilized behaviour that we have spent
more than 70 years trying to build are being trampled;
when there is complete impunity for targeting aid
convoys, civilian, residential neighbourhoods, children
and hospitals — impunity — what chance does Rawan
or any of us have?
One first responder said of the relentless assault of
the last few days: “People do not know what to do or
where to go. There is no escape. It feels like the end
of the world.” The end of the world. It is apocalyptic,
what is being done to eastern Aleppo. Surely, for
Rawan — who at five years old has lost her entire
family — the Council can at the very least have the
courage to say who is responsible for this and, in a
single voice, tell Russia to stop.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France,
alongside the United States and the United Kingdom,
asked for this emergency meeting to be convened
because the information we have received from Aleppo
marks a new height in the military escalation and a
further descent into the abyss that characterize the
tragedy in Syria. This information, corroborated by
the statement made just now by Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura — whom, on
behalf of France, I thank for his involvement — attests

16-298037/24

S/PV.7777

The situation in the Middle East

to a level of violence that has certainly never been
attained in five years of a conflict that, I recall, is the
greatest humanitarian tragedy since the Second World
War.
Folllowing the unspeakable attack on a humanitarian
convoy last Monday, on Thursday the regime — with the
support of its backers — launched a major air offensive
the clear objective of which is to bring Aleppo to its
knees as soon as possible. The streets of Aleppo are
no longer anything but a heap of ruins. According to
the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, hundreds
of victims — including many children — have have
been massacred in three days by the regime’s bombs.
As we speak, 275,000 civilians remain prisoners in the
city and live in terror of indiscriminate bombing by the
Syrian regime and its active supporters.
We are horrified by this new military gambit of
the Syrian regime, which has persisted for months in
trying to take Aleppo with the help of its supporters.
Under the guise of fighting terrorism, the regime
indiscriminately bombs homes, maternity clinics,
hospitals, schools, refugee camps and neighbourhoods
held by the moderate opposition. While the international
community has sought for months to secure a truce, the
Al-Assad regime has tirelessly violated international
humanitarian law, the resolutions of the Security
Council and the most basic principles of humanity.
In many ways, Aleppo is to Syria what Sarajevo was
to Bosnia and Herzegovina, or Guernica to the Spanish
Civil War — a symbolic city, a crossroads city, a
martyred city. Aleppo, a symbolic city several thousand
years old that has been declared a World Heritage site;
a crossroads city, where so many countless cultures
have met and mingled, has today become a martyred
city. That symbol of civilization is under a siege that
can only be called medieval. This is retrogressive and,
frankly, shameful.
The information at our disposal indicates the
systematic use of a new type of incendiary weapon
and high-tech ammunition and subammunition that
puncture bunkers and cause the collapse of an entire
building in one impact. The use of such weapons against
civilians should not surprise us, unfortunately, in the
hands of a regime that has for many years bombarded
its population with chlorine gas, phosphorus and
explosive barrels. As the Secretary-General recalled
yesterday, the indiscriminate and systematic use of
such weapons in residential neighbourhoods constitutes
8/24

25/09/2016

a war crime — yes, a war crime — nd such a crime
cannot go unpunished.
If we do nothing to prevent the total destruction of
Aleppo, this week will be recalled as the moment when
diplomacy failed and barbarity and brutality triumphed.
The Council and the International Syria Support
Group have met this week to seek an agreement on the
cessation of hostilities and immediate and unhindered
access to humanitarian aid. These discussions have not,
for now, been unsuccessful. The military escalation
now under way threatens the fragile hope for a truce
in which we could still believe only a week ago. Russia
imagines that it can restore the trust of its partners by
negotiating a cessation of hostilities with one hand
while supporting the regime that is bombarding Aleppo
with the other.
Today, saving Aleppo must be our priority. A few
weeks ago, Russia and the United States were able to
agree to an operational plan for establishing a cessation
of hostilities and ensuring the delivery of humanitarian
aid. France supported the agreement, as it had supported
all Vienna process initiatives to alleviate the suffering
of civilians. The immediate implementation of that
agreement, beginning with Aleppo, is our only hope
and must therefore be our priority. France also calls
for the establishment of a robust mechanism to monitor
the cessation of hostilitiess, which alone can restore
the necessary confidence and ensure the consolidation
of the truce, first in Aleppo and then throughout the
country. Through its Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Jean-Marc Ayrault, my country has made detailed
proposals to that end.
If there is one zone where the cessation of hostilities
must be implemented on a priority basis, it is Aleppo.
If there is one zone that the regime’s aircraft must
immediately be forbidden to overfly, it is Aleppo. If
there is one zone where the people are urgently in need
of emergency humanitarian assistance, it is Aleppo.
The Security Council is today at a moment of
truth. It must rise to the immense responsibility that is
incumbent upon it, and thus upon each of its members
and all of us. We expect Russia in particular to give
proof of its genuine readiness to stop supporting the
military option and to truly seek a negotiated solution
to the Syrian conflict with all the means and leverage
at its disposal. If we wish to end the tragedy in Aleppo
and Syria, we must ultimately put all our cards on the
table, call things by their rightful names, and find a way
16-29803

25/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East

to unite around a collective approach. That is the only
possible option, howsoever difficult it may be, to break
the current deadlock and restore the political dynamic
that is the only way to stop the Syrian conflict.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Madam President, for convening this emergency
meeting today at the request of the United Kingdom,
the United States and France. I join others in thanking
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura for his briefing and
for his relentless stamina.
The Al-Assad regime and Russia are reducing
Aleppo to rubble. Aleppo’s inhabitants are ordinary
Syrians who have suffered so much for so long.
They are now facing an unprecedented, unrelenting
onslaught of cruelty, and it is increasingly clear that it
is an onslaught beyond the capabilities of the Syrian air
force alone.After five years of conflict, one might think
that the regime has had its fill of barbarity and that its
sick blood lust against its own people has finally run
its course.
But this weekend, the regime and Russia have
instead plunged to new depths and unleashed a new
hell on Aleppo. Bunker-busting bombs, more suited to
destroying military installations, are now destroying
homes, decimating bomb shelters, and crippling,
maiming and killing dozens, if not hundreds. Incendiary
munitions, indiscriminate in their reach, are being
dropped onto civilian areas so that, yet again, Aleppo
is burning. And to cap it all, water supplies so vital
to millions are now being targeted, depriving water to
those most in need. In short, it is difficult to deny that
Russia is partnering with the Syrian regime to carry out
war crimes.
Yet only four days ago (see S/PV.7774), we
heard Foreign Minister Lavrov speak right here of
Russia’s commitment to a political, peaceful solution,
and of Russia’s commitment to the cessation of
hostilities. Today, that commitment resembles much
of Syria — broken and lifeless. The true meaning of
that commitment can be seen on the ashen faces of the
victims of Aleppo; on the faces of a mother clutching
her child, crushed beneath the rubble; on the faces of
the White Helmets and medics, injured or killed as they
try desperately to save lives; and on the faces of every
single man, woman and child who still calls Aleppo
home. As the Secretary-General has said, these are
dark days for the protection of civilians.

S/PV.7777

These devastating events underscore what we have
known for so long. Russia needs to be salvaging, not
stymieing efforts to restore the cessation of hostilities.
Russia needs to be enabling, not attacking unfettered
humanitarian assistance. And ultimately, Russia should
be creating, not destroying the conditions necessary
for the resumption of political talks. If it does not take
these steps and more, Russia will only confirm its
status as an international pariah. But in truth, as the
horrific, unconscionable attack on the humanitarian
convoy last week painfully illustrated, Russia simply
has no credibility left on these issues.
Now Russia will no doubt try to deflect attention
away from the crimes it is committing in Syria by
blaming the opposition and talking a great deal about
the threat from terrorism. Everyone in this Chamber
agrees that Da’esh and Al-Nusra are terrorists and must
be defeated. That is not the question. But Russia and the
regime are not bombing terrorists; they are bombing all
forms of opposition and killing hundreds every month.
They collaborate with sectarian Shia militias and with
Hizbullah — a terrorist organisation in the eyes of many
members of the Council and the Arab League — to
inflict their own terror on Syria’s civilian population.
Let us not forget that Al-Assad’s regime, supported
by Russia, has killed far more civilians in Syria than
Da’esh and Al-Nusra put together. So every time we
rightly condemn Da’esh and Al-Nusra terrorism in Syria,
let us also condemn the absolute terror being inflicted
on the Syrian people by the Al-Assad regime and by
Russia as they continue to bomb Syrian civilians day
and night. Because the Syrian people will never forget
the death and destruction that the sectarian Al-Assad
regime has unleashed upon them, nor will they forget
that Russia aided and abetted that ruthless sectarian
dictator in waging war against his own people. They
also will not forget that the international community,
and the Security Council in particular, failed to stop the
bombing, failed to stop the chlorine and failed to stop
the starvation.
So let us be clear. It is Russia’s actions in Syria
and in the Council that have caused that failure; it is
Russia’s actions that have prolonged the conflict and
prolonged the suffering. It is Russia’s four vetoes in the
past five years that have prevented Council unity and
brought shame on us all, and brought its diplomacy into
disrepute.

16-298039/24

S/PV.7777

The situation in the Middle East

So the Council must now do more than demand or
urge; we must now decide. What can we do to enforce
an immediate end to the bombardment of Aleppo and
other civilian areas in Syria? We must decide what we
can do now to end the sieges and the chokehold that is
preventing aid getting in. And in doing so, we must speak
loudly and clearly that there will be accountability for
these crimes and so many more, including the barbaric,
despicable use of chemical weapons by the regime
against its own people. That is the only way to stop the
suffering, and it is the only way for Russia to atone for
its deplorable actions in Syria.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): This is the sixth year that the Syrian people
have endured a terrible tragedy. In 2011, in Washington,
D.C., and various other Western capitals, the decision
was made to continue reshaping the geopolitics of
the Middle East and North Africa, a process that had
started with the criminal invasion of Iraq in 2003 by the
United States and the United Kingdom. They continued
to swing an axe in both Libya and Syria and did not
shrink from accepting support from terrorist groups.
The inevitable consequences — the disintegration
of both countries and the creation of millions of
refugees — were written off as an unforeseen nuisance.
The result is that hundreds of armed groups are
active in Syria, the country is being bombed by anyone
who feels like it and restoring peace has become
almost impossible. Months of work by Russian and
United States experts under the direction of Russia’s
Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Secretary of State
of the United States, along with the involvement of
the Presidents of both countries, resulted in a detailed
plan, set out in documents finalized on 9 September,
which if carried out in good faith could have enabled
us to calm the situation on the ground, significantly
improve the humanitarian situation and kick-start a
resumption of intra-Syrian negotiations under United
Nations auspices. Thanks to sabotage on the part of
an intractable opposition, the plan’s implementation
was endlessly delayed. Our agreements had a lot of
opponents and, sadly, we have begun to feel that their
unconstructive position has outweighed the desire for
peace and common sense.
The United States has in fact admitted its inability to
exert any influence over the groups under its patronage,
and thus to genuinely fulfil our agreements, which
above all entail distinguishing the moderate groups
from the terrorists and truly effect such a separation on
10/24

25/09/2016

the ground. That was written down in black and white
in all the documents. But nothing has been done. Even
the issue of defining terrorist groups has produced
nothing but wondering, suggesting that the main aim
continues to be protecting the military capacity of
the opponents of the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic, whoever they may be. Unscrupulous methods
and exceedingly dubious allies have been useful in
that regard.
New conditions and ultimatums that change with
dizzying speed are constantly being issued. Requests
for a ceasefire, sometimes for 48 hours, sometimes
for 72, are constant. We have always met them
halfway, or at least tried to, and reached agreement
with the Syrian Government. But in the end what has
happened is that the militants have regrouped, received
reinforcements and launched new offensives. After
that came the demand that a precondition was that the
Syrian Government should unilaterally halt its air-force
flights. First they said it would be for three days, and
we agreed to that. Then they said no, that the President
of the United States had changed his mind and it had
to be seven days, although it was not clear why. Such
tactical tricks cannot go on forever. We are not going to
agree to any unilateral steps any more.
The bombardment by the so-called coalition forces,
reported in this case to be British aircraft, of the Syrian
army positions defending the Syrian city of Deir ez-Zor
from the terrorists of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, was a serious blow to the agreements. There
was a real danger that the terrorists would capture the
city, leading inevitably to the slaughter of civilians.
Fortunately, the Syrian armed forces, assisted by the
Russian air force, succeeding in averting that potential
tragedy. Needless to say, that also created a threat to the
ceasefire, but Damascus displayed enviable restraint in
that regard.
Since my colleagues — understandably — have
talked about the situation in which a humanitarian
convoy was shelled, I naturally have something to say
about it, too. There are two aspects to this.
First, I would like to note that here in New York
we first heard about it from the United States Secretary
of State, who said, in a private conversation, that they
had received intelligence that, for a few minutes, two
Russian aircraft had been somewhere not far from
the area where the humanitarian convoy had been
travelling and where it was attacked. But he said that
16-29803

25/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East

we should not worry and that they were not going to
make the information public, since it had to be further
investigated. As usual, however, there were leaks from
various Washington agencies a few minutes later, and
the following day the Secretary of State made the
tragedy a centrepiece of his dramatic statement in the
Security Council (see S/PV.7774). That is the kind of
way we have to work with our American colleagues.
Secondly, we said from the very beginning that
everything should be investigated. This was because at
first there were reports of artillery shelling, but after
that there was talk of helicopters and, later, aircraft. I
am not a military expert, but today I read somewhere
that the bombing allegedly lasted seven hours. But if
the Russian planes were somewhere in the area for a
few minutes, could bombs have been falling on the
convoy for seven hours? I do not think so. We should
therefore investigate that. By the way, our Western
counterparts promised to inform us two months ago
about their investigation of the bombardment of the
Syrian city of Manbij, in which it was reported that
more than 100 civilians had been killed, apparently by
French aircraft. But neither our French colleagues nor
the American coalition leaders have been in a hurry
to tell us about the conclusions of that investigation,
which they promised to conduct two months ago.
I now return to Aleppo. The humanitarian situation
there could have been normalized as long ago as
August. But we were prevented in this by the armed
groups, which, with the implicit sanction of their
outside sponsors, continued to dictate the operational
conditions and fire on the humanitarian corridors.
We were close to a breakthrough even in September.
The Government withdrew its forces to the agreedon distances and the authorities set up one of the
checkpoints stipulated in the 9 September agreement,
with the participation of Syrian Arab Red Crescent
personnel, and gave permission for the humanitarian
convoy to go through. And once again there ensued
militant provocations.
I would just like to explain the situation in eastern
Aleppo in a bit more detail. The area is under the
control of more than 20 armed groups totalling about
3,500 combatants. The main force consists of about
2,000 units of Jabhat Al-Nusra. They are armed with
tanks, armoured vehicles, field artillery and rocket
launcher systems, not to mention the homemade socalled hell cannons used to shoot gas cylinders, as
well as dozens and dozens of other pieces of military

S/PV.7777

hardware, including heavy weaponry. Needless to say,
such hardware is anything but homemade; I believe it
continues to be supplied by generous Western patrons
with the connivance of the United States leadership of
the coalition. That reminds me of an episode to do with
Libya, when a question was posed at the congressional
hearings held at the end of 2013, at which the United
States Secretary of State was present, asking for
information about the fact that it was known that some
countries had supplied 20,000 tons of arms to Libya,
while the United States looked the other way. No doubt
the State Department was forced to give Congress that
information. We asked for it to be shared with us as
well, but we have received nothing, despite the fact that
the United States is obliged to do so in order to comply
with Security Council resolutions on Libya.
I suggest that the scope of military support to the
motley crew in Syria is significantly bigger than it
was in Libya. The Government forces’ positions and
the city’s residential areas are being shelled daily and
indiscriminately from the eastern districts of Aleppo,
with no adjustments or aiming and with a view to
inflicting maximum damage. Since 1 September, the
shelling from the eastern part of the city has resulted
in the deaths of more than 50 troops and 120 civilians.
Jabhat Al-Nusra specializes in situating weapon
positions in areas where there is significant social
infrastructure — pumping stations, power substations,
hospitals, schools, mosques — and in densely populated
urban areas, thereby turning civilians into human
shields for terrorists.
Jabhat Al-Nusra’s primary attacks take place to the
north, across the Castello Road, and the south-west,
through the Ramousa district, with the aim of breaching
the Government’s defences and creating a corridor for
the passage of reserves, weapons and ammunition,
often in the guise of humanitarian aid. By the way, our
American colleagues told us long ago that Al-Nusra was
not present in Aleppo but only somewhere in the South.
Eventually they admitted that it also had a presence in
the North, but that they were going to let us know what
the situation was there. Al-Nusra is in fact the main
military force there. According to the information we
have, more than 80 per cent of the population in the
city’s eastern districts supports lifting the siege through
peaceful negotiations and is asking the terrorists to
leave the city. Some of the volunteer opposition militias
in Aleppo have been trying to find an opportunity to

16-2980311/24

S/PV.7777

The situation in the Middle East

negotiate with the Government, but Jabhat Al-Nusra
has been firmly suppressing such sentiments.
Since 1 September, seven mass executions have
been recorded of those who supported negotiations or
tried to leave the city. On 19 September, 26 men and
teenagers who had refused to take up arms in support
of Al-Nusra were shot dead in front of residents of
the Sheikh Hader neighbourhood. We have seen mass
exoduses along the seven humanitarian corridors
created by Russia and the Syrian Government, which
speak to the savage reprisals that have been made
against civilians. As they leave, the civilians receive
humanitarian aid. More than 4,000 civilians and about
300 fighters have left Aleppo’s eastern districts along
the corridors since the operation began.
The armed groups have blocked humanitarian
access to the city. Since 12 September, Russia, Syria
and the United Nations have been trying to ensure
the passage of humanitarian convoys to the eastern
part of Aleppo using the Castello Road, and measures
have been taken to demilitarize it in order to achieve
that. The forces along it have been withdrawn twice,
on 14 and 16 September. On 17 September, Syrian Red
Crescent personnel installed a checkpoint on its western
side. The opposition has refused to take the same
measures on their side, as stipulated in the RussianAmerican agreements of 9 September. The illegal Fateh
Haleb armed group coalition, the local Aleppo council
and the provisional opposition Government have all
declared that they would not let aid into the city via the
Castello Road, and militants have threatened to attack
the convoys. As a result, the humanitarian operation in
Aleppo that Russia and the United Nations prepared
at the end of August has been wrecked. The militants
confiscate food, water and medicines from civilians
and force them to work on building defences.
There have been riots in the neighbourhoods of
Avvad, Al-Ansari and Sahur, and protests have been
brutally suppressed by terrorists using arms. Similarly,
more than 200,000 Aleppo residents have been taken
hostage by terrorists from Jabhat Al-Nusra and groups
affiliated with it, in attempts to use women and children
as human shields.
Government forces are protecting the Castello and
Ramousa Roads, and those surrounding them, which
are strategically important to the city as supply routes.
They fire only in response to terrorist attacks and at
known and verified targets. They are also combating
12/24

25/09/2016

Al-Nusra’s intense efforts to penetrate the city from the
south-west and north. In order to try to break through,
the terrorists have made active use of suicide bombers
in mined cars and armoured troop carriers. More than
40 such attacks have been recorded in Aleppo since
1 August.
Aircraft have been used against militant targets
and groups only with the use of air gunners and
target illumination. The main objective is to force the
terrorists out of the city with a minimum of civilian
casualties. The militants are being offered negotiations,
and a special northern corridor to the Castello Road has
been set up for those exiting with arms. The RussianAmerican agreements of 9 September provide for a
mechanism guaranteeing safe exit for combatants
monitored by the United Nations. All those who want
amnesty are offered a simplified process for regulation
of their status. There are officials from the Russian
reconciliation centre in the humanitarian corridor areas
whose job it is to monitor the situation and prevent
inhumane treatment of militants. Civilians are offered
all possible means for leaving the city and getting away
from the armed groups, but the terrorists obstruct this.
We are seeing attempts to launch a media campaign
to discredit the measures the Government is taking to
force out terrorists, using faked or old video, some of
it made in western Aleppo. The scale of the operations
is exaggerated and the shelling is filmed in the city’s
abandoned south-western districts, where hostilities
have been fierce for more than a month, and made out
to be indiscriminate strikes against peaceful parts of
eastern Aleppo.
I will now turn to the political process and address
myself to Mr. Staffan de Mistura as well as, obviously,
to Council members. The political process must be
resumed. Frankly, we do not understand why there has
been no decisive action in that regard since May. In
that regard, I would like to recall that paragraph 9 of
the first statement of the International Syria Support
Group provided that
“[t]he
participants
together
with
the
United Nations will explore modalities for, and
implementation of, a nationwide ceasefire to be
initiated on a date certain and in parallel with this
renewed political process.”
What that means is that continuing the political
process is a fundamental condition that would have
16-29803

25/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East

helped to ensure that the ceasefire was established and
complied with.
I would like to ask Mr. De Mistura who it is who
has been refusing to engage in direct talks all this time?
We know the answer, but I would like to hear it from
his lips. Perhaps it is time to stop dancing around the
irresponsible politicians who pretend to represent the
interests of the Syrian people. If they do not want to
conduct negotiations, let them go back to the foreign
capitals where they have found a haven. We should bring
forward those representatives of the Syrian opposition
who really want to lead their country out of the crisis,
and we know they exist.
And of course there is the ceasefire. We would
like it to remain our goal, along with the resumption
of negotiations. I want to stress once again that we can
talk about restoring the ceasefire only on the basis of a
collective approach, one in which it is not we who have
to unilaterally prove anything to anyone but rather up to
others to convince us of their sincere desire to dissociate
the opposition cooperating with the American-led
coalition from Jabhat Al-Nusra. After that, Jabhat
Al-Nusra must be beaten and the opposition made part
of the political process. If they fail to convince us, that
will only increase our suspicions that all this was done
to take the heat off Jabhat Al-Nusra. The only way
out, therefore, is through honest, joint work to enable
every side to implement the ceasefire agreements rather
than pushing unilateral demands about whom to offer
gestures of goodwill in the hope of profiting from it
down the road.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Envoy De Mistura for his briefing.
The clashes in the areas of Syria under discussion
have recently escalated, resulting in heavy civilian
casualties, and a United Nations humanitarian
assistance convoy has been attacked. China is very
concerned about this. We regret the fact that Syrian
Government forces were hit by an airstrike and suffered
casualties, and hope that all the parties concerned will
improve their coordination and prevent such incidents
from happening again.
The Syrian conflict has persisted for more than five
years now. China is deeply sympathetic to the suffering
of the Syrian people and believes that the situation cannot
be allowed to continue. Right now, the priority is for all
parties in Syria to work to effectively implement the
Security Council resolutions on the Syrian issue. The

S/PV.7777

international community should pursue all four tracks
of a ceasefire, political negotiations, humanitarian aid
and cooperation against terrorism, in order to facilitate
the finding of a solution to the question of Syria.
China hopes that the agreement reached between the
Russian Federation and the United States regarding the
cessation of hostilities among all Syrian parties will be
successfully implemented so as to create opportunities
to improve the situation on the ground. The international
community should work in collaboration to urge all
parties in Syria to effectively implement the agreement
in order to resume the ceasefire as soon as possible.
The more complex the situation in Syria, the
more important it is to uphold the general direction of
political settlement, give full play to the United Nations
in its role as the main channel of mediation, continue
to support the efforts of Special Envoy De Mistura,
relaunch the Geneva talks as soon as possible, and press
ahead on a Syrian-owned and -led political process
so as to achieve arrangements that accommodate all
interests. Countries of the region should play a positive
role in promoting a political settlement in Syria.
The humanitarian situation in Syria is becoming
more and more precarious with each passing day. All
parties in Syria must provide full humanitarian access
and ensure that humanitarian supplies can be delivered in
a timely and safe manner. The international community
should continue to scale up its humanitarian assistance
to Syria so as to alleviate the humanitarian situation
on the ground, provide assistance to neighbouring
countries and help them in hosting refugees.
Counter-terrorism is a very important component
of any solution to the situation in Syria. The Syrian
conflict has led to the rise and spread of terrorism.
Unless we root it out, there will be no peace for the
Syrian people and no security for regional countries.
The international community should work with resolve
to combat all terrorist forces listed by the Security
Council, including the Islamic State. In the process of
international counter-terrorism cooperation, we must
enhance intelligence-sharing, prevent and stop social
media from spreading extremist ideology, and cut off
the flow of terrorists and their channels of financing.
China has made unremitting efforts to promote a
political settlement in Syria, and stepped up its efforts
to urge all parties to end the conflict as soon as possible
and achieve a comprehensive political solution. China

16-2980313/24

S/PV.7777

The situation in the Middle East

25/09/2016

stands ready to play a constructive role in promoting a
full, just and appropriate settlement in Syria.

the perpetrators of this attack, and that the facts will
undergo a thorough investigation.

Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela has always maintained that the search
for a peaceful and negotiated solution to the conflict
in Syria must be based on respect for the sovereignty,
political independence and territorial integrity of the
country, bearing in mind the legitimate Government as
a key figure in the process. In the midst of this bloody
and prolonged conflict, the cessation of hostilities
agreement announced on 9 September by the co-Chairs
of the International Syria Support Group was welcomed
positively, yet cautiously, with a view to paving the
way for greater understanding in pursuit of peace and
stability in Syria.

Without a doubt, these two regrettable events
have sparked an escalation in the conflict and led to
attacks on both sides. Added to all of this is suffering,
which is what matters most in a country whose entire
institutional framework has been severely impacted by
the war waged on it by terrorists and their alliances, who
refuse to accept self-evident truths. Any decision about
the fate of Syria and its Government belongs solely and
exclusively to the Syrian people, since the solution to the
conflict and its differences can be reached only through
political dialogue and negotiation. That is why armed
confrontation and foreign intervention are doomed to
failure and only damage the prospects for peace and
stability in the region. That was tragically manifest in
the horrific events in Libya and Iraq, brother countries
left forlorn and blood-stained by military interventions
and interference of foreign Governments.

Unfortunately, it must be said that the United
States-led coalition against the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant took military action last weekend against the
Syrian army, jeopardizing the cessation of hostilities
agreed to a few days earlier. Venezuela condemns and
laments the inexplicable attack on positions of the
Syrian Arab Army carried out by American, British
and Australian aircraft, manned by the aforementioned
coalition, on 17 September. The attack was followed by
a ground offensive launched by Da’esh in an effort to
make headway on the ground. At the high-level meeting
on Syria on Wednesday, 21 September (see S/PV.7774),
United States Secretary of State, John Kerry said the
attack was a mistake. We have to say that it seriously
undermined the cessation of hostilities and the fragile
trust between the parties. This is especially grave in
the light of the fact that, as we all know, the city of
Deir ez-Zor and its 250,000 inhabitants is besieged by
Da’esh and is being defended only by a Syrian military
contingent.
This unfortunate attack was immediately followed
by another attack against humanitarian aid convoys
heading to the city of Aleppo, resulting in the deaths of
humanitarian workers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent.
This was an appalling act against humanitarian staff
who, in the adverse conditions of war, carry out the
noble duty of providing aid to civilians in need of
humanitarian assistance. We reiterate that such people
cannot be viewed as military targets, which is why
all attacks directed towards them have international
criminal consequences. Furthermore, we hope that
premature conclusions will not be drawn regarding
14/24

Given that the main enemy in the region and
country is terrorism, a genuine commitment to
peace requires that the moderate opposition end its
relationship of convenience with Da’esh, the Al-Nusra
Front and the recently created Jabhat Fateh al-Sham.
The latter seeks to disguise its terrorist acts by
aligning itself with moderate opposition groups so as
to continue receiving the political and military support
of other countries. However, the abdominal images of
the atrocities committed by these so-called moderate
opposition groups against the civilian population
of Aleppo — such as is the beheading of a 12-yearold Palestinian boy among the sadism, laughter and
mockery of the combatants of the so-proclaimed
moderate opposition — are still fresh in our memory.
Our country shares the widespread concern over
the humanitarian situation in Syria. It is a catastrophe.
There have been major violations of international law
and in the protection of civilians in Aleppo. We are
alarmed by the loss of human life and that the situation
on the ground may threaten the progress achieved since
the cessation of hostilities. However, we believe that
convening this emergency meeting only to turn it into
political propaganda against the Russian Federation
and the Syrian Government contributes in no way to
restoring trust among the parties or to alleviating the
humanitarian situation, much less to supporting efforts
on the ground to resume negotiations and the a potential
ceasefire.
16-29803

25/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East

We believe that the Security Council must shoulder
its enormous responsibilities in this conflict in terms
of maintaining international security and peace.
Furthermore, regardless of the differences among its
members or their own national positions, the Council
must support the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, in his efforts to
resume political negotiations and pursue a path towards
peace that includes the legitimate Government of
President Bashar Al-Assad throughout the entire long
and complex process.
Lastly, we must not give up. The Syrian people
have hope for and trust in the United Nations to move
forward in restoring peace to their long-suffering
country.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We meet
again today to make our statements and stress our
various positions on the Syrian crisis, which has lasted
for over five years. Regrettably, this meeting is being
held against the backdrop of continued differences
between regional and international Powers with
influence on the ground, which have thus far failed
to realize that the only party bearing the brunt of this
crisis is the Syrian people, particularly Syrian mothers
who have had to choose between letting their children
face great danger on the high seas rather or having them
stay with them at home.
We have held several meetings in New York in
the past few days on the crisis in Syria, both in the
Security Council and in the International Syria Support
Group (ISSG). All have agreed on two major points:
first and foremost, that we all recognize that the war
in Syria is a proxy war and that stopping the bloodshed
is up to the forces taking part in military operations,
whether directly or indirectly; and, secondly, that the
implementation of the recent agreement between Russia
and the United States on a cessation of hostilities is the
only available opportunity to achieve a ceasefire and
restart the political process before it is too late.
I will not speak at length, as the assessment of the
current situation is glaringly clear. However, I would
like to express my regret that the co-Chairs of the ISSG
have thus far failed to implement their agreement. We
would also like to express our surprise and regret with
regard to the differing accounts of what is taking place
on the ground at this critical juncture, although the
United States and Russia both possess the necessary
technological prowess to monitor the situation.

S/PV.7777

I once again call upon them both to set aside their
rivalries and political differences in order to bear their
responsibilities and focus on coordinating their bilateral
cooperation to implement the cessation of hostilities,
without any media confrontations that may be used by
some to aggravate the situation and kill all hope for a
political process.
I also call upon all Powers with an ability to
influence the conflict and the battles taking place on the
ground to support the implementation of the agreement
between Russia and the United States in good faith.
I also call upon Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura to
prepare for the relaunching of direct negotiations
among the Syrian parties as soon as possible, without
preconditions by any of those parties.
This is a wake-up call: hundreds of thousands
have died and millions have been displaced. The time
has come for us all to think first and foremost of the
interests of the Syrian people. This must be done free
of narrow interests, political aspirations or acts of
external polarization on the part of those that have
never cared for Syria, which have served to destroy the
country and open the door to armed groups and terrorist
organizations, allowing them to infiltrate Syria and
impose their will.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank France, the United Kingdom and the United
States for calling this meeting. It was necessary that
the Security Council meet today, given the worsening
situation. We are facing the most intensive wave of air
strikes since the war in Syria began. I thank Mr. Staffan
de Mistura for his work and for his refusal to throw in
the towel.
Our first message can only be a firm condemnation
of the brutality of the attacks that have taken place in
recent days. The rejection of the cessation of hostilities
by the Al-Assad regime and its declared intention to
take over eastern Aleppo through assault certainly
contravenes every resolution of the Security Council
regarding this conflict. In the face of this challenge, the
international community has the responsibility to take
urgent measures. It is now up to those members of the
Security Council with direct influence on the Al-Assad
government, the Russian Federation in particular, to
put an end to the escalation of violence in Aleppo.
Despite the very serious nature of the situation, Spain
continues to believe that it is still possible to find a way

16-2980315/24

S/PV.7777

The situation in the Middle East

out of this conflict through diplomatic means: we are
with Staffan.
There are three key steps upon which we — the
International Syria Support Group and the Security
Council — must concentrate our efforts: first,
guaranteeing a ceasefire; secondly, ensuring
humanitarian access; and, thirdly, creating the necessary
conditions to resume United Nations mediation. Spain
therefore supports the proposal put forward by the United
States to put an end to the air strikes. We continue to trust
that it could serve as a basis for a new agreement between
the co-Chairs of the International Syria Support Group.
We support that proposal primarily because we believe
that our priority should be on the humanitarian community,
which requires minimum measures of confidence so that the
conveyance of aid to Aleppo can resume. But we support it
as well because we are aware of the importance of separating
the opposition from terrorist groups. As highlighted
by our Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation,
Mr. García-Margallo, here a few days ago (see S/PV.7774),
it is important to draw the line and make it clear to the
opposition that the time has come to make a choice, to decide
which side they are on, without any ambiguity.
We are open to considering options to improve the
supervision of the cessation of hostilities, as proposed by
France. However, the most urgent matter is to put an end to
the fighting, in particular the indiscriminate attacks against
civilians, the besieging of citizens uninvolved in the conflict
and the destruction of critical buildings and infrastructure
necessary for the survival of the inhabitants of Aleppo.
I conclude with a reference to the attack against
the United Nations/Syrian Arab Red Crescent convoy
on 19 September. This is not just another serious attack
against civilians in recent days, but also a flagrant
violation of international humanitarian law that cannot go
unpunished. We will attentively follow the conclusions of
the investigation opened by the Secretary-General in order
to demand accountability to an adequate extent.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank Special Envoy De
Mistura for his briefing and for his stated determination
not to give up on his mission, in which he has our
full support.
We deeply regret that this meeting is being held
due to such a negative turn of events in Syria, with
the collapse of the ceasefire agreement, renewed air
strikes and general fighting in the city of Aleppo. The
devastating effects of the latest escalation of fighting
16/24

25/09/2016

on the civilian population cannot be overstated. It
is deeply regrettable that the United States and the
Russian Federation have been unable to effectively
implement their coordinated agreement on a cessation
of hostilities and collective action against the terrorist
groups operating in Syria.
We share the frustration of most Council members.
We were led to believe that the International Syria
Support Group would be a more effective mechanism
for spearheading the Syrian peace process. However, it
seems that key stakeholders in the group are pursuing
a diplomatic process that is losing credibility on the
ground in Syria, here at the United Nations and in the
eyes of world public opinion.
The concern that some key opposition groups are
cooperating with known terrorist organizations is
legitimate. It is essential to distinguish between them.
However, indiscriminate attacks on civilian areas and
facilities cannot be condoned, regardless of whether or
not terrorist fighters might be present in those areas.
It is also evident that there are elements seeking to
undermine the efforts towards a cessation of hostilities
and the provision of humanitarian assistance. We
believe that it is time for the United States and Russia to
involve other relevant stakeholders, including members
of the Security Council, in the negotiation process for
the modalities of a ceasefire agreement in order to
provide a more effective and long–lasting solution to
the key concerns that have so far stalled the process.
The Syrian Arab Republic cannot continue being
a stage for international rivalries and for a proxy war
between regional and international Powers. The political
and humanitarian repercussions of the Syrian conflict
are likely to hound us for generations to come unless
a timely solution is found. Considering that secretive,
bilateral negotiations have yielded very poor results
in the quest for a final solution to the stalemate, we
strongly request that a more open, inclusive approach
be taken in order to salvage the prospects for peace and
reconciliation and to deliver much-needed humanitarian
relief for the civilian population, particularly in the city
of Aleppo.
Finally, although in despair, we are ready and
willing to join Security Council in responding to
Mr. De Mistura’s appeal to the Council to push for a
cessation of violence and a weekly 48-hour ceasefire
pause permitting the provision of humanitarian
assistance, press for medical evacuations, and urge a
16-29803

25/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East

strong recommitment on the part of the co-Chairs of
the International Syria Support Group to salvage the
cessation of hostilities agreement.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): By
convening today’s emergency meeting on a Sunday,
it is our collective conscience that you, Madam, are
appealing to. Just some four days after the high-level
meeting that was organized here by your country, we
meet here once again at the joint request of France, the
United States and the United Kingdom, whom I thank
for this initiative, to consider once again the untenable
situation of the Syrian people, who are victims of a
conflict that is completely out of their hands. I thank the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, for the first-hand information he has provided
us with and for his ongoing commitment to his work,
despite calls for his resignation.
The President of Senegal announced here four
days ago (see S/PV.7774) that what is happening
in Syria is unsustainable. Despite meeting after
meeting, negotiation after negotiation, resolution after
resolution, under the bombs human lives are destroyed
and houses, markets, schools and health-care clinics are
destroyed in violation of all international humanitarian
rules. Despite the praiseworthy efforts and good will
of humanitarian organizations, an entire population
is suffering and an entire country is collapsing along
with its economy and rich, multi-faith cultural heritage.
Here, four days ago, the President of Senegal asked
how long this could last. The cessation of hostilities
that was obtained through resolution 2268 (2016), and
which is critical to the timely delivery of humanitarian
assistance and the relaunching of the political process,
is now seriously compromised.
Moreover, the hope we had pinned on the recent
cessation of hostilities agreement reached between the
United States of America and the Russian Federation,
co-Chairs of the International Syria Support Group
(ISSG) — which provided safe humanitarian aid
corridors and coordinated action against terrorist
groups, in particular the Islamic State and Fatah
al-Sham, formerly the Al-Nusra Front — has ultimately
been dashed by the large-scale attack on eastern Aleppo.
At the high-level meeting on 21 September, Senegal
urged the ISSG co-Chairs to ensure the maintenance of
the ceasefire. The Senegalese delegation reiterates its
support for the establishment of a joint command centre
to monitor the situation for as long as the ceasefire is
in effect.

S/PV.7777

Given the serious nature of the situation in Syria,
and in particular in Aleppo, Senegal is convinced more
than ever that peace in Syria must be underpinned by
scrupulous respect for international humanitarian law.
That is why we support the three recommendations
made by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. De Mistura: protection of civilian infrastructure, a
48-hour humanitarian relief pause and authorization of
medical evacuation. He also told us that several loaded
trucks are ready and waiting to go.
We therefore need a strong and lasting consensus
among parties in the fight against terrorism, the
international community’s common enemy. For as long
as the Council is divided and the International Syria
Support Group is in deadlock, terrorist organizations
will continue to thrive in Syria, attracting an increasing
number of foreign terrorist fighters and making that
country a safe haven for criminal groups. In the light
of this sad observation, the Senegalese delegation
reiterates its full confidence in Mr. De Mistura’s
ongoing efforts to seek a political solution to the Syrian
crisis. War is not an option.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): As we
talk here, bombs continue to fall in Aleppo. Children
continue to die. Women continue to die. The elderly
continue to die. Civilian protection, which we always
claim to be a State’s primary responsibility, does not
seem that be much in practice today when we consider
the intensification of events taking place in Aleppo.
What is happening is none other than a massacre.
That is what occurs when bombs are dropped on the
civilian population, medical facilities and schools.
Nothing justifies a massacre — absolutely nothing. We
thought that we might have been able to relax somewhat
on the weekend after we bade farewell to our respective
delegations, but last night we were summoned to this
meeting. And now we ask, what will the Council do for
Syria? What will be the result of our deliberations in
the face of this horrendous situation?
Regrettably, I have come to the conclusion that,
whatever we say in our respective speeches here
to voice our disdain and reiterate our positions on
the situation — I could reiterate our call to uphold
humanitarian law, protect civilians amid the horror of
war and for each sector to shoulder its responsibility — if
the ghastly bombing of eastern Aleppo and its civilian
population continues, the people there will not end
up in the hands of the terrorists, they will simply be

16-2980317/24

S/PV.7777

The situation in the Middle East

exterminated. I could also reiterate our support for
Mr. Staffan de Mistura. When my colleagues in Geneva
and I talk about Staffan, we always refer to him as our
constant hero. We are fascinated by his constancy and
unfathomable optimism.
(spoke in English)
He is our constant hero, but he is not a superhero.
If Staffan could make progress on his own and — we
say this very frankly — if two members of the Security
Council — I am referring to the United States and
Russia — could resume talks and manage in some way
to restore the process, my delegation and others could
support it.
Once again, we urge the Russian Federation and
the United States to attempt to meet as they have done
many times in the past to resume the process. Without
them, bombs will continue to be dropped, people will
continue to die and the war itself will continue — we
know that wars can be interminable — and the horror
will continue. We believe that both the Russian
Federation and the United States have acted in good
faith as they worked together. We believe that many
things have occurred to along the way to pull them
apart. Nonetheless, following the example of our
constant hero, we ask that they display a similar level of
constancy and continue to work together because they
will certainly find support among the vast majority of
the members of the Council to help to gradually restore
peace in Syria and give its people a semblance of a
normal life.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I thank the President for
having convened today’s meeting to discuss, yet again,
another numbing development.
Mr. Staffan de Mistura’s latest update provides a
bleak picture on the challenges that we face in Syria. Just
four days ago, we received a strong and clear message
from the Secretary-General in this very Chamber,
(see S/PV.7774) highlighting our collective failure on
Syria. I recall that all Council members, and even the
Syrian representative, expressed hope and support for
the 9 September agreement between the United States
and Russia. Everyone in the Chamber agreed that
there is no military solution to the conflict. We are
all in agreement on need to abide by the cessation of
hostilities, adhere to international law, protect civilians
and allow humanitarian deliveries.
18/24

25/09/2016

Alas, just when we thought that things could not
possibly get any worse in Syria, we were gravely
mistaken. We are again shocked by callous air strikes
against civilians in Aleppo, carried out using incendiary
weapons and bunker-buster bombs. Hundreds of people
were killed or wounded, many of them children. Babies
and children were trapped in the rubble and crushed
to death. Nearly 2 million people are left desperately
without access to running water as the city’s main
water pumping station was destroyed, placing children
at the particular risk of water-borne diseases.
Malaysia condemns the latest military escalation
in Aleppo, which constitutes a flagrant breach of
the agreed cessation of hostilities and seriously
undermines the 9 September agreement. The latest acts
of aggression dash whatever benefit of the doubt we had
accorded to the conflicting parties. It raises questions
about the commitment and sincerity in upholding their
obligations on the cessation of hostilities.
Malaysia calls on the conflicting parties not to lose
sight of peace and to use every window of opportunity
to urgently recommit to the 9 September agreement,
particularly to cease fighting. I reiterate our demand
for the conflicting parties to respect international
humanitarian law, including in providing unfettered
humanitarian access and in protecting civilians and
civilian infrastructure, including children, relief or
rescue personnel, schools and hospitals. I also echo
the call by the Secretary-General for independent
investigation and accountability on the various acts
of atrocities against civilians that may constitute
war crimes.
In conclusion, Malaysia views favourably the
initiative by France to create a credible and effective
monitoring mechanism to oversee and report on the
ceasefire and humanitarian access. Malaysia stands
ready to engage constructively on that proposal. At this
point, we must not give up hope. We must not despair. We
need to urgently move beyond verbal condemnations or
pronouncements and we need to come up with effective
and concrete actions that would make a difference to
thousands of Syrian lives on the ground.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank the delegations
of the United States, United Kingdom and France for the
initiative to hold today’s briefing, and the presidency
for promptly responding to their request. We are also
grateful to Special envoy Staffan de Mistura for his
candid assessment and his courage.
16-29803

25/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East

The latest turn of events is extremely disturbing,
especially on the heels of last week’s high-level
meeting on Syria in this very Chamber (see S/PV.7774).
We condemn the decision of Damascus and its allies
to stage an offensive against eastern Aleppo. It is a
flagrant violation of all relevant Security Council
resolutions and the most recent Geneva arrangements.
Ukraine is not privy to all the details of the most recent
rounds of negotiations among all the parties involved
in the Syrian issue. However, what matters in this
situation is the fact that the actions of the Syrian regime
and its allies go against the very core of international
humanitarian law. They violate every fundamental
principle of human decency. Is that the state of affairs
that the Security Council is prepared to accept as a fact
of life, or is it something that the Council can finally
master the courage to counter? The latter is dependent,
of course, on the political will of just a couple of Council
members, first and foremost on Russia.
More than 200 civilians were killed and 300
wounded in the last 48 hours of sustained aerial and
ground bombing of besieged eastern Aleppo. It speaks
volumes of the true intentions of Bashar Al-Assad
and his Russian allies, and there is no doubt that
such casualty numbers are not final. We agree with
the Secretary-General’s comments yesterday on the
situation in Syria. We are also appalled by the chilling
military escalation in Aleppo. The recent statement by
the Syrian delegation at the General Assembly that
“the victory was even greater because the
Syrian army was progressing in the war against
terrorism” (see A/71/PV.16)
appears particularly cynical and revealing.
Available information on the use of incendiary
weapons and advanced munitions, such as bunkerbuster bombs, in the ongoing fighting around Aleppo
sheds greater light on destructive Russian involvement.
Throughout the year, the Ukrainian delegation has
repeatedly voiced reservations and doubts about the
true nature of Russian involvement in the Syrian
conflict. On repeated occasions, we have been proved
right — which, by the way, does not make us happy.
In this case, we would have been delighted to have
made a mistake. I am not going to repeat what we
have said on numerous occasions. I will just say that
any hopes of reaching a workable arrangement with
Russia and the Al-Assad regime at this moment are
misplaced. As long as these two parties are resolutely

S/PV.7777

bound to a military solution, any pause in the fighting,
any ceasefire agreement, any political hesitance or
unwarranted benefit of the doubt will be mercilessly
exploited by the hawks in Damascus and Moscow to
improve their military positions and to strengthen their
negotiation positions.
As we speak, Russia has just completed
redeployment of additional Sukhoi Su-25 jets designed
for close air support to Syria. Let us also convey a
clear message to those planning to retake eastern
Aleppo. The idea that a regime victory would lead to an
enforced stability in Syria is a dangerous fantasy. The
realization of the so-called Grozny scenario in Syria
is not possible and not sustainble. I will remind the
council that Grozny is the capital of Chechnya, the city
that was razed to the ground by the Russian military
in 1994 and 1995 during the First Chechen War. Those
days, the Russian military commanders used to say
that it was aimed to force terrorists out of the city with
minimal casualties among civilians. Sounds familiar,
does it not? If recent history is any guide, there are no
prospects for a military solution in Syria. Those who
think otherwise will have to face consequences of their
actions on the battlefield and international arena alike.
Is it worth more and more Syrian lives? I doubt it.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): I thank you, Madam, for
convening this meeting. I would also like to extend
my appreciation to Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his
detailed briefing. Last week, the week of 19 September,
was the high-level week for the General Assembly. It
should have been a breakthrough for the crisis in Syria.
We had already welcomed the agreement reached on
9 September between the United States and the Russian
Federation.
We expected that the reduction in violence would
allow for expanded and unimpeded humanitarian
access and the resumption of the political process.
Instead, this year’s high-level week began with the
shocking news from Oram Al-Kubra in rural Aleppo.
A warehouse of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent (SARC)
and a United Nations-SARC aid convey were attacked.
Japan extends its sincere condolences to the families
of all humanitarian workers killed while doing their
invaluable work in Syria. Japan calls upon the United
Nations to investigate this incident and to release the
results publicly. Furthermore, Japan calls upon all
of the relevant stakeholders to ensure the security of

16-2980319/24

S/PV.7777

The situation in the Middle East

humanitarian aid workers who engage in humanitarian
assistance in Syria.
The results of the escalation of the fighting in
Aleppo during the past few days is reported to have
been extremely devastating. We express our deepest
concern about the situation on the ground. Protection
and access must be achieved urgently. A particularly
serious test for humanitarian access will arrive on
Monday. Humanitarian convoys scheduled to deliver
items to eastern Aleppo are sitting at the TurkeySyria border but the food supplies will soon expire.
We strongly urge the Syrian Government, opposition
groups, and all States that have influence on them to
work to enable these trucks to enter into eastern Aleppo.
We all share the view that only an immediate
ceasefire can alleviate this devastating situation.
Without a ceasefire, the increase to humanitarian access,
the protection of civilians, and the resumption of the
political process will never be attained. The important
thing now is to get the agreement between Russia and
the United States back on track. In light of the horrible
intensification of the fighting and the catastrophic
humanitarian situation, we must overcome our
differences and unite to halt this breathtaking tragedy.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of New Zealand.
As our colleague from Senegal reminded us, it
is only four days since my Prime Minister convened
a meeting in this Chamber (see S/PV.774), at which
leaders agreed upon several points. They agreed that
there can be no military solution to the Syrian conflict.
They agreed on the urgent need to stop the fighting
and to put our combined efforts behind ensuring the
arrangement between the United States and Russia to
restore the cessation of hostilities. They agreed that the
Syrian people had suffered far too much and that full,
unhindered humanitarian assistance for those in need
was essential, and they agreed on the need to create the
conditions for the resumption of political talks.
Our leaders did not agree on everything pretend
there were any easy solutions, but they did agree, at
least, on this much. It is therefore with utter dismay
that we find ourselves back in this Chamber as Syrian
planes, reportedly with Russian support, inflict carnage
on eastern Aleppo. These actions, which reportedly
include the use of incendiary and other indiscriminate
weapons, are disturbing and demonstrate total disregard
for their devastating impact on civilians. But what is
20/24

25/09/2016

most appalling is that these actions are shattering any
remaining hopes we had for maintaining the cessation
of hostilities and getting the peace processes back on
track.
As my Prime Minister made clear in this
Chamber a few days ago, words are not enough. All
those who claim to support peace must back words
with action. My delegation demands that the Syrian
Government immediately ceases bombing of civilians
and demonstrates genuine commitment to achieving a
negotiated peace, and we appeal to all those genuinely
committed to a political solution to do the same,
especially those with the greatest influence on the
Syrian Government.
I speak in particular to those whose political and
material support is making the Syrian Government’s
current actions possible. That support is undermining
any remaining prospects for the peace process and
it is destroying innocent lives under the guise of
countering terrorism. The Syrian Government needs to
ground its planes, hold back its armies, and honour its
commitments under resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2268
(2016). New Zealand appeals to the Government of
Russia and to Iran, too. If they are serious about peace,
they should do everything in their power in the coming
days to halt the fighting and give the United StatesRussia arrangement a chance. We recognize that the
opposition, too, has responsibilities.
All those with influence over the opposition must
encourage it to respect the ceasefire and disassociate
itself from terrorist groups. However, what the Syrian
Government and its allies are doing is making that
disassociation harder and prolonging the war. All those
involved in Syria need to take a hard look at themselves
and ask whether they intend to be genuine collaborators
in the search for peace. So, we too join other Council
members in putting our full support behind Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria Staffan de
Mistura’s request and calls on the Council — his call for
the support, his call for the cessation of hostilitiesand
putting protection of civilians as a priority, the 48-hour
pauses and medical evacuations.
We admire Mr. De Mistura’s determination and his
belief that the current course of events can be turned.
For New Zealand’s part, we will do what we can to find
a common cause in the Council for action to enforce the
cessation of hostilities in Syria, as he has asked of us. A
16-29803

25/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East

continuation of this conflict benefits no one, certainly
not Syrian civilians.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): A colleague of the three States that called
to convene this meeting — namely, the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom — mentioned
that my country, Syria, is broken and moribund. I
would like to reassure him that my country has never
been broken and will never be broken. His words are
tantamount to the dream of Satan to ascend to Paradise.
These are mere mixed dreams that cannot be interpreted
and they are meaningless. They are not worthy of a
permanent member of the Security Council. As for
the three permanent members together, they sounded
as if they were reinventing the wheel when they said
that the Syrian Government was trying to recapture
Aleppo. What a great discovery! As if Aleppo were a
town in Djibouti or Afghanistan — or in Brazil, for that
matter. I reassure them that the Syrian Government will
recapture the entire city of Aleppo. If the countries’ of
the permanent members of the Security Council each
have one capital, we have two capitals, Damascus and
Aleppo.
If Shakespeare or the pioneers of the Theatre of
the Absurd, Jean Genet, Adamov, Kaf ka, Kierkegaard
and Georges Shehadeh, were to come to life again,
they would have written better tragedies and better
plays than they did in their time. They would never
have even heard the kind of lies that were told to King
Lear. Some of them are mourning the deaths of the very
persons whom they killed with their own hands. They
weep crocodile tears. Thirteen times, the same three
permanent members that called for this urgent meeting
have aborted a presidential statement that would have
condemned terrorist car bombs and suicide bombers as
well as erroneous strikes by their own forces. Thirteen
times, those countries aborted the adoption of a mere
presidential statement condemning a terrorist act in
Syria. They have also foiled the efforts of our friends in
the Council to adopt resolutions condemning terrorism.
But when a lone French terrorist named Mohammed
Merah wreaked havoc in the French city of Toulouse,
he was killed by 300 bullets at the hands of elite French
forces. And good riddance. But no one in Syria or

S/PV.7777

elsewhere ever called that French terrorist a member of
a moderate armed opposition group. Nor do we refer to
terrorists that way in the United States or other places.
Even if Spain were to give away the Basque region — or
France Corsica or Great Britain Scotland or the United
States California or Texas — the Syrian Government
would never relinquish one inch of its territory, as laid
down in its Constitution and in international law.
Once again, the Council is meeting today at the
request of a number of members who are attempting
to rescue the armed terrorist groups that they falsely
classify them as the moderate armed opposition. They
do that whenever indications point to the possibility
that these groups, under attack from the Syrian Arab
Army and their allies, face defeat. They overlooked
the crime committed by the Nur al-Din al-Zanki rebel
group when they beheaded Abdullah Issa, a Palestinian
child, before the eyes of the world. At that time, that
rebel group, together with the Al-Nusra Front, was in
control of the Handarat Palestinian refugee camp in
Aleppo. We believe that the call for this urgent meeting
is a message from the countries that called it to the
Al-Nusra Front and the other terrorist groups, namely,
that their support and political cover will continue
unhindered, and that the weapon of terrorism as a
means of political pressure on the Syrian Government
and its allies is still viable.
It is the constitutional responsibility of the Syrian
Government to protect our citizens from the acts of
armed terrorist groups that have inflicted suffering
on our people in Aleppo, a responsibility similar to
that of other Council members. The Syrian Army and
its allies began the military operation two days ago,
specifically after the end of the so-called seven-day
halt to military operations, in the wake of the failure
of the so-called truce. They made every effort to
protect civilians, advising them to stay away from the
armed terrorist groups in neighbourhoods of eastern
Aleppo. The Army made every effort to give civilians
a safe exit and to provide them with housing and the
basic necessities of life, including for those who had
been deceived into taking up arms against the State.
By contrast, the armed terrorist groups continued to
prevent civilians from leaving eastern Aleppo, with the
intention of using them as human shields. We know that
there are 2 million inhabitants of Aleppo, 1.75 million
of whom are living under the authority of the State
in areas controlled by the State, while 275,000 are

16-2980321/24

S/PV.7777

The situation in the Middle East

hostages living under duress in eastern Aleppo, which
is controlled by the Al-Nusra Front and its allies.
In that context, my country condemns the use of
internationally prohibited weapons. We stress that all
military operations conducted by the Syrian Army
and its allies on Syrian territory abide by the Charter
of the United Nations and international laws, and are
consistent with the Council’s resolutions on combating
terrorism. In that respect, my Government denounces
the fabricated accusations levelled by certain members
of the Council and the most senior United Nations
officials against the Syrian Army and its allies through
alleging that they use internationally prohibited
weapons or that they deliberately target civilians.
Such false accusations by the most senior Secretariat
officials will ensure that this international Organization
will meet the same fate as the League of Nations. Such
irresponsible behaviour will bring it down.
It is indeed bewildering that the Secretary-General
and his senior aides should make such false accusations
based on fabricated testimony given by terrorists. And
this is while ignoring incontrovertible evidence that
armed terrorist groups, including the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), have used chemical weapons
dozens of times against military personnel and civilians
and that ISIL has seized a chlorine gas factory situated
40 miles from Aleppo.
I have just received information to the effect
that terrorists disguised as Syrian military personnel
are plotting to use toxic chemicals, including yellow
phosphorus, against Syrian civilians. The aim of the
operation of these terrorists, dressed in Syrian military
fatigues, is to fake photographs and videos that suggest
that these crimes were committed by the Syrian military.
That is exactly what they are now doing with pictures
of the little boy named Omran and other victims. They
are the victims of their terrorism, and the aim of the
photographs is to blackmail the Council and world
opinion. Those toxic chemical materials are located in
a garbage dump outside the city of Suraqeb, north of
Aleppo. The toxic material is 20 kilometres from Idlib,
buried 12 metres underground in a depot containing six
barrels of it. On 6 September, the warehouse housing
yellow phosphorous material was visited by two female
United States experts, who then left for Turkey.
This is a proof to the Security Council, like other
tens of letters we have conveyed to this organ in
connection with terrorist activities in my country.
22/24

25/09/2016

Those who commit war crimes in Syria are wellknown. They are the ones who killed more than 200
civilians in the town of Manbij, bombed a school for the
deaf in Raqqa and targeted the Syrian army in Deir ezZor, in support of Da’esh, and who for the past several
years have been providing all kinds of support for the
tens of thousands of terrorists who have been brought
to Syria from more than 100 countries, according to the
Council’s own reports.
My Government has a keener interest than anyone
else in putting an end to the bloodshed in Syria and
to the prolonged suffering of the Syrian people.
Accordingly, we welcomed the United States-Russia
agreement on fighting the two terrorist groups Da’esh
and the Al-Nusra Front and their allies — distinguishing
between the terrorist Al-Nusra Front and the so-called
genetically modified moderate armed opposition
groups — and ceasing hostilities for one week. While
we were committed to the agreement, those who employ
terrorist groups in Syria told them to reject it. More
than 20 armed terrorist groups immediately rejected it,
including the Ahrar Al-Sham, Nur al-Din al-Zanki and
the Al-Nusra Front. That rejection was accompanied by
targeting the Syrian Army on the Castello Road and
at various other positions. They violated the agreement
300 times before it expired, leading to the martyrdom
of 200 civilians and 157 military personnel, as well as
to hundreds of seriously injured victims.
In a premeditated attempt to sabotage and bury the
agreement before it began, the military aircraft of the
so-called international coalition led by the United States
bombarded the positions of the Syrian Arab Armed
Forces fighting Da’esh in the area of Mount Thardeh
in Deir ez-Zor. The terrorists seized a humanitarian
assistance convoy in the Aleppo suburbs and set fire
to it. As usual, this was accompanied by a fabricated
media and political campaign that accused the Syrian
Army and its allies of committing the crime. That was
not the first time that these groups have committed
such horrific crimes.
It is truly deplorable that certain members of the
Council, in addition to the most senior United Nations
officials, including the Secretary-General, continue
to call on the Syrian Government and its allies to
adhere to the cessation of hostilities — despite all
kinds of evidence on the ground proving that since the
beginning, those countries have been backing armed
terrorist groups, which have never wanted and will
never want this endeavour to succeed.
16-29803

25/09/2016

The situation in the Middle East

That was made abundantly clear by the violations
of the agreement by the armed terrorist groups and the
so-called international coalition. Worse still, the United
States shirked the responsibility for its main obligation,
namely, to differentiate between the Al-Nusra Front
and those groups that it insists on classifying as
moderate armed opposition groups. That avoidance of
responsibility has aborted all the progress achieved over
five years towards ending the war of terror imposed on
our country, and clearly demonstrates a lack of political
will on the part of those who sponsor terrorism to stop
the bloodshed — as if the objective were to neutralize
the Syrian forces fighting terrorism, especially the
Syrian Air Force, instead of finding a solution to the
crisis.
With the terrorist war now entering its sixth year,
is it not time for certain members of the Council to stop
deceiving themselves and public opinion by insisting
on protecting and supporting what they refer to at times
as the moderate opposition, at others as the moderate
armed opposition and at still others as non-State armed
groups? All such groups are only one side of the same
coin — terrorism — which has had a boomerang effect,
through attacks, terrorist activities and the propagation
of extremist ideologies in those members’ capitals,
owing to their flawed policies and practices, which
they continue to advocate against my country to this
day. Would any representative in this Chamber dare
to justify the support given by some for four years
in the form of hundreds of millions of dollars and
thousands of tons of weaponry to Nur al-Din al-Zanki,
the terrorists who beheaded that Palestinian child, an
event that the Security Council has lamented today?
That terrorist group, whose name demonstrates that it
is an agent of the Turkish regime, exposed the political
media campaigns and claims aimed at portraying it as
a moderate opposition group when it announced that
it was operating under the authority of the terrorist
organization the Al-Nusra Front.
My country will remain committed to its national
constitutional duty to combat terrorism in all its forms.
It is now incumbent on certain members of the Council
and other members of the international community to
end their exploitation of the Syrian people’s suffering,
which they have created themselves through their
military, political and financial support for armed
terrorist groups. The politicization of the humanitarian
crisis, aimed at achieving ends that have nothing to do
with humanity or the interests of the Syrian people, will

S/PV.7777

lead only to a prolongation of the crisis and of the plight
of Syrian people, as well as a proliferation of terrorism
that threatens international peace and security.
Our commitment to fighting terrorism goes hand
in hand with our commitment to reaching a political
solution through intra-Syrian talks through which the
Syrians shall decide the future of their country without
any foreign intervention. Solutions imposed from
outside are totally rejected by the Syrian people.
With regard to solutions imposed from abroad, they
are completely and categorically rejected by the Syrian
Government. In that regard, I must emphasize that any
political solution can be successful only if it provides
the necessary support and circumstances that will
enable it to be implemented through efforts to combat
terrorism and to continue national reconciliation, which
has already succeeded in many areas.
Finally, everyone must realize that the real war
against terrorism has not yet begun. The victory of
the Syrian Government and its allies over terrorism
is inevitable. That victory will be part of the Security
Council’s resolutions on combating terrorism and in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
I would like to conclude by saying that the Syrian
Air Force has air-dropped assistance to the residents of
Deir ez-Zor, the city that fell victim to the terrorism of
ISIL in the wake of the bombing by the United States
Air Force of the Syrian army bases that protected it.
The President: I now again give the floor to Mr. De
Mistura to respond to Council members’ comments.
Mr. De Mistura: I wish to respond to one specific
question, which was very precise and clearly raised by
the Ambassador of the Russian Federation.
First, I would like to reply that I am guided by
the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and by
resolution 2254 (2015), both with regard to the agenda
and the invitations. I have in the past — and this is
my reply — witnessed refusals for active direct talks
from the High Negotiations Committee, which set
preconditions. I asked the Ambassador of Syria, who
was also the representative of the Syrian Government in
Geneva, whether the Syrian delegation wanted to have
at that time direct talks with the delegations that were
present at the times. The Ambassador of Syria — I ask
him to correct me if I am wrong — indicated that he did
not want to discuss with terrorists or representatives
of terrorists or participants in terrorism. I can confirm

16-2980323/24

S/PV.7777

The situation in the Middle East

that I will send the invitations. Obviously, the political
process cannot be held hostage by the security
environment.
At the same time, let me recall what was stated
in that regard. On that special day — I consider
9 September a special day, or evening rather — there
was a long and very detailed discussion between the
Russian Federation and the United States. At that time,
I made a statement on behalf of the United Nations in
which I said the following:
“The United Nations hopes that the implementation
of this understanding will facilitate without
preconditions renewed efforts to reach a Syrianowned and Syrian-led political settlement of the
conflict, as called for by the Geneva communiqué
and by resolution 2254 (2015). I will then proceed
to consult with the Secretary-General and the
International Syria Support Group in order to be
able to launch it.”
That is still my hope. I can therefore confirm that
when I send the invitations, as per resolution 2254
(2015), I will do that for direct talks.
The President: The representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I wish to make a simple clarification and to
comment about what the Special Envoy has just said.
At the Vienna II conference, held to prepare for
Geneva, Jordan was charged with determining who
was a terrorist and who was not, and Saudi Arabia was
charged with determining who was in the opposition
and who was not, so that we could take those two

24/24

25/09/2016

definitions to Geneva with us. Neither Jordan nor Saudi
Arabia established such definitions, and the problem
was again referred to the Geneva conference. We then
found out that terrorists had been invited to the Geneva
conference. Afterwards, they were excluded because
everyone found out that they were terrorists.
On the other hand, the Syrian Government has been
repeatedly to Geneva and will return there to engage
in an intra-Syrian dialogue — not a Syrian terrorist
dialogue — without outside interference and without
any impositions. Therefore, we need the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Syria to gather all the
opposition groups in one delegation, which would
come to negotiate with the delegation of the Syrian
Arab Republic. We are not prepared to negotiate with
terrorists, or with hundreds of genetically modified
armed terrorist groups. We are a Government that is
prepared to negotiate with one united delegation of the
national opposition that truly desires an intra-Syrian
settlement without outside interference.
We do not consider all members of the opposition
terrorists, as was suggested by the statement of the
Special Envoy. However, we would like to negotiate with
those who believe in Syria and in the future of Syria
and the dialogue among Syrians without their being
used in the service of external agendas. I reiterate that
the Syrian Government is prepared to return to Geneva
and to resume the dialogue, but not with the deaf or the
mute or the blind. We want to resume the dialogue with
Syrian nationals like us who believe in our country and
do not serve an external agenda and spend their days in
five-star hotels and get paid by Governments who use
them in cheap tricks.
The meeting rose at 1.40 p.m.

16-29803
