VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

against the oil companies that supply crude oil and petroleum
products to the racist regime of South Africa;
14. Requests all States that have not yet done so to take
effective measures to end the supply of funds and other
forms of assistance, including military supplies and equipment, to the regimes that use such assistance to repress the
peoples of the colonial Territories and their national liberation movements;
15. Condemns all military activities and dispositions of
a military character in Namibia and other colonial Territories
which are prejudicial to the interests of the peoples of those
Territories and to their right to self-determination and
independence;
16. Calls upon South Africa and the colonial Powers
corn:erned to end the military activities and dispositions of
a military character in Namibia and other colonial Territories
and to eliminate the military bases in accordance with the
provisions of the pertinent resolutions of the General Assembly, in particular paragraph 9 of the Plan of Action for
the Full Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
oflndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, adopted
by the General Assembly in its resolution 35/118;
17. Reiterates that the exploitation and plundering of
the natural resources of Namibia by South African and other
foreign economic interests, in violation of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council
and of Decree No. I for the Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia, enacted by the United Nations Council
for Namibia on 27 September 1974, 36 are illegal and contribute to the maintenance of the illegal occupation regime;
18. Strongly condemns South Africa for its continued
exploitation and plundering of the natural resources of Namibia, in complete disregard of the legitimate interests of
the Namibian people, and for its illegal extension of the
territorial sea and its proclamation of an economic zone off
the coast of Namibia;
19. Calls once again upon all States to discontinue all
economic, financial and trade relations with South Africa
concerning Namibia and to refrain from entering into economic, financial or other relations with South Africa, acting
on behalf of or concerning Namibia, which may lend support
to its continued illegal occupation of that Territory;
20. Invites all Governments and organizations of the
United Nati_ons system, having regard to the relevant provisions of the Declaration on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, contained in General Assembly resolution 3201 (S-VI) of I May 1974, and of the Charter
of Economic Rights and Duties of States, contained in Assembly resolution 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, to
ensure that the permanent sovereignty of the colonial Territories over their natural resources is fully respected and
safeguarded;
21. Requests the United Nations Centre on Transnational Corporations to prepare from available sources a register indicating the profits that transnational corporations
derive from their activities in colonial Territories and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh
session;
22. Calls upon the administering Powers to abolish every discriminatory and unjust wage system prevailing in the
Territories under their administration and to apply an
equitable system of wages;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to continue, through
the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat, a
sustained and broad campaign with a view to informing
world public opinion of the facts concerning the pillaging
36

Ibid., vol. I, annex II.

203

of natural resources in colonial Territories and the exploitation of their indigenous populations by foreign monopolies
and the support they render to the colonialist and racist
regimes;
24. Appeals to all non-governmental organizations to
continue their campaign to mobilize international public
opinion for the enforcement of economic and other sanctions
against the Pretoria regime;
25. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
to continue to examine this question and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
70th plenary meeting
24 November 1981

36/52.

Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the
international institutions associated with the
United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the
international institutions associated with the United Nations",
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in its
resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, and the Plan
of Action for the Full Implementation of the Declaration,
contained in the annex to its resolution 35/118 of 11 December 1980, as well as all other relevant resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly on this subject, in particular resolution 35/29 of 11 November 1980,
Recalling also its resolution ES-8/2 of 14 September 1981
on the question of Namibia,
Taking into account the relevant decisions adopted by the
Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at New Delhi from 9 to 13 February 1981, 37
by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
Unity at its thirty-sixth ordinary session, held at Addis
Ababa from 23 February to I March 1981, by the Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of
Non-Aligned Countries on the Question of Namibia, held
at Algiers from 16 to 18 April 1981, 38 by the United Nations
Council for Namibia at its extraordinary plenary meeting
held at Panama City on 5 June 198139 and by the Assembly
of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity at its eighteenth ordinary session, held at
Nairobi from 24 to 27 June 1981, 40
Having examined the reports submitted on the item by
the Secretary-General, 41 the Economic and Social Counci142
and the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 43
See N36/ 116 and Corr. I, annex.
See N36/222-S/14458 and Corr. I, annex. For the printed text, see
Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-sixth Year, Supplement for
April, May and June 1981.
39
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session,
Supplement No. 24 (N36/24), para. 222.
40
See N36/534, annex.
4
' N36/154 and Add.1-3; NAC.109/L. 1389.
42
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 3 (N36/3/Rev. l), chap. XXX.
43
Ibid .. Supplement No. 23 (N36/23/Rev. l), chap. VI.
37

38

204

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

Aware that the struggle of the people of Namibia for selfdetermination and independence is in its most crucial stage
and that after the failure of the pre-implementation talks.
held at Geneva from 7 to 14 January 1981, it has sharply
intensified as a consequence of the defiant attitude and
stepped-up aggression of the illegal colonialist regime of
Pretoria against the Namibian people and the increased allround support rendered to that regime by the United States
of America and other Western States, and that it is therefore
incumbent upon the entire international community decisively to intensify concerted action in support of the people
of Namibia and their sole and authentic representative, the
South West Africa People's Organization, for the attainment
of their goal,
Deeply conscious of the critical need of the Namibian
people and their national liberation movement, the South
West Africa People's Organization, and of the peoples of
other colonial Territories for concrete assistance from the
specialized agencies and other organizations of the United
Nations system in their struggle for liberation from colonial
rule in their efforts to achieve and consolidate their national
independence,
.Reaffirming the responsibility of the specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system to take
all necessary measures, within their respective spheres of
competence, to ensure the full and speedy implementation
of the Declaration and other relevant resolutions of the
United Nations, particularly those relating to the provision
of moral and material assistance, on a priority basis, to the
peoples of the colonial Territories and their national liberation movements,
Deeply concerned that, although there has been progress
in the extension of assistance to refugees from Namibia, the
actions taken hitherto by the organizations concerned in
providing assistance to the people of the Territory through
their national liberation movement. the South West Africa
People's Organization, still remain inadequate to meet the
urgent needs of the Namibian people,
Expressing its confident hope that closer contacts and
consultations between the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system and the Organization of African Unity and the national liberation movement concerned will help to overcome procedural and other
difficulties which have impeded or delayed the implementation of some assistance programmes,
Recalling its resolution 35/227 D of 6 March 1981 . in
which it requested all specialized agencies and other organizations and conferences of the United Nations system
to grant full membership to the United Nations Council for
Namibia as the legal Administering Authority for Namibia.
Expressing its appreciation to the General Secretariat of
the Organization of African Unity for the continued cooperation and assistance extended by it to the specialized
agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system in connection with the implementation of the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations,
Expressing its appreciation also to the Governments of
the front-line States for the steadfast support extended to
the people of Namibia and their national liberation movement, the South West Africa People's Organization, in their
just and legitimate struggle for the attainment of freedom
and independence despite increased armed attacks by the
forces of the racist regime of South Africa, and aware of
the particular needs of those Governments for assistance in
that connection,
Noting with satisfaction the intensified efforts of the
United Nations Development Programme in the extension
of assistance to the national liberation movements and commending its initiative in establishing channels for closer

periodic contacts and consultations between the specialized
agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system and the Organization of African Unity and the national
liberation movements in the formulation of assistance
programmes.
Noting also the support given by the specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system to the
implementation of the Nationhood Programme for Namibia.
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 32/9 A of
4 November 1977,
Gravely concerned at the continued collaboration between
the International Monetary Fund and the Government of
South Africa in disregard of the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly.
Noting with sati.1faction the high-level meetings held at
Geneva in April 1981 between representatives of the General
Secretariat of the Organization of African Unity and the
secretariats of the United Nations and other organizations
of the United Nations system, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 35/ 117 of IO December 1980, on the
question of co-operation between the United Nations and
the Organization of African Unity .
Mindful of the necessity of keeping under continuous
review the activities of the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system in the implementation of the various United Nations decisions relating
to decolonization.
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the question; 4 '
2. Reaffirms that the specialized agencies and other organizations and institutions of the United Nations system
should continue to be guided by the relevant resolutions of
the United Nations in their efforts to contribute, within their
spheres of competence, to the full and speedy implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
3. Reaffirms also that recognition by the General Assembly, the Security Council and other United Nations organs of the legitimacy of the struggle of colonial peoples
to exercise their right to self-determination and independence entails, as a corollary, the extension by the specialized
agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system of all the necessary moral and material assistance to
those peoples and their national liberation movements;
4. Expresses its appreciation to those specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system
which have continued to co-operate in varying degrees with
the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity
in the implementation of the Declaration and other relevant
resolutions of the United Nations, and urges all the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United
Nations system to accelerate the full and speedy implementation of the relevant provisions of those resolutions;
S. Expresses its concern that the assistance extended
thus far by certain specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to the colonial peoples.
particularly the people of Namibia and their national liberation movement. the South West Africa People's Organization. is far from adequate in relation to the actual needs
of the peoples concerned;
6. Regrets that the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund continue to maintain links with the colonialist racist minority regime of South Africa, as exemplified
by the continued membership of South Africa in both agencies. and that neither has taken the necessary measures to-

VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

wards the full implementation of the relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly;
7. Deeply deplores the persistent collaboration between
the International Monetary Fund and South Africa, in disregard of repeated resolutions to the contrary by the General
Assembly, and calls upon the International Monetary Fund
to put an end to such collaboration;
8. Urges the executive heads of the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund to draw the particular attention of their governing bodies to the present resolution
with a view to formulating specific programmes beneficial
to the peoples of the colonial Territories, particularly
Namibia;
9. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to render or continue
to render, as a matter of urgency, all possible moral and
material assistance to the colonial peoples struggling for
liberation from colonial rule;
10. Requests once again the specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system to continue
to provide all moral and material assistance to the newly
independent anc! emerging States;
11. Reiterates its recommendation that the specialized
agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system should initiate or broaden contacts and co-operation
with the colonial peoples and their national liberation movements, directly or, where appropriate, through the Organization of African Unity, and review and introduce greater
flexibility in their procedures with respect to the formulation
and preparation of assistance programmes and projects so
as to be able to extend the necessary assistance without
delay to help the colonial peoples and their national liberation movements in their struggle to exercise their inalienable right to self-determination and independence in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
12. Notes with satisfaction that the South West Africa
People's Organization continues to be the recipient of a
number of programmes established within the framework
of the United Nations Institute for Namibia at Lusaka and
that the United Nations Council for Namibia, in co-operation
with the South West Africa People's Organization, continues to represent the people of Namibia at meetings of the
specialized agencies and other organizations and institutions
of the United Nations system, and urges those agencies and
organizations to increase their assistance to the South West
Africa People's Organization, the United Nations Institute
for Namibia and the Nationhood Programme for Namibia;
13. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system which have not already
done so to include in the agenda of the regular meetings of
their governing bodies a separate item on the progress they
have made in the implementation of the Declaration and
other relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
14. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, in accordance with
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council, to take all necessary measures to withhold
any financial, economic, technical or other assistance from
the Government of South Africa, to discontinue all support
to that Government until it restores to the people of Namibia
their inalienable right to self-determination and independence and to refrain from taking any action which might
imply recognition of, or support for, the legitimacy of the
domination of the Territory by that regime;
15. Notes with sati.1faction the arrangements made by
several specialized agencies and organizations of the United
Nations system which enable representatives of the national
liberation movements recognized by the Organization of
African Unity to participate fully as observers in the pro-

205

ceedings relating to matters concerning their respective
countries, and calls upon those agencies and organizations
which have not yet done so to follow this example and to
make the necessary arrangements without delay;
16. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system which have so far not
granted full membership to the United Nations Council for
Namibia to do so without delay;
17. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations and institutions of the United Nations system to
extend, as a matter of priority, substantial material assistance to the Governments of the front-line States in order
to enable them more effectively to support the struggle of
the people of Namibia for freedom and independence and
to resist the violation of their territorial integrity by the
armed forces of the racist regime of South Africa, directly
or, as in Angola. through puppet traitor groups in the service
of Pretoria;
18. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations and institutions of the United Nations system to
assist in accelerating progress in all sectors of the national
Ii fe. particularly in the development of the economies of the
small Territories:
19. Recommends that all Governments should intensify
their efforts in the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system of which they are
members to ensure the full and effective implementation of
the Declaration and other relevant resolutions of the United
Nations and, in that connection, should accord priority to
the question of providing assistance on an emergency basis
to the peoples in the colonial Territories and their national
liberation movements;
20. Proposes, under article III of the Agreement between the United Nations and the International Monetary
Fund, 44 the urgent inclusion in the agenda of the Board of
Governors of the International Monetary Fund of an item
dealing with the relationship between the Fund and South
Africa and further proposes that, in pursuance of article II
of the Agreement, 44 the relevant organs of the United
Nations should participate in any meeting of the Board of
Governors called by the Fund for the purpose of discussing
the item;
21. Draws the attention of the specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system to the Plan
of Action for the Full Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples. contained in the annex to General Assembly resolution 35/ 118, in particular to those provisions calling upon
the agencies and organizations to render all possible moral
and material assistance to the peoples of the colonial Territories and their national liberation movements;
22. Urges the executive heads of the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system,
having regard to the recommendations contained in paragraph 11 above and the provisions of paragraph 21 above,
to formulate, with the active co-operation of the Organization of African Unity where appropriate, and to submit
as a matter of priority to their governing and legislative
organs concrete proposals for the full implementation of the
relevant United Nations decisions, in particular specific programmes of assistance to the peoples of the colonial Territories and their national liberation movements;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to assist
the specialized agencies and other organizations of the

4
'
See Agreements betv,e,•11 th,· Ur1ited Nations ar1d the Speciali:<•d
Agn1ci<'s and the lnfl>rnatumal Atomic /:'nergr A.genn' ( United Nation"
puhlicat,on. Sales No. Ell-' 61 X I l. p 61

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

206

United Nations system in working out appropriate measures
for implementing the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations and to prepare for submission to the relevant bodies,
with the assistance of those agencies and organizations, a
report on the action taken since the circulation of his previous report in implementation of the relevant resolutions.
including the present resolution;
24. Requests the Economic and Social Council to continue to consider, in consultation with the Special Committee, appropriate measures for co-ordination of the
policies and activities of the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system in implementing
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
25. Requests the Special Committee to continue to consider this question and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
70th plenary meeting
24 November 198/

36/53.

United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa, in particular resolution 35/30 of 11 November 1980,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the Programme for 1980/81, 45 containing an account of the
work of the Advisory Committee on the United Nations
Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa
and of the operation of the Programme during the year.
Noting with grave concern the significant decline in the
level of contributions received in 1981 and the consequent
sharp decrease in the number of new awards granted and
the total number of scholarship holders,
Strongly convinced that the continuation and expansion
of the Programme is essential in order to assist the peoples
of South Africa and Namibia,
Recognizing that supplementary contributions are urgently required in order to enable the Programme to meet
its current level of obligations and that increased contributions for the coming fiscal year are required to meet the
growing needs for assistance,
Taking account of the desirability of providing educational opportunities and counselling to student refugees in
a broad spectrum of professional, cultural, technical and
linguistic disciplines suitable for their future functions, notably, in the fields of development and international cooperation,
l. Endorses the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Educational and Training Programme for
Southern Africa;
2. Takes note with grave concern of the deficit facing
the Programme in the current financial year because of escalating costs and a decrease in contributions in both ahsolute and real terms;
3. Expresses its appreciation to all those who have supported the Programme by providing contributions, scholarships or places in their educational institutions;
4. Requests the Secretary-General and the Advisory
Committee on the United Nations Educational and Training
Programme for Southern Africa to take all possible measures
for the promotion of generous contributions to the Programme;

5. Appeals to all States, institutions, organizations and
individuals, in view of the increasing demand for educational opportunities by the people of South Africa and
Namibia and the rapidly increasing costs of higher education
and training, to offer greater financial and other support to
the Programme in order to ensure its continuation, effectiveness and expansion.
70th plenary meeting
24 November 1981

36/54.

Offers by Member States of study and training
facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing
Territories
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 35/31 of 11 November 1980,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General on
offers by Member States of study and training facilities for
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories, 46 prepared
under General Assembly resolution 845 (IX) of 22 November 1954,
Considering that more scholarships should be made available to the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories
in all parts of the world and that steps should be taken to
encourage applications from students in those Territories,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
that have made scholarships available to the inhabitants of
Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Invites all States to make or continue to make generous offers of study and training facilities to the inhabitants of those Territories that have not yet attained selfgovernment or independence and, whenever possible, to
provide travel funds to prospective students;
4. Urges the administering Powers to take effective
measures to ensure the widespread and continuous dissemination in the Territories under their administration of information relating to offers of study and training facilities
made by States and to provide all the necessary facilities
to enable students to avail themselves of such offers;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session on the implementation of the present resolution;
6. Draws the attention of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
70th plenary meeting
24 November /98/
36/62.

Question of Bermuda, the British Virgin
Islands, the Cayman Islands, Montserrat and
the Turks and Caicos Islands
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Bermuda, the British
Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Montserrat and the
Turks and Caicos Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 47
46

A/36/580 and Add. I.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/36/23/Rev. I), chaps. III-V and XVIII-XXII.
47

45

A/36/147.
