S/2017/224

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 March 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan (covering
the period from 16 December 2016 to 1 March 2017)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2327
(2016), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) until 15 December 2017 and requested me to report on
the implementation of the mandate every 90 days. It covers developments from
16 December 2016 to 1 March 2017 and contains recommendations on the steps to
adapt UNMISS to the situation on the ground and to i ncrease the efficiency of the
implementation of its mandate.

II. Political and economic developments
Peace process
2.
Since the adoption on 16 December 2016 of resolution 2327 (2016), there has
been minimal progress towards implementation of the Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan (the peace agreement). Gichira
Kibara (Kenya), the new Chair of the National Constitutional Amendment
Committee established under chapter I of the peace agreement, visited Juba in
December. During his visit, he consulted with members of the Constitutional
Amendment Committee and the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission on
the Amendment Committee’s work and the need to develop an action plan for the
implementation of the mandate of the Committee. On 15 December, the Ministry of
Justice inaugurated the technical committee for the consultative process on the
establishment of the Commission for Truth, Reconciliation and Healing, in
accordance with chapter V of the peace agreement. The technical committee is
chaired by the Ministry of Justice and includes representatives from the Ministry of
Gender, Child and Social Welfare, the South Sudan Peace Commission, the South
Sudan Human Rights Commission and faith-based and civil society organizations.
Since its establishment, the technical committee has started mapping conflict
patterns and hotspots to be considered for national consultations.
3.
On 14 December, the President of South Sudan, Salva Kiir, announced the
launch of a national dialogue initiative under his patronage. The President stated
that the process would take a three-phased approach starting with grass-roots
consultations, followed by regional peace conferences and culminatin g in a national
conference in Juba. He further said that the Transitional Government of National

17-03816 (E)

170317

*1703816*

S/2017/224

Unity would work closely with regional and international partners to enhance the
credibility and effectiveness of the process. On 16 December, the Transitional
National Legislative Assembly endorsed the national dialogue proposal.
4.
On 19 December, Mr. Kiir appointed four advisers as patrons of the process
and a 26-member National Dialogue Steering Committee comprising
parliamentarians, retired military commanders and religious leaders, with the
mandate to develop an agenda and timetable for the national dialogue that would not
contravene the terms of the peace agreement. The Steering Committee will be
assisted by five advisers and a 15-member secretariat representing seven national
institutions. In a letter dated 1 March 2017 addressed to Mr. Kiir, Paride Taban,
Bishop Emeritus of the Catholic Diocese of Torit, asked to be excused from his role
as Co-Chair of the Steering Committee, citing his advanced age and previous
retirement from official functions.
5.
On 21 February, speaking at the opening of the second session of the
Transitional National Legislative Assembly, Mr. Kiir stressed that the national
dialogue, as the chief priority of the Government for 2017, was designed with
flexibility and transparency to unite the people of South Sudan and consolidate
peace and security. According to the President, other priority tasks for 2017 include
implementation of the peace agreement, economic recovery and improved r elations
with regional and international partners.
6.
Mr. Kiir’s national dialogue initiative received mixed reactions. The Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement/Army (SPLM/A) in Opposition, led by Riek Machar,
welcomed a national dialogue process in principle but raised concerns regarding the
political context and implementation modalities, in particular Mr. Kiir’s credibility
to lead the process. They asserted that national dialogue must be anchored in
accountability and justice through the Hybrid Court for South Sudan and be
complementary to the peace agreement. The exiled leader of the National
Democratic Movement, Lam Akol, argued that peace was a prerequisite for a
meaningful bottom-up national dialogue and called for an inclusive national
dialogue conference to be held outside the country and facilitated by a neutral
entity. Other opposition leaders, including from the Democratic Change Party and
the former political detainees, welcomed the initiative, but stressed the need for
inclusivity. Civil society and faith-based organizations generally supported the
concept of a grass-roots approach to a national dialogue, although some
organizations, including the South Sudan Council of Churches, have expressed
reservations over the current configuration of the Steering Committee. The
voluntary civil society task force on the implementation of the peace agreement
discussed the role of civil society organizations in the national dialogue initiative
and agreed to consult the population and present their findi ngs to the Steering
Committee for consideration.
7.
On 29 January, on the margins of the twenty-eighth African Union Summit, the
African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) and the
United Nations held a consultative meeting and issued a joint statement expressing
deep concern over the continuing spread of fighting, risk of mass atrocities and the
dire humanitarian situation in South Sudan. The statement called for an immediate
cessation of hostilities and an inclusive political proc ess. The three organizations
encouraged the African Union High Representative for South Sudan, Alpha Oumar
Konaré, to undertake active shuttle diplomacy towards ensuring inclusivity in the
national dialogue and implementation of the peace agreement, in clo se consultation
with the Chair of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, Festus Mogae,
as well as IGAD and the United Nations.

2/16

17-03816

S/2017/224

Other political developments
8.
On 14 January, Mr. Kiir issued a decree creating four additional states in
greater Upper Nile and Western Equatoria and rearranging state administrative
boundaries. The decree now brings the total number of states to 32 from the 28
created by establishment order 36/2015. The pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition
and the National Democratic Movement condemned the creation of new states. Also
in January, Mr. Kiir replaced the governors of Boma, Eastern Nile, Gbudwe,
Gogrial, Ruweng and Twic, and appointed governors for the newly established
states and renamed states of Akobo, Bieh, Central Upper Nile, Northern Upper Nile,
Latjor, Maiwut and Tambura. During their swearing-in ceremony on 20 January,
Mr. Kiir urged the new governors to improve intercommunal relations and directed
them to lead the national dialogue process in their respective state s. In early
February, Mr. Kiir also replaced the governors of Imatong and Fashoda.
9.
Since February, five senior government and military officials have resigned
from their positions, accusing Mr. Kiir and the SPLA command of pursuing an
agenda of ethnic domination through the Jieng (Dinka) Council of Elders. These
included the SPLM/A in Opposition-nominated Minister of Labour, Public Service
and Human Resources Development, the SPLA Deputy Chief of General Staff for
Logistics, the SPLA Head of Military Courts, the SPLA Director of Military Justice
and the SPLA Logistic Support Brigade Commander.
Economic developments
10. December became the thirteenth month of triple-digit inflation, with the yearon-year consumer price index estimated at 479.7 per cent, largely driven by the
increasing devaluation of the South Sudanese Pound and compounded by continued
low oil production. The rapid depreciation of the currency and salary arrears further
undermined household purchasing power across South Sudan. On 14 Ja nuary,
Mr. Kiir replaced the Governor and Deputy Governor of the Central Bank as well as
the Deputy Minister for Finance and Economic Planning. On 23 January, the
President replaced the Board of Directors of the state-owned Nile Petroleum
Company, followed by the replacement of the Managing Director on 20 February.
The President instructed the newly appointed officials to urgently address the
deteriorating economic situation. Furthermore, with support from the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), Japan and the African Development
Bank, the International Monetary Fund concluded its 2016 article IV mission to
South Sudan in early December, and called for the implementation of fiscal
stabilization measures and prudential action in the public financial management
framework to address economic challenges. The Fund urged the authorities to
eliminate fuel subsidies and ghost workers on government payrolls and reduce the
costs of foreign diplomatic missions, as well as to enforce minimum reserve
requirements.

III. Security situation
11. The security situation remained tense across Greater Equatoria, Greater Upper
Nile and Western Bahr el-Ghazal, with devastating consequences for the civilian
population. Operations of SPLA in southern Central Equatoria an d parts of Western
Equatoria resulted in significant civilian displacement and reports of serious and
systematic human rights violations. Mass displacement has also increased the
incidence of sexual violence by militias, armed youth and elements of securit y
forces. Repercussions from the split in the SPLM/A in Opposition and the
subsequent realignment among local commanders resulted in periodic fighting and
17-03816

3/16

S/2017/224

persistent insecurity in Unity. In Upper Nile, internal tensions led to low -level
fighting among Shilluk forces, followed by fighting starting in late-January between
predominately Shilluk forces allied with SPLA in Opposition and militias aligned
with SPLA near Malakal and in Wau Shilluk, resulting in large -scale civilian
displacement. Sporadic clashes between government and opposition forces in
Western Bahr el-Ghazal also led to persistent insecurity and sustained civilian
displacement.
Greater Equatoria region
12. Greater Equatoria continued to see SPLA operations against armed opposition
elements. In Central Equatoria, the deployment of a large number of SPLA soldiers
and the presence of armed opposition elements in the Yei area continued to cause
insecurity and civilian displacement. Following the deployment of National Security
Service personnel to Yei in early December, the security situation in Yei town
improved, but insecurity in surrounding areas continued. On 24 December, the
National Security Service and an SPLA-affiliated armed group allegedly clashed on
the Yei-Maridi road, two kilometres from Yei, resulting in the death of two SPLA
soldiers. On 2 January, two male civilians were allegedly detained by SPLA forces
in the area and were later found dead. On 6 January, SPLA in Opposition forces
reportedly clashed with SPLA in Morobo, south of Yei, escalating fighting in the
area. UNMISS conducted three patrols to Yei town, but has faced continuous
obstruction from the authorities, preventing patrols to the surro unding areas. In
Juba, criminality, looting of civilian property and harassment of civilians, fuelled by
a failing economy, were a daily occurrence. During fighting between SPLA and
opposition forces starting on 22 January in Mondikolok, Lire Payam, in Kaj o Keji
County, seven civilians were allegedly killed and one woman raped. Fighting
continued on 23 January, with an alleged attack on the Mere police station in Lire
Payam, resulting in two casualties. With some 30,000 civilians having fled the area,
the small population left in Kajo Keji town consists largely of the elderly, women
and children. UNMISS also received reports that Dinka Bor cattle keepers supported
by SPLA clashed with armed opposition elements in Kajo Keji and Nyepo Counties.
After repeated attempts starting in early February, UNMISS was finally able to gain
access to the area during the period 6 to 9 February and found that a large number of
civilians had been displaced and that SPLA soldiers had looted houses and
arbitrarily arrested civilians.
13. In Eastern Equatoria, insecurity along major roadways remained a concern. On
17 December, one South Sudan National Police Service officer and a child were
reportedly killed in an ambush west of Magwe, while a number of SPLA soldiers
were reportedly killed in an ambush west of Torit town. Several ambushes were
allegedly carried out by armed men in government uniforms against civilian
vehicles. On 2 January, suspected SPLA in Opposition forces clashed with SPLA
along the Torit-Juba road, west of Torit town, killing three SPLA soldiers and
injuring two others. On the same day, suspected SPLA in Opposition elements
attacked a prison facility along the Torit-Magwe road, south-west of Torit town. Six
prison guards were later reported missing. On 3 Januar y, two fire brigade members
were reportedly killed when opposition elements attacked the police post at Lolere,
west of Torit town on the Torit-Juba road.
14. In Western Equatoria, South Sudan People’s Patriotic Front elements
reportedly attacked a military post at Bazungua in Yambio County on 18 December,
killing two government-aligned South Sudan National Liberation Movement
soldiers. On 28 December, suspected members of the Patriotic Front ambushed an
SPLA convoy and killed two SPLA soldiers at Rimenze Boma, north-east of Yambio
town. The Government reportedly continued military operations targeting the
4/16

17-03816

S/2017/224

Patriotic Front in Rimenze, Bazungua, Bodo and Buzumburu in January. Internally
displaced persons from those areas claimed that SPLA soldiers had killed civilians,
sexually assaulted women, looted and destroyed property.
Greater Upper Nile region
15. The security situation remained tense in the greater Upper Nile region, with
reports of clashes in parts of Upper Nile throughout the reporting period. In late
December, fighting broke out between the host community and refugees from the
Doro refugee camp in Bunj, Maban County, leading hundreds of refugees to seek
protection in the vicinity of UNMISS and United Nations agency compounds.
According to local officials, approximately 32 deaths were reported during the
fighting. In Nasir, the stand-off between SPLA and the pro-Machar SPLA in
Opposition continued as the two sides exchanged heavy gunfire near the UNMISS
base. On 2 January, an SPLA foot patrol came under fire from the SPLA in
Opposition close to the UNMISS base, damaging UNMISS accommodation
containers and an UNMISS armoured personnel carrier. In subsequent days,
UNMISS observed SPLA helicopters bombing and landing near SPLA in Opposition
positions and exchange of small arms fire in Kuarenga, west of the UNMISS base.
In northern Manyo County, clashes were reported between Aguelek Shilluk forces
under the command of Johnson Olony and forces aligned with the National
Democratic Movement under Lam Akol on 3 and 4 January. Two senior National
Democratic Movement generals, Yohannes Okiech and Gabriel Tanginye, were
reportedly killed during the clashes. Between 25 and 28 January, fighting took place
between SPLA and General Olony’s forces on the west bank of the Nile near
Malakal, causing significant civilian displacement. SPLA heavily bombarded a
position in Burkiny, south of Wau Shilluk. Heavy fighting reportedly also took place
in Doleib Hill. On 30 January, fighting started between SPLA and opposition f orces
in the Renk area. On 8 February, SPLA reportedly clashed with Aguelek forces near
their stronghold areas of Owachi (20 km south-west of Malakal town) and Tonga
(80 km west of Malakal), resulting in significant casualties on both sides. Clashes
were also reported in the Owachi area on 13 February with reports that SPLA had
succeeded in taking control of the area. On 20 February, SPLA clashed with the pro Machar SPLA in Opposition in the general area of Canal (Khorfulus), Panyikang
County. In Malakal, UNMISS observed the arrival of SPLA reinforcements and
resupplies in the days leading up to 9 February, when UNMISS heard intermittent
firing of heavy calibre weapons from the SPLA base north of the UNMISS base in
Malakal towards the general direction of Wau Shilluk. UNMISS observed artillery
landing on the west bank as well as around the SPLA base on the east bank of the
Nile. In the following days, UNMISS observed SPLA moving both soldiers and
civilians, as well as what appeared to be looted goods, from Wa u Shilluk to Ditang
by boat. The build-up of forces and reports of SPLA troop movements towards
opposition positions north of Malakal indicate that continued confrontations are
likely.
16. Insecurity in southern and central Unity persisted, with reports o f troop
mobilization, clashes between warring factions, looting and destruction of civilian
property. The pro-Machar Opposition leadership claimed that a joint force of SPLA
and opposition forces aligned with Taban Deng Gai attacked pro -Machar opposition
positions in Koch and Mayendit Counties between 12 and 18 December, which
resulted in at least 14 civilians killed and the looting of civilian property. On
27 December, pro-Machar opposition forces detained the government -appointed
Panyijar County Commissioner after he landed in Ganyiel, Panyijar County. The
pro-Machar opposition later claimed that the County Commissioner had defected.
Separately, an SPLA colonel, with a number of SPLA soldiers, defected to the pro Machar opposition in Rubkona. A road ambush allegedly committed by armed men
17-03816

5/16

S/2017/224

affiliated with the defected colonel near Mayom Junction on 10 January reportedly
resulted in two SPLA soldiers killed and four others injured. In southern Unity,
attacks and counter-attacks by government-aligned forces and the pro-Machar
opposition continued in areas around Leer and Mayendit Counties, reportedly
resulting in at least 10 civilians dead.
17. In Jonglei, clashes between SPLA and the pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition
broke out in Panyok, Uror County, an opposition-controlled area, on 15 February.
The SPLA consolidated its position in Yuai with SPLA reinforcement from Bor,
including heavy equipment. Meanwhile, there were reports of insecurity on the
Pibor-Gumuruk road. Two civilians were killed and five were wound ed in an
ambush at Kavagoch village. Armed men also attacked an SPLA vehicle and a cattle
truck between Tangjon and Black Rock.
Greater Bahr el-Ghazal region
18. Sporadic clashes along established fault lines in Western Bahr el -Ghazal and
reports of general lawlessness and uniformed men killing and harassing civilians
around Wau continued. In other parts of the Bahr el-Ghazal region, incidents of
cattle raiding, some involving SPLA soldiers, were reported. While the Government
maintained control of the major towns in Western Bahr el -Ghazal, armed opposition
elements remain present in the surrounding areas. SPLA and government -aligned
groups continued to clash with opposition elements, including SPLA in Opposition,
south of Wau, particularly around Bisellia and Bussere. Opposition forces were also
reportedly active on the outskirts of Raga town and, on 30 December, the Governor
of Lol was reportedly ambushed in an alleged targeted attack. Meanwhile, UNMISS
access to areas beyond Wau and Aweil remained restricted by local authorities. In
January, violence between pastoralists from Tonj and Gogrial, supported by
government forces, and farmers in Wau aided by SPLA in Oppo sition elements led
to killings, property damage, looting and civilian displacement.
Intercommunal conflicts
19. Incidents of intercommunal violence in Western Bahr el-Ghazal included
attacks by armed Dinka cattle keepers in Melen, Wadalelo, Kwajena and Jur River
Counties, which displaced approximately 5,500 civilians who fled to Wau town. To
curb the violence, local authorities agreed on the return of pastoralists to their states
of origin and identification and prosecution of those having caused ins ecurity.
Insecurity in Jonglei increased during the dry season, involving cattle -raiding
incidents in the greater Bor area. On 16 January, a cattle -raiding attack in Duk
County resulted in 12 civilians killed. Six Ethiopian children were allegedly
abducted by Murle cattle keepers in Pochala. On 19 January, Ethiopian authorities
gave a 15-day deadline to Murle cattle keepers to return the abducted Ethiopian
children. Peace dividends generated by a series of community consultations in
Jonglei and Boma from May to December 2016 are at risk of being undermined by a
resurgence of cattle raiding and child abductions. In Unity, the long -standing land
and border conflict between Koch and Rubkona Counties was characterized by
inter-county cattle raids and attacks. Local officials in Buaw, Koch County, claimed
that armed youth from Rubkona had carried out cattle raids, resulting in the death of
civilians. Intercommunal tensions in Rubkway, outside Leer, also led to civilian
casualties. In Lakes, intercommunal tensions and cattle raiding remained a concern.
On 30 December, 15 people were reportedly killed in fighting between Belle youth
from Barghel Payam and Gok youth from Cueibet County.

6/16

17-03816

S/2017/224

IV. Humanitarian situation
20. During the reporting period, the humanitarian situation in South Sudan
deteriorated significantly, with famine declared in parts of Unity, where just over
100,000 people are facing starvation. A further one million people elsewhere in the
country are on the brink of famine. Since January, more than 108,600 people, the
majority of whom are women and children, have fled South Sudan to Uganda. This
brought the number of refugees in Uganda to more than 755,000 and the total
number of South Sudanese refugees in neighbouring countries, including the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, the Sudan and Uganda, to more than
1.54 million. Civilians also continued to be internally displaced, including as a
result of clashes in and around Wau Shilluk. As at early February, there were more
than 1.9 million internally displaced persons across the country.
21. Food insecurity and malnutrition continued to escalate during the reporting
period. On 20 February, localized famine was declared in Leer and Mayendit
Counties in Unity, with Koch deemed to be at high risk of famine. Some 4.9 million
people in South Sudan are now severely food insecure, with this number expected to
rise to 5.5 million at the height of the lean season in July if nothing is done to curb
the severity and spread of the food crisis. More than one million children are
estimated to be acutely malnourished. The Integrated Food Security Phase
Classification report released on 20 February estimates that 14 out of 23 assessed
counties have global acute malnutrition rates at or above the emergency threshold of
15 per cent, with some areas as high as 42 per cent.
22. Communicable diseases continued to spread. A cholera outbreak, which began
in June 2016, continued in Lakes, Jonglei, Unity and Central Equatoria , with 5,085
cholera cases (55 per cent women), including 105 deaths (a case fatality rate of
2.06 per cent), reported in 12 counties as at 17 February. Malaria remained the
leading cause of morbidity, followed by acute watery diarrhoea and acute respiratory
infection. There were rising cases of the deadly tropical disease kala-azar, with 236
cases (138 of which were women) reported by 12 February. Measles cases have
been confirmed in three counties since the start of the year and an active outbreak is
ongoing in Wau, Western Bahr el-Ghazal. Violence and displacement in the greater
Equatoria region have affected populations with the highest prevalence of
HIV/AIDS and have disrupted access to life-saving treatment. As part of an ongoing
HIV/AIDS awareness campaign, UNMISS/UN Cares sensitized 61,330 persons
(41,010 men and 20,320 women), in addition to 25,660 internally displaced persons
(including 10,990 women) in UNMISS protection of civilians sites.
23. The operating environment remained challenging and dangerous throughout
the reporting period, with insecurity due to planned or ongoing military operations
resulting in ad hoc relocations of personnel and disruption of aid delivery in areas of
high need. At least 116 aid workers were relocated from Central E quatoria, Upper
Nile and Unity in December and at least 42 aid workers were relocated in January
from Upper Nile and Unity. During the fighting in the Doro refugee camp in Maban
County in December, humanitarian compounds and facilities, including health
clinics and schools, were vandalized and looted. The fighting in Wau Shilluk forced
humanitarian organizations to relocate aid workers and suspend key activities;
humanitarian compounds and supplies were reportedly looted. It has also been
reported that humanitarian compounds were looted during clashes in Yuai in
February, with aid workers relocated to Motot and Walgak. In December, two senior
aid workers, including the Country Director of the Norwegian Refugee Council,
were deported from South Sudan, bringing the number of aid workers declared
persona non grata, expelled or deported in November and December to four. In

17-03816

7/16

S/2017/224

January, at least three aid workers were killed, bringing the total number of aid
workers killed since the crisis started to 70.
24. Humanitarian actors continued to respond, despite the challenges. In 2016,
more than 5.1 million people had been reached with humanitarian assistance and
protection and the humanitarian response plan was more than 85 per cent funded,
with $1.1 billion received out of $1.3 billion required. On 21 February, the 2017
humanitarian response plan was launched, appealing for $1.6 billion to provide life saving assistance and protection to 5.8 million people in dire need across the
country. A concerted, multisectoral scale-up of the response is under way in counties
affected by, and at risk of, famine.

V. Implementation of the mandated tasks of the Mission
A.

Protection of civilians
25. In implementing its mandate to ensure that civilians, particularly displaced
persons, are protected from physical violence, UNMISS continued to follow a
coordinated three-tiered approach, including through the establishment of a
protective environment and through support to the political process exercised
through the good offices of my Special Representative. Following his arrival in
January, my new Special Representative has engaged senior national leadership,
including the President, as well as state-level officials, community leaders and the
media, in field visits to Rumbek, Wau, Bentiu, Leer, Malakal and Yambio. He has
stressed the need for an immediate cessation of hostilities to allow displaced
civilians to return to their homes and for UNMISS freedom of movement to protect
civilians. Along with the Special Envoy for the Sudan a nd South Sudan, he also
engaged with key national actors outside the country on the margins of the African
Union Summit in Addis Ababa in January to promote a return to the peace process.
While my Special Representative continues to engage stakeholders ins ide South
Sudan on reinvigorating the peace process, the Special Envoy leads our engagement
with regional and international partners and national stakeholders located outside
the country.
26. Under the first tier, protection through dialogue and political engagement,
UNMISS delivered 41 workshops on subjects related to social cohesion,
reconciliation and conflict management. Over 5,300 participants (of which 1,300
were women) were reached, including state and county officials, traditional leaders
and youth and women’s representatives in communities across the country and in
UNMISS protection of civilians sites. Long-standing grievances and accountability
related to abuses committed during the 2010 general election in Aweil East were
addressed through a community-led forum facilitated by UNMISS. In Western
Lakes, UNMISS facilitated a forum for state legislators addressing principal root
causes of intercommunal conflict, including the consequences of high bride prices.
A series of community consultations between the Dinka Bor of Jonglei and the
Murle of Boma that began in May 2016 culminated in a peace conference in Pibor
in December, supported by UNMISS, UNDP and the United Nations Children’s
Fund. The conference proposed solutions to address conflict manifest ations,
including cattle raiding and child abductions, livelihood options and inter -state
collaboration on peacebuilding projects. In Yambio, UNMISS facilitated a workshop
on the conflict management roles of youth, which was attended by members of the
local youth union and current and former combatants. UNMISS conducted
integrated missions to Yei in December and February and facilitated a dialogue
forum on civil-military relations, attended by representatives from the state
government and security organs and traditional, religious, youth and women leaders.

8/16

17-03816

S/2017/224

The UNMISS Aweil and Kuacjok field offices supported a cattle migration and
cross-border conflict management conference between Aweil and Gogrial in
January, resulting in an agreement on key principles to manage inter-state pastoral
migration.
27. Under the second tier, protection of civilians under threat of physical violence,
UNMISS continued to protect 223,926 internally displaced persons in six UNMISS
protection of civilians sites nationwide, including 120,011 in Bentiu, 38,942 in Juba,
33,191 in Malakal, 681 in Melut, 1,976 in Bor and 28,925 in Wau.
28. As at 24 February, a total of 1,969 security incidents were reported in
protection of civilians sites and 2,930 persons (of which 117 were women) were
detained in three holding facilities in Juba, Bentiu and Malakal. To mitigate risks of
violence and communal tensions in the sites, UNMISS conducted training and
sensitization campaigns with residents, including community leaders, to underscore
their responsibility to maintain the civilian character of the sites and to cooperate in
operations to search for weapons. UNMISS, together with humanitarian partners,
supported the process of selecting community leaders in the Bentiu and Malakal
sites to promote inclusive community representation.
29. In Juba, UNMISS established dismounted integrated patrols, including
military, police and civilian personnel, to facilitate engagement with host
communities and internally displaced persons. During the period under re view,
UNMISS reported the confiscation of an increased amount of live ammunition in
the weapons-free zone in Juba and a concurrent reduction of attacks against
civilians and criminal activities. UNMISS conducted preliminary assessments to
establish weapons-free zones around the Bentiu and Bor protection of civilians sites.
30. UNMISS continued to focus on proactive deployment and patrols aimed at
deterring and pre-empting violence against civilians beyond the UNMISS protection
of civilians sites. A total of 10,340 patrols were conducted during the reporting
period, including to Kajo Keji and Yei. The temporary protection area in Leer,
southern Unity, continues to offer refuge to internally displaced persons since the
resumption of violence in August. UNMISS police continued weekly consultative
meetings with the South Sudan National Police Service, community leaders and
civil society on protection of civilians. UNMISS regularly conducted patrols outside
the protection of civilians sites in Bentiu, Bor, Juba, Malakal and Wau to prevent
sexual and gender-based violence and other crimes.
31. UNMISS intensified its efforts to enhance public awareness on zero -tolerance
of sexual and gender-based violence, including conflict-related sexual violence. As
part of the 16 Days Campaign to Combat Violence Against Women, UNMISS,
together with United Nations and national partners, articulated key messages around
the campaign theme, “from peace at home to peace in South Sudan”, and reached
out to community watch groups, religious leaders and school teachers, whose
perspectives influence gender relations and behaviour patterns of community
members. Within the framework of the Global Open Day for Women and Peace
dialogue initiative between the United Nations leadership and wome n leaders,
UNMISS facilitated a women’s peace forum in Wau, with similar events being
planned in other locations.

B.

Monitoring and investigating human rights
32. During the reporting period, UNMISS continued to monitor, verify, investigate
and report on alleged human rights violations and abuses, as well as alleged
breaches of international humanitarian law. UNMISS also focused on monitoring,
investigating and reporting on incidents of hate speech and incitement to violence.

17-03816

9/16

S/2017/224

Ongoing insecurity across the country and denials of access by the authorities
continued to restrict the ability of UNMISS to monitor and verify alleged violations
and abuses, including unlawful killings of civilians, cases of torture and other
inhumane and degrading treatment, conflict-related sexual violence including rape
and gang-rape, arbitrary arrest and detention, looting and destruction of civilian
property, forced displacement of the civilian population and restrictions on freedom
of expression, association and assembly. Although both government and opposition
forces were responsible for human rights violations and abuses, government forces,
including SPLA soldiers and National Security Service officers, committed most of
the cases documented by UNMISS. This may in part be because UNMISS was not
able to access all the areas controlled by SPLM/A in Opposition or other armed
groups.
33. Between 14 and 17 February, the Assistant Secretary -General for Human
Rights visited Juba and Malakal and met with representatives from the Government,
security forces, the South Sudan Human Rights Commission, faith -based and civil
society organizations, humanitarian partners and victims of human rights viola tions.
In a press statement dated 17 February, he condemned the human rights situation,
stating that SPLA had engaged in what could amount to war crimes and crimes
against humanity, and called for accountability for atrocity crimes, an end to
arbitrary and prolonged detention and the safety of human rights defenders.
34. In December, the Mission established a working group on the prevention of
mass atrocities to monitor hate speech through public statements made by South
Sudanese leaders and on social media and local radio stations and to formulate a
coherent United Nations-wide action plan to mitigate the risk of mass atrocities,
supported by a Headquarters-level working group. In addition, UNMISS Radio
Miraya has begun broadcasting the third series of a r adio drama aimed at countering
hate speech and incitement. The Mission also provided resource staff to train 25
South Sudanese journalists on conflict-sensitive journalism and countering hate
speech at a workshop held by UNDP in November.
35. While fighting between SPLA and SPLM/A in Opposition and allied armed
groups continued to result in human rights violations and abuses across the country,
the greater Equatoria and Upper Nile regions and Western Bahr el -Ghazal were most
affected during the reporting period. The situation in Yei in Central Equatoria
continued to be of serious concern. In early January, for instance, two SPLA soldiers
allegedly opened fire at a funeral, killing at least one civilian and wounding five
others. On 12 January, SPLA soldiers detained and shot at a group of 10 Kakwa
youths, killing four of them instantly and injuring four others. SPLA soldiers
detained a doctor who treated the injured and accused him of providing medical
treatment to rebels, prevented the medical evacuation of t wo of the injured and
detained three carers travelling with the men. At least one of the injured men later
died of his injuries. SPLA soldiers and members of the allied Mathiang Anyoor
militia were also reportedly responsible for other killings and burning down homes
around Yei. On 16 January, for instance, Mathiang Anyoor reportedly burned down
at least 14 houses in Lutaya and the Catholic diocesan pastoral centre. Elsewhere in
Central Equatoria, during violence in Kajo Keji, there were reports of SPLA att acks
on civilians including killings, conflict-related sexual violence and burning down of
homes, resulting in massive displacement of the civilian population. On 11 February,
in Kubi village SPLA indiscriminately attacked civilians, raped an unconfirmed
number of women and detained approximately 48 people, all but four of whom were
later released.
36. In Western Equatoria in early January, SPLA soldiers attacked Banzungu
Payam and the surrounding area, killed and injured civilians, raped women and
burned down property. SPLA soldiers frequently accused civilians of supporting the
10/16

17-03816

S/2017/224

“rebels”. The attacks resulted in large-scale civilian displacement, with the Catholic
Church compound in Rimenze hosting at least 5,000 internally displaced persons by
mid-January.
37. At least five civilians reportedly died as a result of fighting between SPLA and
SPLM/A in Opposition in Upper Nile on 25 January and over 20 were injured in
Wau Shilluk on 27 and 28 January. According to witness testimonies, SPLA
conducted house-to-house searches, torched homes, looted property and shot dead a
man in the market area and a woman in her home; a burned body was found in the
remains of a house. Humanitarian partners reported the arrival of about 18,000
internally displaced persons in Kodok (50 km north-west of Malakal) and over
13,500 in Aburoc (25 km north-west of Kodok) as a result of ongoing hostilities.
SPLA has repeatedly prevented UNMISS from travelling to Wau Shilluk and to
Kodok to verify these reports.
38. There was a spike in attacks by unidentified armed groups on civilians during
the reporting period, particularly in Eastern Equatoria and Central Equatoria. These
included an attack by a group of armed men on a vehicle traveling from Juba to
Torit at Khordilep, about 24 km from Torit on 16 December. The attackers set the
vehicle on fire and killed 8 of the 11 passengers. In an attack in Jonglei on
25 December, armed men shot seven civilians dead and wounded two others in
Baping village, Nyuak Payam, Twic East County.
39. Human rights violations continued to arise in the administration of justice.
UNMISS documented repeated cases of prolonged and arbitrary detention, proxy
detention, executive interference in the justice system, arrests for civil matters and
the detention of minors alongside adults, and detention conditions failed to meet
international human rights standards. UNMISS also documented cases of politically
motivated detention. The National Security Service continued to hold individuals
incommunicado with no access to family members or to a lawyer in its detention
facilities, including in Jebel, Juba. SPLM/A in Opposition spokesperson James
Gadtek Dak has been detained incommunicado by the National Security Service
since his deportation from Nairobi to South Sudan on 3 November. Mr. Dak had
refugee status in Kenya.
40. The authorities continued to crack down on freedom of expression, assembly
and association. On 24 January, SPLA soldiers arrested four journalists in Juba, one
from UNMISS Radio Miraya and three others who were covering the provision of
free medical services by a team of Moroccan military doctors. The soldiers held and
interrogated the journalists for five hours and accused three of them of broadcasting
coverage critical of the Government. In Wau, National Security Service officers
detained 11 civil servants, including two women, on 10 and 11 January, and held
them incommunicado for two days. The civil servants were allegedly detained in
relation to a dispute over reassignment to Lol following the division of Western
Bahr el-Ghazal. Two were subsequently released, while the other nine were forcibly
transferred to Raja in Lol.
41. In line with resolution 2327 (2016), UNMISS continued to monitor,
investigate, verify and report specifically and publicly on violations and abuses
committed against children. During the reporting period, a total of 38 incidents,
affecting 1,084 children (582 boys and 502 girls), were documented and verified in
South Sudan through the monitoring and reporting mechanism on grave violations
against children in situations of armed conflict. Most of the incidents reported
named SPLA and SPLA in Opposition, both Riek Machar and Taban Deng Gai
factions, as the perpetrators. The most recurrent documented violations included the
recruitment and use of children by the parties to the conflict (48 per cent of
incidents), killing and maiming of children (21 per cent), attacks on or military use
17-03816

11/16

S/2017/224

of schools (12 per cent), sexual violence against mi nor girls (9 per cent), attacks on
hospitals (5 per cent) and the abduction of children and denial of humanitarian
access (5 per cent). In December, children were most exposed to violations in
Central Equatoria and Western Equatoria (where 46 and 36 per ce nt, respectively, of
all violations were reported). In January, children were most exposed to violations
in Unity (55 per cent of all violations recorded).

C.

Creating conditions conducive to delivery of humanitarian assistance
42. UNMISS presence in Yambio (Western Equatoria) and Torit (Eastern
Equatoria) helped to create conditions conducive to the delivery of humanitarian
assistance inside the towns. UNMISS increased patrolling in and around Torit town
in the light of the deteriorating situation there. In Western Equatoria, UNMISS
undertook a patrol with humanitarian partners to assess the situation of internally
displaced persons in Rimenze. The sustained presence of UNMISS in Leer town,
through its temporary operating base, enabled humanitarian organizations to carry
out missions to assist displaced persons sheltering in the temporary protection area
there. Furthermore, UNMISS military undertook additional patrols in areas around
the Bentiu protection of civilians site in line with the “beyond Ben tiu” strategy.
UNMISS also worked with humanitarian actors to develop contingency plans in
Juba, Bor, Bentiu, Malakal, Melut, Wau, Torit and Yambio, including the
pre-positioning of life-saving items in United Nations premises.
43. With the onset of the dry season, UNMISS reinforced efforts to create
conditions conducive to delivery of humanitarian assistance. UNMISS maintained
approximately 530 km of main supply roads across the country, enabling
humanitarian organizations to pre-position aid supplies during the dry season. When
requested as a last resort, UNMISS provided force protection for food drops,
convoys and other humanitarian activities in various locations. UNMISS patrols,
aimed at accessing areas where violence, displacement and human rights violations
had been reported, were frequently denied freedom of movement.
44. The Mine Action Service deployed 28 mine action teams to survey and clear
roads, airstrips and helicopter landing sites to facilitate security and humanitari an
access. A total area of 2,161,713 square metres was surveyed and released, in
addition to the removal and destruction of 16,666 explosive hazards and 137,216
pieces of small arms ammunition.

D.

Supporting the implementation of the peace agreement
45. Overall progress in the implementation of the peace agreement has been
minimal. UNMISS police provided support to the South Sudan National Police
Service on the establishment of the Joint Integrated Police, including the
development of an overarching strategy, the concept of operations and terms of
reference. The joint management team comprising officers from the South Sudan
National Police Service and the South Sudan National Police Service in Opposition,
led by First Vice President Taban Deng Gai, in close coordination with UNMISS
police, developed and approved a training plan and curriculum for the Joint
Integrated Police with UNDP providing logistical support. So far, 66 senior officers
(4 women) have been undergoing training in the police training centre and
preparations are under way for the training of the remaining 1,121 (216 women)
members, who are currently under review in accordance with the human rights due
diligence policy on United Nations support to non -United Nations security forces.

12/16

17-03816

S/2017/224

46. On 25 January, the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism held its first board meeting since 30 June 2016 with
representation from SPLA, the pro-Taban faction of SPLA in Opposition and former
political detainees. Meanwhile, with the deployment of two new Monitoring and
Verification Teams of the Mechanism to UNMISS bases at Pibor and Leer, a total of
11 teams are now operational. Lack of freedom of movement and security
clearances for patrols remain a challenge.
47. The Secretariat continued to engage with the African Union Commission
regarding the establishment of the Hybrid Court for South Sudan, in full respect
with the African Union’s lead responsibility in this matter. Officials of the Office of
Legal Affairs of the Secretariat and the Office of the Legal Counsel of the African
Union Commission met both in New York and in Addis Ababa. The Office of Legal
Affairs provided suggestions for consideration in the preparation of draft
constitutive legal instruments for the Hybrid Court. The Secretariat remains
committed to providing technical assistance in setting up the Hybrid Court and for
the implementation of other aspects of chapter V of the peace agreement, pursuant
to Security Council resolutions 2241 (2015), 2252 (2015) and 2327 (2016).

VI. Mission staffing and status of deployment of surge capacity
48. As at 23 February, the strength of UNMISS civilian personnel stood at 2,555,
including 837 international staff members, 1,350 national staff members and 386
United Nations Volunteers. The UNMISS police strength stood at 1,561 of the
authorized 2,101 officers, including 665 individual police officers, 67 corrections
officers and 829 personnel in formed police units. The deployment of 160 Rwandese
formed police unit personnel to Juba is pending final clearances. The deployment of
170 Ghanaian formed police unit personnel has been delayed owing to lack of
readiness of troops and equipment. The UNMISS troop strength stood at 11,746
military personnel, including 180 military observers, 368 military staff officers and
11,198 military contingent personnel. Following the withdrawa l of the Kenyan
infantry battalion, a 255-strong advance party of the incoming Bangladeshi infantry
battalion deploying to replace the Kenyans arrived. The Cambodian level II hospital
in Juba has been replaced by an Indian level II-plus hospital. In addition, the
induction of military engineers from the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland is ongoing and will be followed by the induction of level II
hospital personnel in April/May. UNMISS has been experiencing delays in the
deployment of uniformed personnel since December because of changed entry
requirements imposed by the Government of South Sudan, which led in February to
the stranding of over 200 uniformed personnel in Entebbe, Uganda, or Nairobi
awaiting re-entry clearances, some for over a month. As at 23 February, 45 police
personnel, three corrections officers and 95 military personnel were awaiting visa
and/or re-entry clearances.
49. There has been minimal progress in the deployment of the regional protection
force since the Transitional Government of National Unity conveyed its
unconditional consent for the immediate deployment of the force in November. The
allocation of a plot of land for the force near United Nations House in Juba is well
under way. Nonetheless, there are critical outstanding issues to be resolved with the
Government, including the mandate of the force to protect Juba International
Airport and the allocation of a second piece of land for the force north of Juba. The
Government has yet to respond to the Mission’s request to convene a joint security
assessment of the airport. Reconnaissance teams from Bangladesh, Nepal, Pakistan
and Rwanda visited South Sudan in preparation for the deployment of the force.

17-03816

13/16

S/2017/224

50. During the reporting period, UNMISS continued to implement the SecretaryGeneral’s zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse pursuant to his
report on special measures for protection from sexual exploitation and abuse
(A/69/779). In addition, the arrival of an UNMISS Military Gender Adviser
enhances the gender expertise of the Mission’s military component and its readiness
to respond to sexual and gender-based violence cases. UNMISS also trained 47
Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring M echanism officers
(6 women) on gender, sexual and gender-based violence and conflict-related sexual
violence.

VII. Violations of the status-of-forces agreement, international
humanitarian law and security of United Nations personnel
51. During the reporting period, UNMISS recorded 48 violations of the status -offorces agreement, 22 of which were restrictions of movement affecting UNMISS
personnel and contractors engaged in tasks exclusively related to the Mission
mandate. Other violations recorded by UNMISS included imposition of new
immigration conditions specific to UNMISS personnel for entry into South Sudan,
levying of fees for issuance of visas and work permits for UNMISS personnel and
international contractors and their employees, four physical as saults on UNMISS
personnel and UNMISS international contractors, one direct threat to open fire on
members of an UNMISS patrol team returning to the UNMISS base in Bor and nine
cases of arrest and detention. The arrest and detention violations included
harassment, temporary detention and questioning by the authorities of an UNMISS
radio journalist while on duty and the prolonged detention of three staff members,
including another UNMISS radio journalist, arrested in 2014 without charges. The
National Security Service has denied access to UNMISS to visit them since
December 2015. UNMISS also reported the forcible entry into UNMISS premises in
Bentiu and abduction of an individual by an unspecified number of SPLA soldiers
and the forceful boarding and search of UNMISS aircraft by an unspecified number
of SPLA soldiers in Malakal to verify the identity of a passenger. The Mission
continues to notify the host Government of the violations of the status -of-forces
agreement through notes verbales and in meetings with relevant officials. A monthly
matrix of incidents is also shared with the Government.
52. In an effort to enhance understanding of the UNMISS mandate, the Mission
launched a comprehensive communications strategy, including greater interaction
between the media and Mission senior leadership and the production of weekly
radio programmes on UNMISS Radio Miraya. To further expand coverage, radio
content is being distributed to community radio stations for re -broadcast, in
partnership with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization.

VIII. Financial aspects
53. The General Assembly, by its resolution 70/281, appropriated the amount of
$1,081,788,400 for the maintenance of the Mission for the period from 1 July 2016
to 30 June 2017. As at 13 February 2017, unpaid assessed contributions to the
UNMISS Special Account amount to $574.8 million. Total outstanding assessed
contributions for all peacekeeping operations at the same date amount to
$1,980.0 million. Reimbursement of troop and formed police costs for contingent owned equipment has been made for the period up to 30 September 2016, in
accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

14/16

17-03816

S/2017/224

IX. Observations and recommendations
54. I remain deeply alarmed by the continued violence between government and
opposition forces in several parts of South Sudan, particularly across the greater
Equatoria and Upper Nile regions as well as in Western Bahr el -Ghazal, which have
resulted in a dire crisis, with significant civilian displacements, serious and
systematic reported human rights violations and abuses, and famine.
55. Many of those who fled the ongoing violence have given harrowing accounts
of killings of civilians, arbitrary arrest, detention, torture and other inhumane and
degrading treatment, conflict-related sexual violence including rape and gang-rape,
and looting and destruction of civilian property. I call on all political and military
actors to immediately cease hostilities across the country and remind the
Government of its obligation to prevent these horrendous crimes and hold
perpetrators accountable.
56. Continued insecurity has led to a further deterioration of the humanitarian
situation. The number of people on the brink of starvation or forced to flee from
their homes is staggering. Urgent action is needed to prevent further atrocities and
ensure humanitarian access to address the desperate needs. I urge all members of the
international community to lend support, both thro ugh their influence on the parties
to the conflict and by funding humanitarian operations.
57. UNMISS has, in an effort to protect civilians from physical violence and
establish a protective environment, intensified its presence and active patrolling in
areas at risk of conflict and with high concentrations of displaced persons. Yet, the
Mission and its partners continue to face numerous access restrictions, including the
obstruction of patrols and humanitarian operations and the denial and delay of entry
into the country of United Nations personnel, which prevent UNMISS from
fulfilling its core mandated tasks. I welcome Mr. Kiir’s renewed pledge to restore
freedom of movement for UNMISS and humanitarian actors, but this must be
translated into concrete action on the ground. This is an issue that also requires a
strong intervention from the Security Council, which receives monthly reports on
restrictions of movement and access imposed on UNMISS. I look forward, as well,
to the full support of IGAD and the African Union, and intend to engage with them
actively as part of the ongoing efforts to remove the many impediments that are
crippling the implementation of the mandate of UNMISS and making it extremely
challenging to deliver support to the millions of South Sudanese in need of
assistance.
58. I urge the Government to expedite facilitating the deployment of the
authorized regional protection force as an important confidence -building measure
and a step towards enhancing security in Juba. Continued political an d diplomatic
support from regional and international partners to help create an environment
conducive to the expeditious deployment of the regional protection force is equally
critical.
59. Killing, assault and harassment of United Nations personnel and h umanitarian
workers are not only a violation of international law but represent unforgiveable
acts committed against people who have left their own countries to serve the people
of South Sudan. I call upon Mr. Kiir and Mr. Machar to issue clear and public orders
to their respective forces that such acts must cease immediately and that those found
guilty of committing such offences will face justice in an expeditious manner.
60. I have welcomed the launch by Mr. Kiir of a national dialogue process
proposed to start at the grass-roots level and culminate at the national level. I note
his call on regional and international partners to support the process so as to

17-03816

15/16

S/2017/224

enhance its credibility and effectiveness. It is my expectation and earnest hope that
the dialogue would be conducted with a genuine commitment to restoring peace and
in a manner that promotes national reconciliation and intercommunal harmony
among all groups and interests across South Sudan. In this respect, I am deeply
concerned that, in variance with its statement on the national dialogue, the
Government is actively participating in the continuous escalation of the armed
conflict, with all the dire human consequences I have referred to. Clearly, a national
dialogue is incompatible with the current situation, in which the country is
embroiled in an armed conflict stoked by ethnic antagonisms and the protection and
freedoms of civilians are profoundly constrained or violated. For the national
dialogue to be viable, armed hostilities must cease across So uth Sudan, the dialogue
must be guided by an impartial entity that enjoys broad nation -wide acceptance and
the process must be inclusive of all South Sudanese stakeholders. The Government
must create conditions in which South Sudanese of all backgrounds an d political
persuasions feel sufficiently free, and sufficiently protected, to participate in the
national dialogue and to express their views without fear.
61. During a joint consultative meeting on the margins of the twenty -eighth
African Union Summit, the African Union, IGAD and the United Nations
unequivocally expressed deep concern over the continuing spread of fighting and
the dire humanitarian situation in South Sudan. Stating our continued collective
commitment to the search for lasting peace, security and stability in the country, we
affirmed that there can only be a political solution to the conflict, within the
framework of the 2015 peace agreement.
62. It is the responsibility of the country’s leaders to make the decisions necessary
to achieve progress towards sustainable peace. I am encouraged by my meeting with
Mr. Kiir on the margins of the African Union Summit, during which we reaffirmed
our determination to enhance cooperation in support of the South Sudan peace
process. The United Nations also remains firmly committed to working closely with
the African Union High Representative for South Sudan, Alpha Oumar Konaré; the
Chair of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, Festus Mogae; IGAD
member States; and other partners to ensure inclusivity in the implementation of the
peace agreement and the proposed national dialogue process.
63. Lastly, I wish to convey my sincere appreciation for the unwavering
commitment of UNMISS personnel, who, under the able leadership of my Special
Representative, David Shearer, continue to protect hundreds of thousands of
civilians, facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance and promote an inclusive
political process. In particular, I thank the troop - and police-contributing countries
that have provided essential uniformed personnel and assets to the Mission. I further
commend the United Nations country team and non-governmental organization
partners for their courage and sacrifice to provide much -needed humanitarian
assistance to the population, often in perilous circumstances.

16/16

17-03816
