United Nations

A/RES/61/137

General Assembly

Distr.: General
25 January 2007

Sixty-first session
Agenda item 41

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 19 December 2006
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/61/436)]

61/137. Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees on the activities of his Office 1 and the report of the Executive Committee
of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on the
work of its fifty-seventh session 2 and the conclusions and decisions contained
therein,
Recalling its previous annual resolutions on the work of the Office of the High
Commissioner since its establishment by the General Assembly,
Expressing its appreciation for the leadership shown by the High
Commissioner, commending the staff and implementing partners of the Office of the
High Commissioner for the competent, courageous and dedicated manner in which
they discharge their responsibilities, and underlining its strong condemnation of all
forms of violence to which humanitarian personnel and United Nations and
associated personnel are increasingly exposed,
Endorses the report of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the
1.
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on the work of its fifty-seventh
session;2
2.
Welcomes the important work undertaken by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and its Executive Committee in the
course of the year, and notes in this context the adoption of the conclusion on
women and girls at risk and the conclusion on identification, prevention and
reduction of statelessness and protection of stateless persons, 3 which are aimed at
strengthening the international protection regime, consistent with the Agenda for
Protection, 4 and at assisting Governments in meeting their protection responsibilities
in today’s changing international environment, including by promoting the
_______________
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/61/12).
Ibid., Supplement No. 12A (A/61/12/Add.1).
3
Ibid., chap. III, sects. A and B.
4
Ibid., Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 12A (A/57/12/Add.1), annex IV.
2

06-50265

A/RES/61/137

progressive implementation of mechanisms and standards through relevant national
public policies supported by the international community;
3.
Reaffirms the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees 5 and
the 1967 Protocol thereto 6 as the foundation of the international refugee protection
regime, recognizes the importance of their full and effective application by States
parties and the values they embody, notes with satisfaction that one hundred and
forty-six States are now parties to one instrument or to both, encourages States not
parties to consider acceding to those instruments, underlines in particular the
importance of full respect for the principle of non-refoulement, and recognizes that
a number of States not parties to the international refugee instruments have shown a
generous approach to hosting refugees;
Notes that sixty-two States are now parties to the 1954 Convention
4.
relating to the Status of Stateless Persons 7 and that thirty-three States are parties to
the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness, 8 encourages States that have
not done so to give consideration to acceding to these instruments, notes the work of
the High Commissioner in regard to identifying stateless persons, preventing and
reducing statelessness, and protecting stateless persons, and urges the Office of the
High Commissioner to continue to work in this area in accordance with relevant
General Assembly resolutions and Executive Committee conclusions;
Takes note of the current activities of the Office of the High
5.
Commissioner related to protection of and assistance to internally displaced persons,
including in the context of inter-agency arrangements in this field, emphasizes that
such activities should be consistent with relevant General Assembly resolutions and
should not undermine the mandate of the Office for refugees and the institution of
asylum, and encourages the High Commissioner to continue his dialogue with States
on the role of his Office in this regard;
Re-emphasizes that the protection of refugees is primarily the
6.
responsibility of States, whose full and effective cooperation, action and resolve are
required to enable the Office of the High Commissioner to fulfil its mandated
functions, and strongly emphasizes, in this context, the importance of active
international solidarity and burden- and responsibility-sharing;
Emphasizes that prevention and reduction of statelessness are primarily
7.
the responsibility of States, in appropriate cooperation with the international
community;
Also emphasizes that protection of and assistance to internally displaced
8.
persons are primarily the responsibility of States, in appropriate cooperation with
the international community;
Urges all States and relevant non-governmental and other organizations,
9.
in conjunction with the Office of the High Commissioner, in a spirit of international
solidarity and burden- and responsibility-sharing, to cooperate and to mobilize
resources with a view to enhancing the capacity of and reducing the heavy burden
borne by host countries, in particular those that have received large numbers of
refugees and asylum-seekers, and calls upon the Office to continue to play its
_______________
5

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.
Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.
7
Ibid., vol. 360, No. 5158.
8
Ibid., vol. 989, No. 14458.
6

2

A/RES/61/137

catalytic role in mobilizing assistance from the international community to address
the root causes as well as the economic, environmental and social impact of largescale refugee populations in developing countries, in particular the least developed
countries, and countries with economies in transition;
10. Strongly condemns attacks on refugees, asylum-seekers and internally
displaced persons as well as acts that pose a threat to their personal security and
well-being, and calls upon all concerned States and, where applicable, parties
involved in an armed conflict to take all necessary measures to ensure respect for
human rights and international humanitarian law;
11. Deplores the refoulement and unlawful expulsion of refugees and
asylum-seekers, and calls upon all concerned States to ensure respect for the
principles of refugee protection and human rights;
12. Emphasizes that international protection of refugees is a dynamic and
action-oriented function that is at the core of the mandate of the Office of the High
Commissioner and that it includes, in cooperation with States and other partners, the
promotion and facilitation of, inter alia, the admission, reception and treatment of
refugees in accordance with internationally agreed standards and the ensuring of
durable, protection-oriented solutions, bearing in mind the particular needs of
vulnerable groups and paying special attention to those with specific needs, and
notes in this context that the delivery of international protection is a staff-intensive
service that requires adequate staff with the appropriate expertise, especially at the
field level;
13. Affirms the importance of mainstreaming the protection needs of women
and children to ensure their participation in the planning and implementation of
programmes of the Office of the High Commissioner and State policies and the
importance of according priority to addressing the problem of sexual and genderbased violence;
14. Acknowledges that forcibly displaced women and girls can be exposed to
particular protection problems related to their gender, their cultural and socioeconomic position, and their legal status, that they may be less likely than men and
boys to be able to exercise their rights, and that, therefore, specific action in favour
of women and girls may be necessary to ensure that they can enjoy protection and
assistance on an equal basis with men and boys, and notes the important guidance
provided in the Executive Committee conclusion on women and girls at risk to
address issues of identification of those individuals and action to be taken in
prevention and response;
15. Strongly reaffirms the fundamental importance and the purely
humanitarian and non-political character of the function of the Office of the High
Commissioner of providing international protection to refugees and seeking
permanent solutions to refugee problems, and recalls that those solutions include
voluntary repatriation and, where appropriate and feasible, local integration and
resettlement in a third country, while reaffirming that voluntary repatriation,
supported by necessary rehabilitation and development assistance to facilitate
sustainable reintegration, remains the preferred solution;
16. Expresses concern about the particular difficulties faced by the millions
of refugees in protracted situations, and emphasizes the need to redouble
international efforts and cooperation to find practical and comprehensive approaches
to resolving their plight and to realize durable solutions for them, consistent with
relevant General Assembly resolutions and international law;

3

A/RES/61/137

17. Recalls the important role of effective partnerships and coordination in
meeting the needs of refugees and in finding durable solutions to their situations,
welcomes the efforts under way, in cooperation with countries hosting refugees and
countries of origin, including their respective local communities, United Nations
agencies and other development actors, to promote a framework for durable
solutions, particularly in protracted refugee situations, which includes the “4Rs”
approach (repatriation, reintegration, rehabilitation and reconstruction) to
sustainable return, and encourages States, in cooperation with United Nations
agencies and other development actors, to support, inter alia, through the allocation
of funds, the development and implementation of the 4Rs and other programming
tools to facilitate the transition from relief to development;
18. Welcomes the progress that has been achieved in increasing the number
of refugees resettled and the number of States offering opportunities for
resettlement, notes that the Multilateral Framework of Understandings on
Resettlement 9 sets out the strategic use of resettlement as part of a comprehensive
approach to refugee situations aimed at improving access to durable solutions for a
greater number of refugees, and invites interested States, the Office of the High
Commissioner and other relevant partners to make use of the Multilateral
Framework, where appropriate and feasible;
19. Notes the progress that is being made by interested States and the Office
of the High Commissioner to take forward elements outlined in the Mexico Plan of
Action to Strengthen International Protection of Refugees in Latin America, adopted
on 16 November 2004,9 and expresses its support for the efforts to promote its
implementation with the cooperation and assistance of the international community,
as appropriate, including in the area of resettlement, as well as in supporting host
communities that receive large numbers of persons who require international
protection;
20. Also notes that some progress is being made by interested States and the
Office of the High Commissioner within the context of the European-Asian
Programme on Forced Displacement and Migration on issues related to asylum and
forced displacement, consistent with the mandate of the Office;
21. Further notes the importance of States and the Office of the High
Commissioner discussing and clarifying the role of the Office in mixed migratory
flows, in order to better address protection needs in the context of mixed migratory
flows, including by safeguarding access to asylum for those in need of international
protection, and notes the readiness of the High Commissioner, consistent with his
mandate, to assist States in fulfilling their protection responsibilities in this regard;
22. Emphasizes the obligation of all States to accept the return of their
nationals, calls upon States to facilitate the return of their nationals who have been
determined not to be in need of international protection, and affirms the need for the
return of persons to be undertaken in a safe and humane manner and with full respect
for their human rights and dignity, irrespective of the status of the persons concerned;
23. Encourages the Office of the High Commissioner to continue to improve
its management systems and to ensure effective and transparent use of its resources,
recognizes that adequate and timely resources are essential for the Office to
continue to fulfil the mandate conferred upon it through its statute 10 and by
_______________
9

Available from www.unhcr.org.
Resolution 428 (V), annex.

10

4

A/RES/61/137

subsequent General Assembly resolutions on refugees and other persons of concern,
recalls its resolutions 58/153 of 22 December 2003, 58/270 of 23 December 2003,
59/170 of 20 December 2004 and 60/129 of 16 December 2005 concerning, inter
alia, the implementation of paragraph 20 of the statute of the Office, and urges
Governments and other donors to respond promptly to annual and supplementary
appeals issued by the Office for requirements under its programmes;
24. Calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner to widen its donor base,
so as to achieve greater burden-sharing by reinforcing cooperation with traditional
governmental donors, non-traditional donors and the private sector;
25. Requests the High Commissioner to report on his activities to the General
Assembly at its sixty-second session.
81st plenary meeting
19 December 2006

5
