UiVITEDNATIOiVS

THIRTY-THIRD

YEAR
th
MEETING: 6 DECEMBER 1978

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2105) . . . . , , . , . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . , . . . , . . . . . , , . . , . , . _ . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New Members concerning the
application of the Commonwealth of Dominica for admission to membership
in the United Nations (S/12956) . , , . . , , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplemelzts of the Official Records of the Security Courzcil.The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appearsor in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordancewith a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutionsand Decisionsof the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, becamefully operative on that date.

2105th

MEETING

Held in New York on Wednesday,

6 December

1978, at 3 p.m.

President: Mr. Riidiger van WECHMAR
(Federal Republic of Germany).

idud and Tobago) took the places reserved for them at the
side of the Courzcil chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Venezuela.

3. The PRESIDENT: The Council will now consider the
report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerning the application of the Commonwealth
of Dominica for admission to membership in the United
Nations [S/l 29.561.
4. In paragraph 3 of the report, the Committee recommends to the Council that it should have recourse to the
provisions of the last paragraph of rule 60 of the provisional
rules of procedure pursuant to which the Security Council
would immediately present its recommendation to the
General Assembly. If I hear no objection, I shall take it that
the Council. wishes to depart from the time-limits set forth
in the penultimate paragraph of rule 60.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/‘LlOS)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerning the application of the Commonwealth of Do,ninica for admission to membership in the United Nations (S/l 2956)

S. In paragraph 4 of the report, the Committee recommends to the Council the adoption of a draft resolution on
the application for membership of the Commonwealth of
Dominica. In accordance with the procedure followed on
previous occasions, I propose that the Council should first
proceed to the vote on that draft resolution and that those
who wish to speak do so thereafter. If I hear no objection, I
shall take it that that procedure is acceptable to the
members of the Council. I shall now put the draft
resolution to the vote.

The meeting was called to order at 3.45 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerning the application of the Commonwealth of Dominica for admission to membership in the
United Nations (S/l 2956)

A vote was taken by show of hands.
T7rzedraft resolulion was adopted unanimously. 1

I. The PRESIDENT:
I have received letters dated
6 December from the representatives of Barbados, El
Salvador and Trinidad and Tobago requesting to bc invited
to participate in the discussion of the application of the
Commonwealth of Dominica for admission to membership
in the United Nations, In accordance with the provisions of
Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure, as well as in conformity with the usual
practice of the Council, I propose to invite these representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote.

6. The PRESIDENT: I shall request the Secretary-General
to transmit this recommendation to the General Assembly.
7. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): I would start by
expressing the thanks of my delegation to the representative of Gabon for the skill and dexterity with which he
handled the difficult period as President of the Council last
month.

8. I also take this opportunity of welcoming you to the
presidency, Mr. President,particularly sinceyou representa
country with which mine has such close and friendly
relations. I am confident that your most pleasanttask in
what looks like being a busy month in the Council will be
to presideover our discussionof the admissionof Dominica
asthe 151stMember of the United Nations.

2. In view of the limited number of places available at the
Council table, I invite those representatives to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber,
on the usual understanding that they will be invited to take
a place at the Council table when it is their turn to address
the Council.

9. My delegation was delighted to support the draft
resolution which we have just adopted. We shall be very

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Blackman (Barbados), Mr. Urquia (El Salvador) and Mr. Abdufah (tin-

1 Seeresolution442 (1978).
1

pleased

indeed to welcome yet another independent
of the Commonwealth to the United Nations-the
second this year and the seventh in the Caribbean region.

matter of principle that we support every application for
membership so long as the applicant satisfies the accepted
guidelines. We do not believe that ,the application for
membership by any State to the United Nations should be
subjected to political bargaining or power-politics. Every
aspirant to membership must be encouraged. My delegation
is in favour of the principle of universality which the
Organization is approaching with remarkable speed.

IWXISC~

10. I understand that Dominica was named by Christopher
Colombus when he sighted it on Sunday, 3 November 1493.
During the next three centuries, if I can compress them,
Dominica became the centre of a three-fold conflict
between the Caribs, the indigenous inhabitants of the
island, the British and the French. In 1748, after repeated
attempts to establish settlements on the island had failed,
the British and the French agreed to leave Dominica to the
Caribs. However that was not to be and, after changing
hands several times between 1759 and 1805, Dominica
finally passed to Britain. It remained a British dependency
until 1956, when it joined the West Indian Federation.
French influence, however, has left an enduring legacy in
the predominance of the Roman Catholic faith and the
widespread use of a French patois as a second language. The
Caribs also survived, and Dominica is indeed the hope of the
main surviving Carib community in the Caribbean. After
the dissolution of the West Indian Federation, Dominica
became a State in association with the United Kingdom.
During the 15 years that Dominica had this status, it
managed its own affairs and has now decided to complete
the process by exercising the full function of statehood as
an indcpendcnt country and as a full member of the
international community.

16. My delegation would like to express its sentiment of
congratu!ation to the young applicant-Dominica-on
the
attainment of its independence. It couples this congratulation with
the warmest expression of welcome to
Dominica as the newest Member of the United Nations. We
are certain that Dominica will do its best to promote the
implementation of the goals and purposes of the Charter of
the United Nations. The emancipation of any people from
colonial rule is a triumph for the Charter, and in this spirit
Kuwait appreciates the meaning of the independence of
Dominica.
17. My delegation hopes that in the not-too-distant future,
the State of Palestine will be admitted as a Member of the
United Nations. This should be done along the line of
General Assembly resolution 181 (II) which called for the
creation of a Palestinian State. It is an irony of llistory and
fate that more than 3 million Palestinians, active, productive, creative and ancient as they are, and with a historical
land of their ancestors, are denied their right to have a
State. It is painful and indeed unpardonable that a
permanent member of the Security Council is not in favour
of the right of the Palestinians to have a State of their own.
Be that as it may, my delegation is convinced that one day
the Palestinians will have their State, no matter what the
Israelis and their supporters think of that.

11. The United Kingdom, for its part, has given its full
support to the aspirations of the people, and the Government of Dominica under their Prime Minister, Mr. Patrick
John, to proceed to full independence. On the occasion of
independence on 3 November 1978, which incidentally was
the anniversary of the month in which Christopher
Columbus actually sighted it, my Government agreed to a
sizeable financial and aid package, comprising project,
technical and budgetary assistance.

18. Mr.
LEPRETTE
(France)
(interpl’etation
from
French): Mr. President, I should like first of a!1to tender to
you my sincere congratulations on your accession to the
presidency of the Council. The French delegation is
particularly
happy to see the Ambassador of a great
country, the Federal Republic of Germany, which is a
friend of ours, directing our work during the month of
December. Your experience and your talents will be most
helpful to us, and you can be assured that in the difficult
task you are about to undertake you can count on the
complete co-operation of my delegation.

12. The Commonwealth of Dominica, with its population
of 80,000 will be, on the confident assumption that its
application for membership is successful, one of the smaller
nations represented here in the United Nations. Nevertheless, with its rich social, ethnic and linguistic mixture, its
fascinating, if turbulent, history and its long preparation for
full nationhood, we are certain t!lat Dominica has a useful
part to play in the Organization. We look forward very
much to Dominica’s admission in the near future.

19. I should like also to address our gratitude to Ambassador N’Dong of Gabon for the remarkable manner in
which he conducted our deliberations during the very
delicate and heavy period of November.

13. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): Let me begin, Mr. President,
‘by saying how happy we are to see you occupying the
presidency for the month of December. The term of the
Federal Republic of Germany in the Security Council will
end with the termination of your presidency. It is indeed
the most effective and memorable way in which you end
the term of your country’s role in the Council.
14. I should also like to say how grateful we are to the
representative of Gabon, your predecessor, who conducted
the business of the Council with exemplary skill and
efficiency.

20. The Security Council has just recommended unanimously to the General Assembly that the Commonwealth
of Dominica should be admitted to membership in the
United Nations. We gladly join in this recommendation.
Since Dominica has fulfilled the conditions which are
required and has undertaken to respect the provisions of
t!le Charter, the French delegation, in accordance with its
constant position, could not but express support for its
admission.

15. The delegation of Kuwait supported the admission of
Dominica to membership in the United Nations. It is a

21. The admission of Dominica to the Organization will
bring us even closer to the aim of universality to which we
2

are most attached. There are also other reasons which are
related to culture, geography and history which all explain
the satisfaction that we felt when the candidacy of this the
151st Member of- the Organization was submitted. We
should never forget that Dominica is one of our closest
neighbours in the Caribbean and that its population also
speaks French. Dominica existed within the framework of
the United Kingdom but on achieving independence on
3 November this year it acceded to a new stage in its
history. In applying for membership in the Organization,
the new State has clearly demonstrated its will to work to
achieve international peace and prosperity in the spirit of
the Charter.

tions on the independence of the Commonwealth of
Dominica and announcingthe ChineseGovernment’sdecision to recognize the Commonwealthof Dominica. Both
China and the Commonwealthof Dominica belong to the
third world. We sincerely hope and believe that the
relations between our two countries and the friendship
between our two peopleswill grow daily and that, upon its
admissionto the United Nations, the Commonwealth of
Dominica will exert unremitting efforts for the realization
of the purposesand principlesof the Charter together with
all the countries that uphold justice.
28. Mr. BARTON (Canada):Mr. President,sincethis is the
first occasion under your presidency that I have had an
opportunity to speak, I should like to commence by
expressingthe pleasureof my delegationin seeingyou in
the Chair and upholding the higlr honour of the office,
particularly sinceyou, like we, arc leaving the Council in a
few weeks. It is particularly significant that you should be
our presidingofficer on this occasion.

22. The French delegation concludes by tendering its
sincere felicitations to the Prime Minister of Dominica and
his Government and wishes to assure them that France is
prepared to enter into relationships with his country in
every field in a spirit of co-operation and friendship. I want
to express to the people of Dominica our warm wishes for
their happiness and prosperity.

29. I should like also to expressappreciation to Ambassador N’Dong for his magnificent work in the month of
November. I am sure it is an experience that he will
rememberfor a long time and we are all duly gateful to him
for the contribution he made.

23. Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (interpretation from Clzinese).
Mr. President, first of all I wish to congratulate you on your
assumptionof the presidency of the Security Council for
the current month.
24, On 3 November 1978, the Commonwealth of
Dominicaproclaimedits independence.On 21 November, it
applied for membership in the United Nations fsee
S/12942/ and declared its acceptance of the obligations
containedin the Charter. The Chinesedelegation considers
that the Commonwealth of Dominica is qualified for
membershipin the United Nationsaccording to the relevant
provisionsof the Charter. We fully support its application,
and we arein favour of the Security Council recommending
to the General Assembly the admissionof the Commonwealth of Dominica to membershipin the United Nations.

30. My delegation is pleasedto join with others which
have spoken in extending warm congratulations to the
Commonwealth of Dominica on the occasionof its application for admissionto membershipin the United Nations.In
this, the final month of our current membershipon the
Council, we are particularly pleasedto welcomeDominica,
a fellow member of the Commonwealth, as the newest
Member of the United Nations. For a numberof reasonswe
take a particular interest in the admissionof Dominica.We
have had a long history of involvement in the Caribbeanin
general and with Dominica in particular. Since 1961 we
have assistedthe Government of Dominicain developingits
economy and have provided specialassistance
in suchfields
as school construction, water development, port development and agricultural projects. WClook forward to continuing and expanding these close and friendly relations
with Dominica both within the traditional spheresand now
within the United Nations and other international organizations. It is with great pleasure, therefore, that my
delegation has supported the draft resolution recommending that the Commonwealth of Dominica should be
admitted asa Member of the United Nations.

25. Over the past four centuries, the Dominican people,
carrying forward their glorious tradition of combating
imperialismand colonialism, have waged a prolonged and
valiant struggle against colonial rule and finally won the
brilliant victory of attaining national independenceunder
the leadership of His Excellency Prime Minister Patrick
John. The Chinesepeople as well as the people of the rest
of the world rejoice in it. This once again shows that
countries want independence,nations want Iiberation and
the people want revolution, and that this has become an
irresistiblehistorical trend of our time.
26. On the occasion of its independence, the Prime
Minister of the Commonwealth of Dominica solemnly
declaredthe readinessof the Dominican people to rely on
their own strength in building their country and to
continue to support the struggleof the developing countries.Wesincerelywishthem continuednew successes
in their
just causeof defending national independence,developing
their country and safeguardingpeace and security in the
Caribbeanarea.

31. Mr. KHARLAMOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian):We would congratulate you, Mr. President,for having assumed
for the second
time the very responsibleduties of Presidentof the Security
Council. The burden borne by the Presidentis certainly not
an easy one to bear. It is noble, however, and most
responsible.Bearing in mind your experience,we are sure
that all the questionswhich will come before the Council
will be resolved constructively in a manner useful to the
United Nations and to the authority that it will exert.

27. On 3 November, Hua Kuo-feng, Premier of the State
Council of the People’sRepublic of China, sent a cable to
Prime Minister Patrick John expressingwarm congratula-

32. On behalf of the Soviet delegationI shouldlike alsoto
expressour sincerethanks to the representativeof Gabon,
the President of the Council for November, for his
3

successful and able leadership in the Council where he
showed the high diplomatic qualities with which he is
endowed.

diplomat and all the dynamism we know you have, we have
no doubt that you will carry out your duties most
successfully.

33. The delegation of the USSR has gladly supported the
draft resolution by which the Council recommends that the
Commonwealth
of Dominica should be admitted to
membership in the United Nations. The admission of this
youngest State will be a further step towards achieving the
universality of the Organization and towards ensuring equal
co-operation among all States.

39. After reading the letter addressed to the SecretaryGeneral by the Prime Minister of the Commonwealth of
Dominica [see S/12942] concerning the application of his
country for admission to membership in the United
Nations, I should like to say immediately that my delegation supports that application. In fact we believe it is our
duty to ensure that the people of the Commonwealth of
Dominica, independent since 3 November last, shall see its
independence crowned by admission to the United Nations.
Our
Organization, which in resolutions adopted by its
various bodies has always supported the right of colonial
peoples and countries to independence, can only rejoice at
seeing a new Member add to its ranks.

34. It is easy to understand the legitimate wish of this new
State from the very first day of its independent existence to
become an active participant in the life of the world
community and to become a full-fledged member of it. We
note with satisfaction the statement of the Prime Minister
indicating that the Commonwealth of Dominica accepts the
commitments of the Charter and solemnly pledges to fulfil
them.

40. The people of the Commonwealth of Dominica, which
has had great experience in the administration of public
affairs, has shown in an exemplary manner that it is able to
abide by the provisions of Article 4 of the Charter of the
United Nations, which stipulates the following:

35. The achievement of independence by Dominica on
3 November last was an important success in the struggle to
implement the rights of peoples to self-determination and
national independence. It is a further step towards the
complete and final elimination of the colonial system.

“Membersitip in the United Nations is open to all other
peace-loving States which accept the obligations contained in the present Charter and, in the judgement of the
Organization, are able and willing to carry out these
obligations.”

36. The Soviet Union, true to its policy of principle of
supporting the struggle of colonial peoples for their
freedom and independence, warmly welcomes this event.
On the day of the declaration of independence of the
Commonwealth of Dominica, the Soviet Government sent
to the Prime Minister of that country its sincere congratulations and its wishes for the progress and well-being of its
people along the path of independent development. In the
telegram from the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of
the USSR, Mr. Kosygin, the following was stated:

The recognition given by many countries to Dominica
clearly demonstrates, furthermore, that this peaceful country fulfils all the conditions required in law and in
international usage.
41. In its application for membership, the Prime Minister
of the Commonwealth of Dominica has solemnly declared
that his country accepts all the obligations embodied in the
Charter, is in a position to comply with them and
undertakes to do so. Therefore my delegation is fully
convinced that that country not only has shown its
faithfulness to the principles embodied in the Charter but
has also expressed its determination to ensure their implementation in all circumstances. In welcoming the Commonwealth of Dominica, the United Nations can therefore
congratulate itself on having in its ranks a Member State
that will resolutely support the struggle for peace, international security, understanding and friendship among all the
peoples of the world.

“The Soviet Government, consistently following its
policy based on the principles of equality and self-determination of peoples and supporting the development of
friendship and co-operation among all States, declares by
this message its recognition of the Commonwealth of
Dominica as an independent and sovereign State and
expresses its readiness to establish diplomatic relations
with it.”
37, The delegation of the USSR wishes to take this
opportunity to congratulate the newly independent State
and people of the Commonwealth of Dominica on the
affirmative decision taken by the Security Council on the
application of Dominica for admission to membership in
the United Nations and wishes them peace and Success in
their national development.

42. The United Nations, being an amalgam of States large
and small, powerful and weak, where each and every one
makes its contribution for the welfare of all, should,
therefore, in a spirit of understanding and co-operation,
proffer every assistance and friendship to newly independent States and welcome them warmly to its fold.

38. Mr. N’DONG (Gabon) (interpretation from French).
Mr. President, allow me first of all to extend to you the
congratulations of my delegation upon your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for the month of December.
We are all the more gratified because your great country,
the Federal Republic of Germany, and my own, the
Republic of Gabon, maintain relations of friendship and
co-operation in all areas. In view of your great experience in
international affairs, your qualities as an outstanding

43. It is for all these reasons that my delegation supported
with special pleasure the draft resolution we have just
adopted aimed at enabling Dominica to become a Member
of the United Nations. This will make it possible for the
Organization thus to take a further step forward in its long
march towards universality.
4

!’

44. Mr. HRCKA (Czechoslovakia) (interpretation from
Russian): Mr. President, allow me, on behalf of the Czechoslovak delegation, to join the speakers who preceded me in
congratulating you on your accession to the responsible
post of President of the Security Council for December, In
this connexion, I am pleased to note that again recently an
appreciable development of the relations between our two
countries has taken place. The official visit by the General
Secretary of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia and
President of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, Gustav
Husak, to the Federal Republic of Germany in April this
year at the invitation of its President, Mr. Walter &heel,
was a clear expression of this. As was stressed in the joint
statement signed by the President of the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic, and the Chancellor of the ,Federal
Republic of Germany, Mr. Helmut Schmidt, that visit
contributed to the further development of co-operation and
the broadening of relations between our two neighbouring
States. It also contributed to the strengthening of the
proceiss of detente and co-operation in Europe.
45. I should like also to take this opportunity to thank the
representative of Gabon, Mr. N’Dong, for having so ably
and (competently guided the work of the Council in
November.
I

46. ,4fter the admission of Solomon Islands to membership
at the current session of the General Assembly, we are
witnessing today another significant event as the Security
Council is approving a recommendation to admit to the
United Nations the Commonwealth of Dominica, a new
State which achieved its independence on 3 November of
this :year. The delegation of the Czechoslovak Socialist
Republic was pleased to support the recommendation of
the Council in regard to this application, recognizing the
inalienable right of all countries and peoples to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations and the historic Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peop’les. In so doing, it also noted the statement of the
Prime Minister of the Commonwealth of Dominica to the
effect that Dominica accepted the obligations contained in
the Charter and solemnly undertook to fulfil them.
47. The admission of the Commonwealth of Dominica at
the thirty-third session of the General Assembly as the
151st Member of the United Nations is one of the steps
along the road to the final liquidation of the colonial
system. Domimca’s declaration of independence has turned
a new page in the life and history of the people of the
Commonwealth of Dominica. On this occasion the Czechoslovak delegation wants to offer its sincere congratulations
to them and to wish them peace and success in the
many-sided development of their country.
48. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Czechoslovakia for his kind words to me and to my country
and with regard to the relations between our two countries.
49. Miss LOPEZ (Venezuela) (interpretation
from
Spanish): Mr. President, allow me to congratulate you on
behalf of my delegation and to congratulate your country,
the Federal Republic of Germany, upon your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council. We reiterate our

full confidence in your wisdom and skill of which we have
had clear evidence during your presence in the Council.
50. We also wish to reiterate to the representative of
Gabon our appreciation of the manner in which he
conducted our debates last month, thanks to which we
were able to consider a number of delicate international
issues.
51. The application of the Government of Dominica for
admission to membership in the United Nations has
obtained the unanimous support of the membership of the
Council, which has decided to recommend to the General
Assembly that Dominica should be admitted. We wish to
express our gratification at an act that strengthens the
principle of self-determination of peoples and contributes
to the universality of the Organization, faithful as we are to
our traditional policy in defence of these principles, We are
truly gratified to see the disappearance of the last vestiges
of colonialism on our continent and we applaud the
initiatives of the administering Power designed to provide
assistance to the new independent State.
52. Venezuela has long maintained relations of co-operation, friendship and neighbourliness with Dominica and
wishes to express here its satisfaction at the admission of
this new country to membership in the United Nations, in
the full exercise of all rights and in the acceptance of all the
obligations set forth in the Charter of the United Nations
for all sovereign States irrespective of their population,
their size, their political, economic or social system or the
race or creed of their inhabitants.
53. My country, whose coasts are washed by the same seas
as those of Dominica, share the same ideals of independence, development and democracy, and in this connexion
we extend a most cordial welcome to this new sisternation, which has now entered the community of free
States of the Caribbean and the international community
represented by the United Nations.
54. Mr. FUENTES IBANEZ (Bolivia) (interpretation from
Spanish): Mr. President, the delegation of Bolivia wishes to
express its satisfaction at seeing you assume the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of December. Your
outstanding qualities as a diplomat and international figure
as well as your Government’s position in the field of
international relations-a
Government which has always
been ready to co-operate in the solution of problems
besetting the world and in contributing to the progress of
developing countries-bear
witness to the effectiveness of
those services which will be all the more valuable as it seems
difficult to find just and equitable solutions to problems
entrusted to the Council by the international community.
In view of the ever cordial and close relations existing
between our two Governments and peoples, it is hardly
necessary for me to reiterate our desire for co-operation.
55. I also wish to express the gratitude of my delegation for
the excellent work done by the representative of Gabon,
Mr, N’Dong. His sagicity and diplomatic tact enabled him
to conduct our work in a climate of serenity and a patient
quest for solutions to some of the most controversial issues
before the Council. We extend to him the expression of our
admiration and gratitude.

United Nations family of nations by its many friends,
among which we count ourselves.

56. With regard to the question that we are gathered here
this afternoon to consider, my delegation associates itself
with the expressions of agreement elicited by the application of the Commonwealth of Dominica for admission to
membership in the United Nations, In supporting the report
of the Committee on the Admission of New Members, I am
happy to extend to Dominica a warm welcome and to wish
it a positive and fruitful contribution to the purposes and
objectives of the United Nations.

64. We have followed Dominica’s progress in recent years
with interest and satisfaction. We are pleased that we have
been able to participate, however modestly, in its internal
economic and social development. Our Government,
through various multilateral agencies, has provided economic assistance for Dominica’s development, and we have
had an active Peace Corps programme on the island for a
number of years. I am similarly pleased to note that among
the ties that bind us is the fact that, along with the many
other nationalities that make up our country, there are a
number of people of Dominican origin who have contributed their talents and skills to our society.

57. We are also gratified to learn that Dominica, on joining
the Organization, will become another member of the Latin
American Group, which thus will bc enriched not only in
numerical terms but also by reason of the virtues of the
Dominican people, whose history is so similar in many ways
to that of other peoples in our part of the world.

65. We have noted with pleasure the peaceful and responsible manner in which Dominica attained its independence.
We are confident that this achievement demonstrates that
the Government and people of Dominica are prepared to
shoulder their responsibilities in the world and that they
share the principles that guide us here in the United
Nations: to establish a world of peace, justice, and
prosperity.

58. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Bolivia for the kind words he addressed to me and to my
country with regard to the good relations between our two
countries.
59. Mr. PITCHEN (Mauritius): Mr. President, as this is the
first time that I have had an opportunity to address the
Security Council, I look forward to your indulgence.

66. Mr. HARRIMAN (Nigeria): Mr. President, please also
permit me to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. I do not need to repeat that
your efficiency and proficiency in dealing with matters
both in the United Nations and in the deliberations of the
Security Council are revered by members of the Council
and by Members of the United Nations. The visit of your
Chancellor to my country recently was a high-water mark
in the relations between our two countries.

60. The delegation of Mauritius extends to you and to
your country its warm congratulations on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December, The Council will surely benefit from your great
experience and know-how in steering its course in the right
direction during the difficult days looming ahead.
61. As is well known, Mauritius has never failed to support
and to work actively for the independence of countries ever
since it was admitted as a Member of the United Nations. It
therefore has given Mauritius, as a member of the Security
Council, immense pleasure in recommending the admission
of Dominica as a full-fledged member of our world-wide
Organization. We look forward to the actual admission of
Dominica-which
will certainly receive the official sanction
of the General Assembly-when
we shall have an opportunity to welcome warmly the Commonwealth
of
Dominica.

67. At the same time, I should like to extend, through
you, the profound appreciation of my delegation to the
representative of Gabon, my brother and friend, Ambassador N’Dong, for the skilful manner in which the affairs of
the Council were conducted during the tnonth of
November.
68. My delegation is indeed happy to support the resole
tion recommending to the General Assembly the admission
of the Commonwealth of Dominica as the 15 1st Member of
the United Nations. As a member of the Commonwealth,
Nigeria is indeed gratified to welcome another member
within the Organization.

62. As a member of the Security Council, Mauritius takes
special pride in welcoming this historic event, since it is to
be remembered that, when the United Nations was created,
the Organization had only 51 Members and therefore
Dominica is the 100th Member to be admitted to the
United Nations since its inception. We warmly welcome the
delegation of Dominica, extending to them our sincere
congratulations on their independence, and we express to
them our full co-operation. Our congratulations go also to
the United Kingdom which has a remarkable recorcl in the
process of decolonization in the best spirit of the universality of membership and in accordance with the principles
of the Charter.

69. Here I would wish to recall that Nigeria-as I hop will
be the case with Dominica-became a member of the
Commonwealth because it believed in certain values, values
that have transformed the colonial system which pervaded
our history for the better part of a century on the basis of
self-determination, independence and equality of peoples,
of races and of nations. That is what keeps the Common.
wealth going, and it is a tradition which we hope will
extend beyond colonial possessions into the wider field of
international relations, particularly as regards the British,
and I congratulate them on the peaceful transition of
Dominica to statehood.

63. Mr. PETREE (United States of America): The United
States is pleased to support the application for admission to
membership in the United Nations of the Commonwealth
of Dominica. This State, which attained its independence
on 3 November this year, is certainly to be welcomed in the

70. I also hope that the Commonwealth of Dominica will
benefit immensely from the fruits of statehood occasioned
6

by its
dence
Unite L
the nE
indepc
indepc
forwa
count
71. I
indepr
canno
my P:
racial
Namil
Africa
threat
legi tin
tramp
lation
of jus
will c
blood
peopll
inate
Africi
manoc

vatior
tile

of

72. ‘:
Nigeri
to rnc
our tv
73. I
every
and sj
Secur
the 1
inhibi
are ic
Courl
indee
two 4
you v
in su
Deter
74. I
repre!
Dorni
occas
havin
indep
75. (
will I
Natio
we w
becor
Natio
admi:
Comr
repre;

by its attainment of independence-not just legal independence but, I believe, real independence-and
that the
United Nations and-the specialized agencies will rally round
the new State to enable it to strengthen its sovereignty and
independence. Nigeria sent a strong delegation to the
independence celebrations of the new State, and WC look
forward to the strengthening of links between our two
countries and peoples in the years ahead.

76. We shall look forward to developing close relations
with Dominica as the latest addition to the Caribbean
component, which is playing an increasingly active role in
the United Nations.
77. The PRESIDENT: I thank ttle representative of India
for his most generous words addrcsscd to the presidency. I
can only hope that there will be no change in the
Charter-that
members of the Council can continue to share
this office among themselves.

71. As more and more countries and peoples become
independent and join the United Nations, my delegation
cannot but recall that a number of States, particularly in
my part of the world, are still held in colonial bondage and
racial domination. We refer in this instance to Zimbabwe,
Namibia, and the settler colonialism in upzrfkeid South
Africa where the rights of peoples are still seriously
threatened and circumscribed, partially or totally, and their
legitimate yearnings for freedom and independence
trampled with reckless abandon. However, we find consolation in the fact that both history and time are on the side
of justice and that freedom may take long to achieve but
will certainly arrive. It may even have to be reached by a
bloody path, but it will arrive in the end. Four million
people-the whites-cannot
continue indefinitely to dominate across racial lines 30 million people in southern
Africa, no matter the odds and notwithstanding
the
manoeuvres of certain vested interests bent on the preservation of the current unacceptable ~tut~s quo in that part
of the world.

78. The next speaker is the representative of El Salvador,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
79. Mr. URQUIA
(El Salvador) (interpretation from
Spanisk): I have asked to be called upon not only as
representative of El Salvador but also in my capacity as
Chairman of the Latin American Group, in order to express
the gratification
of the representatives of the Latin
American and Caribbean countries at the decision of the
Security Council to recommend to the General Assembly
Dominica’s admission to United Nations membership.
80. Dominica is one of the islands in the Leeward and
Windward group, which in turn are part of the Lesser
Antilles in the Caribbean Sea. It was discovered by
Christopher Columbus on Sunday, 3 November 1493, in
the course of his triumphant second voyage of discovery-a
voyage that was not devoid of difficulties or perils-across
the stormy waters of the Atlantic, during the famous
expedition sponsored by the Catholic monarchs of Spain.
The fact that it was a Sunday and that the Spanish
equivalent of Sunday is “domingo”, and that doming0 and
Dominica are two words which etymologically evoke the
name of the Lord-that is, of the only God of those of us
who profess the same religion as King Ferdinand and Queen
Isabella-prompted
the discoverer to give the island the
name it now bears, together with the English word
“Commonwealth”.

72. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Nigeria for his statement and for the kind words addressed
to me and to my country regarding the relations between
our two countries.
73. Mr. JAIPAL (India): Mr. President, my delegation and
every one of us extends to you our warm congratulations
and sincere good wishes on your becoming President of the
Securi,ty Council for this month. As your neighbour during
the last two years, I have observed you without any
inhibitions and have found in you certain qualities which
are ideal for the office of a permanent president of the
Council, if such an office were to be created. The Council is
indeed fortunate in having you preside over it twice in your
two years. I am sure that, with your customary efficiency,
you will organize the various critical situations in the world
in such a manner that we have no meetings after 23
December.

81. Certainly one of the most beautiful of the Windward
Islands, Dominica was a French possession until 1763, and
then passed to the British Crown, with which it has been
associated, like the other islands hi the group, since 1967.
82. Having achieved its independence little more than a
month ago, Dominica has knocked on the door of the
United Nations in order to join it as a Member State.

74. My delegation was pleased to listen to the British
representative’s romantic introduction to the admission of
Dominica to the United Nations. This is yet another
occasion for congratulating the British Government for
having carefully groomed one of its fomler colonies for
independent statehood.

83. The resolution unanimously adopted by the Council
recommending to the General Assembly the admission of
that State is eloquent proof that the doors of this house are
open to that small and young State belonging to the
American community-a
peace-loving country ready to
respect and to comply with the purposes and prknciples
enshrined in the Charter and to co-operate in the work of
the world Organization. We are convinced that the recommendation will be welcomed by the Assembly and that
Dominica’s admission will be approved by consensus.

7.5. One more of the discoveries of Christopher Columbus
will come home to roost now in this crowded United
Nations. We will be very happy to welcome Dominica, and
we wish this new State a happy future in what is rapidly
becoming the “town meeting of the world”, as the United
Nations was once called by an American observer. The
admission of Dominica will also strengthen the forces of the
Commonwealth, as tactfully pointed out by the British
representative.

84. Meanwhile, I wish to voice my thanks for the
unanimous decision and to convey the fraternal congratulations of the Latin American Group to the Prime Minister
7

of the CoInn~onwealth
of Dominica on the manner in which
the ColltlciI
has received and acted upon the application of
his cOl~t~try for admission.

as the international community, can provide the Commonwealth of Dominica with the necessary means with which
to strengthen further its national economy, increasingly
provide its people with better standards of living and
consolidate its national independence.

85. 1 hasten to extend to the Prime Minister and other
rcl’rescntatives
of the island a very warm welcome and to
tell then1 that the members of the Latin American Group
are looking
forward to welcoming them with open arms in
our midst.

92. The positive contribution
of the Government and
People of the Commonwealth of Dominica to the devel.
opment of the Caribbean has been widely acknowledged.
We are therefore convinced that the United Nations itself
will be further enriched by its membership. Our Govemmerits look forward to increasing and mutually beneficial
co-operation with the Commonwealth of Dominica, not
only at the regional level but also now at the universal level.
We are accordingly confident that the General Assembly
will consider favourably the recommendation of the
Security Council which has just been adopted regarding the
admission of the Commonwealth of Dominica, thereby
bringing the Organization one step closer to the goal of
universal membership.

@ii The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Trinidad
and Tobago, whom I invite to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
87.

Mr. ABDuLAH
(Trinidad and Tobago): Mr. President,
like
first of all to thank you and the other
of the Council for inviting me to address the

1 S~OU~C~
members

its consideration of the application of the
of Dominica for admission to membership
Nations.
I wish also to state that the
dclcgalions
of the Bahamas, Barbados, Grenada, Guyana
and Jamaica
have requested to be associated with the
remarks which I am about to make.
Cmllcil

during

~ommanwealth
in the
United

93. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the Minister of
Labour of Barbados, His Excellency Mr. Donald Blackman.
I welcome him and invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

wish
to join the others who have spoken here
today in welcoming
the Council’s decision just taken to
recommend
to the General Assembly that the Commonwealth of Dominica should be admitted to membership in
the United
Nations. In doing so, I hasten to add that the
delegations
on whose behalf I speak are not seeking to
detract from
the sentiments that were so eloquently
expressed by the representative of El Salvador when he
spoke as Chairman
of the Latin American Group for the
current month.
We fully endorse all that he said on behalf
of the Latin American Group, of which we are, of course,
members.

88. We

94. Mr. BLACKMAN
(Barbados): I wish to thank the
Security Council, through you, Mr. President, for having
generously afforded me the opportunity of speaking on
behalf of Dominica whose representative could not be
available at this time to respond to the very warm and
impressive welcome that has been accorded its application
for admission to membership in the United Nations.
95. The representative of Dominica would have been
deeply interested in the nutshell accounts of Dominican
history with which the Council was regaled this afternoon.
He would have craved the Council’s indulgence to effect
some emendations to the historical accounts that were
rendered here. In discussing the vicissitudes of Dominican
history, he would have quarrelled politely with the view
expressed here that Dominica was discovered by Christopher Columbus. He would have pointed out that there
were human beings, to wit the Caribs, with a long, rich
cultural tradition who inhabited Dominica for centuries
before the date when Christopher Columbus is alleged to
have set eyes on Dominica.

89. The peoples of Dominica and their neighbours in the
Caribbean
for whom I speak have been linked over the
centuries by historic& political, cultural and economic ties.
In recent times our relationships have deepened through
involvement
in various regional institutions which are aimed
at promoting
the economic and social development of all
the peoples of the Caribbean. Our respective Governments
look forward
to a further strengthening of these bonds of
friendship with the peoples of Dominica.
90. The accession of the Commonwealth of Dominica ta
sovereign independence
on 3 November this year was the
outcome
of the freely expressed desire on the part of the
people of that Territory to exercise their inalienable right
to self-determination
and independence in accordance with
tl\e Charter
of the United Nations and General Assembly
resolution
15 14 (XV). We welcome the fact that this
transition
to independence took place peacefully and in
accordance
with long-standing arrangements for the tennination of the island’s status as a “State in ass::ziation with
the United Kingdom”.

96. Also, the representative would have been pleased to
witness the transformation, almost miraculous, undergone
by certain representatives here because I recall vividly the
occasion on which my country was deeply involved in
having the General Assembly adopt resolution 32/186 of 19
December 1977, in which aid was requested, through the
United Nations and the specialized agencies, for the West
Indies Associated States, including Dominica. At that time
there were some countries represented here today which
looked askance at such a resolution; indeed, some rePresentatives wondered whether it was possible for the People
of Dominica to think as independent human beings.

91. We recognize, however, that the people of Dominica,
like tile peoples in the other Caribbean territories, will
continue
to face problems inherent in small island developing countries. We firmly believe that assistance from the
former administering
Power and other Governments, as well

97. I am therefore particularly gratified at the euphoric
statements that have emanated from those countries which
were sceptical about the fitness of the people of Dominica
8

t’o control their own destiny, and I rejoice at this
marvellous change of heart. However, it is with a tinge of
regret that I should like to mention that the United Nations
is still to implement the terms of that resolution and that
the people of Dominica are anxiously awaiting its implementation to move them even further and more quickly
forward on the path to independence.
98. Again, I thank the Security Council for the unanimous
recommendation that it has made to the General Assembly.
99. We in the Caribbean believe that this is one long step
forward towards the elimination of colonialism in that
region. I believe there are more areas in need of decolonization within the Caribbean than in any other region of the
world. We look forward to the day when all the other
countries now wallowing in a state of colonialism will be
admitted with the same graciousness and charm as
Dominica has been today. We look forward to the day
when even Dominica’s imperialist neighbours will see fit to
depart and let their respective client States take their places
here as dignified national entities.
:lOO. The PRESIDENT: As there are no further speakers, I
shall now make a statement in my capacity as representative of the FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.
101. We are pleased to welcome Dominica as the 15lst
Member of the United Nations and as the thirtieth
independent State in the American region. Dominica’s
iadmission to the United Nations will strengthen the
‘universal role of the Organization, just as its independence
will further stability in the Caribbean.
102. The Federal Republic of Germany was one of the
first States to recognize Dominica under international law
through a message of congratulation from the Federal
President which was delivered by a special envoy on the day
of independence.

103. We hope that the friendly relations between our two
countries will be further improved. We are also prepared to
assist Dominica in its economic development. The Caribbean Development Bank has already offered Dominica a
loan of some $2.1 million from a German contribution to
the Bank’s Special Fund, to be used for the maintenance of
roads and bridges in Dominica. Moreover, experts from my
country seconded to the Bank under a German technical
assistance programme designed to strengthen industrial
co-operation with the Eastern Caribbean are currently
engaged in the promotion of exports from Dominica, in
introducing new technologies to the country and in
establishing joint ventures with business firms from my
country.
104. A former British overseas territory, Dominica has
been associated with the European Economic Community.
We hope that, as a member of the Caribbean Community
and Common Market, Dominica will soon accede also to
the LomC Convention and will thus maintain its close
relations with the European Community.
105. We extend our best wishes to the people and
Government of Dominica on their future role as a Member
of our world Organization-the 100th since the founding of
the United Nations.
106. As PRESIDENT of the Council, I note that the list of
speakers has been exhausted. Before concluding this meet.
ing, please permit me to make a suggestion to the members
of the Council. My country will leave the Council at the
end of this month and, in spite of all the warm compliments that members of the Council have made to the
presidency, I should like to recall that there is a rule in the
provisional rules of procedure that does not really permit
such congratulations. Perhaps in the future members of the
Council could adhere to that rule.
The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.

*

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

or

from
bookstores
and distributors
write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente
dans les librairies
et les agences
ddpositaires
du mondo entier. Informez-vous
aupr&s de votre Iibraire ou adressea-vous
B : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou GenBve.
ICAI-C

IIOJIY’IlfTb

I%~tmm
3HHax
BaILreM

OprariK3aqwu
06'be~meritibrx
u &reHwreax
BO BC~X paRo!iax
HHHSKHOM
Mara3HHe
MnH nAUlme

KBAAHHII

HaqwR,

C!e~rr~a

COMO

CONSEGUIR

no nponaxe

OPI’AHK3AL(UH

us~~wnR,

PUBLICACIONES

OB’bEANHEHHhIX

HAU&fH

HaqwR
NO)KHO xynmb
B KHWXHLIX
hsar*mfpa.
H~BOAHT@
cnpaawi
06 mRawmx
B
no aApecy:
0praHuaawit-i
O~%~AUH~HN~IX
Hbt+Ff~p~
HIGH
XCeHesa.

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estan en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en todas partea de1 mundo.
Coneulte
a su libcero o dirfjase
a: Naciones
Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$U,S.

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

78-7000%December

19794,200
