General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

18

35/43.

Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte

35/112.

Peaceful use of nuclear energy for economic and
social development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the
Declaration,
Recalling its previous resolutions, in particular resolutions 3161 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973, 3291 (XXIX)
of 13 December 1974, 31 /4 of 21 October 1976, 32/7 of
I November 1977 and 34/69 of 6 December 1979, in
which it, inter alia, affirmed the unity and territorial integrity of the Comoros,
Recalling, in particular, its resolution 3385 (XXX) of
12 November 1975, on the admission of the Comoros to
membership in the United Nations, in which it reaffirmed the necessity of respecting the unity and territorial integrity of the Comoro Archipelago, composed
of the islands of Anjouan, Grande-Comore, Mayotte
and Moheli,
Taking note of the talks opened between the Government of the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros
and the Government of the French Republic,
Convinced that a just and lasting solution of the question of Mayotte is to be found in respect for the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of the
Comoro Archipelago,
Bearing in mind the decisions of the Organization of
African Unity, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the Organization of the Islamic Conference
concerning this question,
l. Reaffirms the sovereignty of the Islamic Federal
Republic of the Comoros over the island of Mayotte:
2. Invites the Governments of the Comoros and
France to continue the talks, with a view to rapidly finding for the question of the Comorian island of Mayotte
a just solution in conformity with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations:
3. Welcomes the initiative taken at Freetown by the
Organization of African Unity 16 to convene at Moroni
before the thirty-seventh ordinary session of the Council
of Ministers its Committee of Seven charged with the
question, with a view to discussing with the Comorian
Government appropriate measures likely to speed up
the settlement of the question of Mayotte:
4. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations to follow developments concerning this question,
in conjunction with the Secretary-General of the Organi,:ation of African Unity, and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session:
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item -:ntitled "Question of the
Comorian island of Mayotte ...

74th plenary meeting
28 November 1980
"'~"c A/35/463 and Cnrr. ]_ annex
(XXX Yi.

I. rc,olution CM/Res.no

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency to the General Assembly for the
year 1979, 17
Reaffirming the principles and provisions of its resolution 32/50 of 8 December 1977 on the p~aceful use of
nuclear energy for economic and social development,
Recalling the relevant paragraphs of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 18 the first special session devoted to disarmament,
Recalling also its decision. as contained in its resolution 34/63 of 29 November 1979, to convene an international conference for the promotion of international
co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, in
principle by 1983,
Recalling the role of the International Atomic Energy
Agency set out in resolution 34/63,
Welcoming the establishment, by the Board of Governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency, of the
Committee on Assurances of Supply,
Expressing the conviction that progress in the work of
the Committee on Assurances of Supply will greatly
contribute to the success of the aforementioned conference,
Recognizing the need for the timely initiation of preparations for the conference,

I. Decides to convene in 1983 the United Nations
Conference for the Promotion of International Cooperation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy;
2. Decides in this regard to take account of the results of the work of the Committee on Assurances of
Supply:
3. Further decides to establish a Preparatory Committee for the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful
Uses of Nuclear Energy, composed of seventy Member
States and, on an equal footing, other Member States
which may express their interest in participating in the
work of the Committee, and requests the President of the
General Assembly to appoint the members of the Committee, in accordance with the principle of equitable
geographical representation, not later than I July
1981:
4. Requests the Preparatory Committee to hold, at
Vienna, an organizational session not exceeding one
week in length during the second half of 1981, primarily
for the purpose of preparing its programme of work,
and to submit its report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session;
5. Invites the International Atomic Energy Agency
to fulfil its appropriate role within the scope of its responsibilities at all stages of preparation of the Conference. and during the Conference itself, by contributing to the discussion of relevant issues, by providing
technical data and documentation as needed, particularly in relation to the progress of the work of the
"International Atomic Energy Agency, The Annual Report for /979
(Austria. July I 980); transmitted to the members of the General
Assembly by a note of the Secretary-General (A /J5 / _H,5).
"Resolution S-10 1 2.

II.

Committee on Assurances of Supply, and by participating in the secretariat of the Conference:
6. Invites all States which have not yet done so to
communicate to the Secretary-General, not later than 30
June I 981, their views on the opening date, duration.
venue and agenda of the Conference and on other matters relevant to its preparation and organization;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Preparatory Committee and to the Director-General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency all the communications received from Member States and, in consultation with the Director-General, to assist the Committee by providing it with all necessary facilities for its
work;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session, under the item "Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency", a subitem entitled
"United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation m the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy".
*

*

*

The President of the General Assembly subsequently informed the
Secretary-General''' that, in accordance with paragraph J vf the above
resolution, he had appointed fifty-four States as members of the
Preparatory Committee for the United Nations Conference for the
Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of
Nuclear Energy, on the understanding that he would appoint anvfimhcr
candidates once they had been endorsed by their respective groups.
As a result, the Preparatory Committee is composed of thefullowi11g
Member States: ALGERIA, AR(;ENJIN:\, AllSlR·\LIA. AliSJKI\.
BELGIUM,

BRAZIL,

BULGARIA,

BYLLORl'SSIAN

SOYl!J

SUCl•\LISJ

REPUBLIC, CANADA, CHILE, CHINA. COLOMBIA, Cos] A RI( ,,. CtlBA,
CZECHOSLOVAKIA, DENMARK. ECUADOR. EGYPT. FINI \NIJ, FRANCE,
GERMA"< Dl-.MOCRATIC REPUBLIC. Uc.RM.ANY, Ft·lll·R,\I Rl·Pl!BI IC OF.
GHANA, GRHU., GllAl'EMALA, HUNGARY, INDIA, INDONl·SIA. IK\().
ITALY, JAPAN. LIBYAN ARAB JAMAIIIRIYA.
MOROCCO.

NHllt:RLi\NDS,

RoM.\NI\,

SP\I,.

S111

NORWAY,

1.-\"<K\.

19

Res(Jlutions adopted without refere,u·e to a Main Committee

MAllRlr,\NI,\,

P,\KIS"IA'.

Sw11>1 r-,_

PI.Rt..

MIXILO.
Pot.M,ll,

S,JU\;-.J :\R\B R11•11B1"

Ti' RJ,; I , . lJ "R \IN!\ N So, 11 I s()( I \ I IS I R I l'I 1\1 J( • ( h, 1(1~ I )I So, 11 I
1

Srn 1,11,1 R11•11111,.,. l 1 ,1111l Ki''-<,l><>\J "'
N<>RIIIIR'- IRll\,ll. lh111ll Sl\11,
'"
V, " / t 11 ,. Y, '""'\\,,and/ \IIU

(;J<1 \I

B1u1 " '

'"'

\,11,rn ,. l'1u ,,, ,,.

Drafting Committee of the Conference should be
enabled to meet in :\Jew York from 12 January to 27
February I 98 l and that the Group of Seventy-seven
should be given facilities to meet prior to the tenth session, from4to6March 1981,
Considering the suggestions contained in the aforementioned letter regarding the need for the Conference
to examine the institutional implications of the Convention and any other decisions that the Conference
may adopt and for the United Nations to make a special
effort with regard to public information,
l. Expresses its deep sense of loss at the sad news of
the death of Hamilton Shirley Amerasinghe, President
of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of
the Sea, and wishes to place on record its great appreciation both of his remarkable personal qualities as a diplomat and leader and of his unique contribution to the
work of the Conference:

2. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
<..ieneral Assembly at its thirty-sixth session on the question of awarding a memorial fellowship or scholarship
in the field of the law of the sea and related matters, in
recognition of the unique contribution made by
Hamilton Shirley Amerasinghe to the work -of the Conference;
3. Approves the convening of the tenth session of the
Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea
in New York·'' for the period from 9 March to 17 or 24
April 1981:
4. Approves also the convening of the Drafting Committee of the Conference in New York from 12 January
to 27 February 1981:
5. Recommends that the Secretary-General should
provide the ne;essary facilities for informal consultations from 4 to 6 March 1981 to delegations participating in the Conference, in particular to the members of the Group of Seventy-seven:
6. Requests the Secretary-General, in his capacity as
Secretary-General of the Conference, to prepare and
submit to the Conference at its tenth session, for such
consideration as it deems appropriate. a study identifying:

84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980

35/116.

Third United Nations Conference on the Law of
the Sea

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3067 (XXVIII) of 16 November 1973, 3334 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974, 3483
(XXX) of 12 December 1975, 31/63 of 10 December
1976, 32/194 of20 December 1977, 33/17 of 10 November I 978 and 34 /20 of 9 November 1979,
Taking note of the letter dated 29 September 1980
from the President of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea to the President of the
General Assembly 20 informing the latter that the Conferen_c~ had decided to recommend to the Assembly that
prov1s1on should be made for the Conference to hold its
ten!h sessio~ from 9 March to 17 or 24 April 1981 at
Umted Nations Headquarters in New York, that the
'"1\/35/805 and Add. I

"'Official Re~ords of the General A.rn•mbly, 7hirtr-fijih Session, Annexes, agenda Item 20. document A /_l'> •soo

(a) The future functions of the Secretary-General
under the draft Convention:
(b) The needs ,if countries, especially developing
countries, for information, advice and assistance under
the new legal regime:
7. Suggests to the Secretary-General that special efforts be made, particularly in connexion with the adoption of the Convention, to promote the widest possible
public awareness ,if the achievements of the Conference:
8. Authorizes the Secretary-General to make the
necessary arrangements in accordance with section I,
paragraph 5, of General Assembly resolution 31 / 140 of
17 December 1976, pursuant to the invitation extended
by the Government of Venezuela for the holding of the
final session of the Conference in Caracas should the
Conference decide, in consultation with that Government, to hold the final session prior to the thirty-sixth
session of the Assembly.

8Vth plenary meeting
I O December 1980
'•( ;eneva was .:onsiderc-J '" an alternative site if ade4uate facilities
,·uuld not be provided "' ,'Jew York. Sec also sect. X.B.1, deci--.ion i-; /452
