S/2014/480

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 July 2014
Original: English

Third report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013) and covers developments pertaining to the issues of missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the
national archives, since the issuance of my previous report, dated 14 March 2014
(S/2014/191).
2.
The reporting period witnessed continuing enhancement of bilateral relations
between Iraq and Kuwait. On 17 and 18 March, my Special Representative for Iraq
visited Kuwait and met His Highness the Emir, the Emir’s Adviser, the Prime
Minister, the First Deputy Prime Minister, the Foreign Minister and other senior
officials, as well as the National Committee for Missing Persons and Prisoners of
War Affairs. Kuwaiti interlocutors highlighted Kuwait-Iraq relations as a very
positive development in the region and expressed their wish to see my Special
Representative, my Deputy Special Representative and other officials of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) more frequently in Kuwait to
exchange information and ideas on the way forward with regard to the Mission’s
mandated tasks.
3.
In another positive development, the legal obstacles to Kuwait’s repossession
of its consular premises in Basra are expected to be resolved soon, the current
occupant agreeing to move out. The long-held plans for Kuwait to reopen its
consulate there are thus set to come to fruition.

II. Recent activities with regard to the repatriation and return
of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals, or their remains
4.
With a view to carrying out his responsibilities under resolution 2107 (2013),
my Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs at UNAMI held meetings in
Baghdad with relevant Iraqi interlocutors, including Arkan Saleh, Deputy Minister
for Human Rights and head of the Iraqi delegation to the Technical Subcommittee of
the Tripartite Commission; Ambassador Walid Shiltagh, who heads the Iraqi
interministerial committee on missing Kuwaiti property, including the national
archives; Patrick Youssef, head of the delegation of the International Committee of
the Red Cross in Iraq, and members of the diplomatic corps.
14-56912 (E)

150714

*1456912*

S/2014/480

5.
On 17 March, my Special Representative met with the Chairman and members
of the National Committee for Missing Persons and Prisoners of War Affairs. The
Committee expressed its wish for Iraq to take full ownership of the humanitarian
dossier and come up with initiatives to move the dossier forward. The Chairman
expressed appreciation for the role of UNAMI, particularly in terms of its outreach
to Iraqi government officials, its ability to contact people at local levels and to reach
out to those members of the former regime in third countries holding information,
and to facilitate new initiatives on the part of Iraq. My Special Representative
assured the Committee that UNAMI would do all within its ability to source
information from the local level by activating its Governorate Liaison Officers
network, which is present in most of the Governorates in Iraq. In addition, UNAMI
would assist in raising international awareness and work closely with the
Government of Iraq on this humanitarian issue. The Committee also noted that the
observer status of UNAMI would be settled during the next meeting of the Tripartite
Commission, scheduled for October.
6.
On 19 March, my Special Representative met the Prime Minister, Nouri
al-Maliki, and debriefed him on his visit to Kuwait. The Prime Minister underlined
the missing persons issue as a humanitarian matter, and assured my Special
Representative that Iraq would make all resources available in the search for
missing Kuwaiti persons and property and the national archives. He also stressed
that Iraq had no interest in keeping Kuwaiti documents, much less the national
archives, and Iraq stood ready to act on any piece of information for their location
and return.
7.
On 25 March and 13 May, the Iraqi interministerial committee on missing
Kuwaiti nationals convened under the auspices of the Ministry of Human Rights.
The committee reviewed progress in acquiring new information on burial sites and
reaching out to known witnesses and informants, both within and outside Iraq. My
Deputy Special Representative reiterated the availability of the good offices of
UNAMI to facilitate Iraqi efforts to reach out to members of the former regime who
might possess relevant information but are not in a position to cooperate with the
Government of Iraq. He urged the interministerial committee to provide as much
information as possible on such potential informants. On 28 May, my Deputy
Special Representative put an Iraqi witness in contact with the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs with a view to identifying a grave site inside Kuwait. UNAMI is working
with the Ministries of Foreign Affairs and Human Rights to take the interview
process forward.
8.
On 2 June, my Deputy Special Representative facilitated a meeting between
Arkan Saleh and Duncan Spinner, head of the Iraqi operations of the International
Commission on Missing Persons, an organization with experience in finding human
remains in post-conflict settings. UNAMI proposed that the Commission make a
comprehensive proposal to build forensic capacity and assist searches using the
latest technology, including cost-effective drones and trained sniffer dogs. The
Commission is working on a proposal to be presented to the Ministry of Human
Rights and for consideration by the Council of Ministers. Earlier in May, the
Council of Ministers had turned down a proposal from an overseas archaeologist,
routed through the Technical Subcommittee, citing “formidable” costs.
9.
At his meetings with both Iraqi and Kuwait interlocutors, my Deputy Special
Representative stressed that the use of science and technology and other innovative

2/4

14-56912

S/2014/480

but cost-effective methods could be helpful in the search for the missing Kuwaiti
and third-country nationals. In response to my Deputy Special Representative’s
proposal, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs ran advertisements in 13 local daily
newspapers starting on 27 May for three days on missing Kuwaiti and third-country
nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the national archives, with
telephone numbers of both the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Embassy of
Kuwait in Iraq, as well as assurances of anonymity and legal protection.
10. On 9 June, my Deputy Special Representative, during his quarterly visit to
Kuwait, met with Khaled al-Jarallah, Under-Secretary for Foreign Affairs;
Mohammad Abdullah Abulhasan, Adviser to the Emir; and Jasem al-Mubaraki, head
of the Kuwaiti interministerial committee on missing Kuwaiti property, including
the national archives, in addition to the Chairman and members of the National
Committee for Missing Persons and Prisoners of War Affairs. He also met with
Mohammad Bahr al-Uloom, Ambassador of Iraq to Kuwait, as well as the
Chargé d’affaires of the Embassy of the United States of America and the Deputy
Ambassador of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
11. Kuwaiti officials were highly appreciative of the role of UNAMI in carrying
out its mandated tasks under Security Council resolution 2107 (2013), noting the
positive steps that UNAMI has taken to facilitate this dossier. The Chairman of the
National Committee for Missing Persons and Prisoners of War Affairs called on my
Deputy Special Representative to have more frequent meetings with the Committee,
requesting the presence of UNAMI on the sidelines of the tripartite mechanism
meetings until UNAMI could be formally included in an observer capacity.
12. From 9 to 19 March and from 5 to 15 May, a specialized team of the Ministry
of Human Rights dug 337 and 327 trenches, respectively, in the Ain al-Tamur area
in the Karbala Governorate. On 18 March, a witness was escorted to the Karbala site
and identified 11 new coordinates, as a prelude to the excavation mission to be
conducted later. From 14 to 22 June, a specialized team of the Ministries of Human
Rights and Defence and the Medico-Legal Institute conducted exploratory and
excavation works in Muthanna Governorate, digging 239 trenches. No human
remains were found at any of the locations.

III. Recent activities with regard to the return of Kuwaiti property
13. On 8 June, my Deputy Special Representative observed a meeting of the IraqKuwait joint interministerial committee on missing Kuwaiti property, the second of
its kind since 15 May 2013. Ambassador Jasem al-Mubaraki and Ambassador Walid
Shiltagh led the Kuwaiti and Iraqi delegations respectively.
14. Both sides agreed that they would meet on a biannual basis. My Deputy
Special Representative, together with the heads of delegations, observed the official
handover of Kuwaiti artefacts and co-signed the inventory of items. The items
handed over included a large copper plate with the seal of Kuwait; 26 tape
recordings belonging to Radio Kuwait; three paintings with the seal of the Kuwaiti
National Museum; and about 4,500 books and publications in both Arabic and
English. At their meetings with my Deputy Special Representative, Kuwaiti officials
welcomed the return of the artefacts and books, while stressing the pending location
and return of their national archives, which they considered to be part of Kuwait’s
“identity, culture and history”. Iraqi officials, meanwhile, reiterated their request for

14-56912

3/4

S/2014/480

Kuwait to provide a description of the remaining lost properties to facilitate their
location. My Deputy Special Representative underlined the need for Iraq to show
results and renewed the commitment of UNAMI to working closely with the Iraqi
authorities on this.

IV. Observations
15. I am pleased that the increasing mutual trust and cooperation between Iraq and
Kuwait has created an environment conducive to progress on the return of the
missing Kuwaiti persons and the national archives.
16. Tens of thousands of Iraqis and more than 300 Kuwaitis and third-country
nationals remain unaccounted for from the pre-2003 decades. The issue of the
missing is a tragic national issue that transcends international boundaries. Their
families have demonstrated unyielding hope that one day the remains of their
missing sons, brothers and husbands will be found. It is the duty of the Iraqi
authorities, with assistance from the International Committee of the Red Cross and
UNAMI, to see that those hopes are realized without any further loss of time. I
therefore urge Iraq to take advantage of any available cost-effective modern
technology to address this humanitarian issue and strive for concrete results.
UNAMI, through my Special Representative and Deputy Special Representative,
will continue to provide its full assistance to promote, support and facilitate Iraqi
efforts in this regard.
17. The Tripartite Commission and its Technical Subcommittee and the steering
role of the International Committee of the Red Cross remain central in addressing
the issue of missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals. My appreciation goes out
to the men and women committed to this humanitarian dossier. I am hopeful that
UNAMI will be granted observer status in the Tripartite Commission and its
Technical Subcommittee at the earliest opportunity to better fulfil its full mandated
role.
18. I remain disappointed that no evidence or information has emerged so far that
would indicate the whereabouts of Kuwait’s national archives. I urge the Iraqi
interministerial committee coordinating the search for missing Kuwaiti property,
including the national archives, to meet more frequently and to take advantage of
the assistance of UNAMI in this matter. I call on the Government of Iraq to
undertake ever greater endeavours on this issue.

4/4

14-56912
