S/PV.9410

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9410th meeting

Tuesday, 5 September 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hoxha. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. França Danese
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Koumba Pambo
Mr. Boateng
Mr. Ishikane
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Ms. Shaheen
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Wood

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)
Working methods of the Security Council
Letter dated 28 August 2023 from the Permanent Representative of Albania
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2023/630)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-26019 (E)
*2326019*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9410

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

05/09/2023

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and other Procedural Questions.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: I should also like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to
Her Excellency Ambassador Linda Thomas-Greenfield,
Permanent Representative of the United States, for
her service as President of the Council for the month
of August 2023. I am sure I speak for all members
of the Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Thomas-Greenfield and her team for the
great diplomatic skill with which they conducted the
Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2017/507)
Working methods of the Security Council
Letter dated 28 August 2023 from the
Permanent Representative of Albania to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2023/630)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, the Central African Republic,
Chile, Costa Rica, Cuba, Denmark, Egypt, Germany,
Greece, India, Indonesia, Ireland, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Italy, Liechtenstein, Mexico, Morocco, Norway,
Pakistan, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, the
Republic of Korea, Romania, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand and Viet Nam to participate
in this meeting.

I am grateful for the opportunity to provide the
briefing today as Chair of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions at
this annual open debate on working methods. Annual
open debates on working methods have served to
collectively engage in a reflection with the wider
membership on the working methods used by the
Council to deliver on its important responsibility to
maintain international peace and security. This has
been a constant of the Council since 2010, to assess the
implementation of the measures set out in note by the
President S/2017/507 and in subsequently adopted notes
by the President.
Since 2017, 15 new notes by the President on
its working methods have been adopted under the
auspices of the Informal Working Group, the last two
of which were adopted in August during my tenure
as Chair. Those new 15 notes add to the normative
acquis set out in note 507 to enhance the efficiency,
transparency and effectiveness of the Council. Many
of the notes were issued in response to demands from
the wider membership in the context of these debates
and elsewhere.

its

We find ourselves here today at a particularly
critical juncture, and today’s open debate could not
be more relevant. While the worst effects of the
coronavirus disease pandemic are now behind us,
other critical challenges remain. The persistence of
multifaceted crises and armed conflicts in different
parts of the world, adverse effects of climate change,
terrorism and the use of new and emerging technologies
for terrorist purposes are only a few examples.
Against that backdrop, and consistent with its primary
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security, the Security Council is expected to act — and
to do so efficiently, transparently and effectively on
behalf of the rest of the membership.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/630, which contains the text of
a letter dated 28 August 2023 from the Permanent
Representative of Albania to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting a concept note on the item under
consideration.

However,
challenging
political
dynamics
worldwide as well as divisions within the Council have
prevailed, turning division into an obstacle for action,
critically affecting the Council’s ability to deliver on
its responsibilities as established in the Charter of the
United Nations. In 2022 and 2023, this Chamber has
been a venue of old and new rifts inhibiting its action
in connection with some of the world’s most pressing

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

2/34

begin

23-26019

05/09/2023

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

problems. At stake is not only the Council’s reputation,
but also the overall reputation of the United Nations.
For all the criticism, however, the Council has
maintained its level of activity of last year, being actively
seized of 41 items on its agenda so far, fully resumed
open debates with high levels of participation and
adopted decisions regularly to maintain the operations
of the United Nations worldwide. The workload is evergrowing, and the stakes could not be greater. In that
context, the importance of the working methods cannot
be overstated.
Since assuming my role as Chair of the Informal
Working Group, in January 2022, I have had the
privilege of building on the significant achievements
of my predecessors in advancing the Security Council’s
working methods. Over the past two years, I have strived
to steer discussions at the Informal Working Group
towards making the Council not only more efficient
and effective in its work and decision-making, but also
more transparent and inclusive of the viewpoints of all
of its members, the wider United Nations membership
and those affected by its decisions.
I would like to highlight a few major milestones
that the Informal Working Group has achieved in the
past 18 months.
First, at the outset of 2022, the Informal Working
Group adopted a programme of work setting out the main
priorities and planned actions for the upcoming year,
allowing all Council members to comment and make
proposals. Again, that happened at the beginning of
2023, rendering the work of the Group more predictable
and results oriented. In addition, as an important step
towards greater transparency, the Informal Working
Group adopted its first annual report in 2022 (see
S/2022/1032), thereby aligning itself with the practice
of the rest of the subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council. The annual report includes summaries of its
activities as well as a set of selected indicators, in a
first attempt at tracking the implementation of note
507 and subsequently adopted presidential notes. Those
indicators are crucial to get a better overview of how
the Council is performing and what gaps remain. In that
regard, I would welcome the comments and feedback
of Member States to further enhance the indicators
and identify new areas of work for their reflection, if
possible, in the Group’s 2023 annual report.
As I mentioned at the outset, under the auspices
of the Informal Working Group, the Council adopted

S/PV.9410

two additional notes by the President of the Security
Council on working methods. The first note by the
President (S/2023/612) lays out the procedure for the
observance of minutes of silence and aims to ensure
that it is conducted in an orderly manner. It reflects
the consensus of all members of the Council to ensure
that those solemn occasions are conducted smoothly,
respectfully and devoid of any politicization. The second
note (S/2023/615) reaffirms the Council’s commitment
to making every effort to agree provisionally on the
appointment of the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies for
the following year no later than 1 October and includes
an interim contingency measure in case the provisional
agreement is not reached on time during the month
of January.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank all
Council members for the cooperation demonstrated
in the framework of the Informal Working Group
in achieving those important outcome documents.
Contrary to the narrative of division that I mentioned
earlier, the Informal Working Group proves that
productive engagement is possible in the Council and
that the search for common ground should always be
pursued. Indeed, the Informal Working Group has
proven that working methods can aid in facilitating the
Council’s work and reduce polarization by discussing
topics that present clear obstacles to the functioning of
the Council and identifying possible solutions.
For example, the Informal Working Group has
maintained on its agenda, as standing items, regular
reporting by presidencies of the Council and penholders
in exercising their responsibilities. Building on the
work of previous Chairs, the reporting on the work of
each presidency has made those members holding that
responsibility more aware of their fundamental role
in implementing the working methods agreed upon
by the Council. It has also facilitated the sharing of
best practices among Council presidencies. Similarly,
the regular reporting by penholders on the way in
which they held the pen was aimed at enhancing their
accountability in doing so, and additional efforts should
be considered on that track.
In the past 18 months, the Informal Working Group
addressed many other topics, including how to improve
the selection of Chairs of subsidiary bodies and
ensure a more equitable distribution of labour among
Council members, the access of elected members to
confidential documentation of the Council predating
their membership, the practice of monthly assessments,

23-260193/34

S/PV.9410

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

the cooperation with other United Nations principal
organs, the mainstreaming of gender into the work
of the Council and the participation of civil society
in Council meetings and ensuring their protection
against reprisals.
Discussions in the Informal Working Group have
also led to practical outcomes. In April 2023, emulating
a practice well-established in the General Assembly,
the Council rolled out a live list of speakers for open
debates, which will help the wider membership to be
better informed and engaged in the work of the Council.
Lastly, I would like to highlight that, in the true
spirit of Informal Working Group cooperation, former
Informal Working Group Chairs Kuwait and Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, as well as myself as
current Chair, joined Japan in collaborating towards
the successful launching of the Interactive Handbook
of the Working Methods of the Council. Easily
accessible through the website of the Security Council,
the handbook serves as a practical guide to the rules,
practices and procedures of the Council and is intended
for its members and the wider membership to better
understand and implement the working methods. We
are grateful to Japan for spearheading such an initiative.
It is a timely innovation for the incoming elected
members, who will commence observing proceedings
next month.
Before I conclude, I would like to stress that, rather
than an obscure and merely technical area of expertise,
the working methods of the Council are a critical tool
for the effective functioning of the Council and for
the discharge of its mandate. It is therefore crucial for
everyone in the Chamber to be collectively invested in
advancing this agenda and proactively contribute to
its enhancement. While not in and of themselves the
solution to the conflicts on the Council’s agenda, the
working methods are a means to an end and can build
the path towards finding solutions. I look forward to
hearing the proposals from the wider membership as
we collectively strive towards enhancing the Council’s
effectiveness, efficiency and transparency. Proposals
put forward today will help shape future discussions
of the Informal Working Group under my remaining
months as Chair and will be critical for future Chairs
to consider.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
4/34

05/09/2023

Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
Let me start by congratulating you, Mr. President,
on assuming the presidency and by wishing you a
very productive month of September. Let me also
start by thanking you for your role as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions and for your team’s excellent
stewardship of this important topic.
On 17 January 1946, the Security Council held its
first meeting — in Church House, in Westminster in
the United Kingdom (see S/PV.1). In the 77 years since,
the Council has worked to discharge its responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security. Dag
Hammarskjöld, of course, said it best: “The United
Nations was not created to take mankind to heaven, but
to save humanity from hell”. For all its faults, fractures
and inefficiencies, the Council continues to play a vital
role. It has outlasted the League of Nations by 51 years,
and it has helped to prevent third world war.
Our vision remains for a Council that is able to
solve problems though interactive debate, building
consensus, responsible and inclusive penholdership and
decisions that have real impact on the ground. Realizing
that vision means looking ahead to forthcoming threats
to peace and security and being proactive in preventing
conflict or deterring escalation, while using all the
tools at the Council’s disposal. It means tackling issues
head-on, even where they are uncomfortable for some.
It means hearing from genuine experts, including
civil society, who can enrich our deliberations. It also
means striking a balance between transparency and
confidentiality. Sometimes the Council is most effective
when it holds frank discussions in private; when it does
so, we should strive to agree press elements in the
interest of transparency. And it means, most important,
that all Council members have a responsibility to
uphold the Charter of the United Nations.
It is 50 years since the United Kingdom last
unilaterally vetoed a Council draft resolution (see
S/PV.2902). We are glad that General Assembly
resolution 76/262 has helped ensure transparency and
accountability when a permanent member blocks action
to maintain international peace and security.
By invading its sovereign neighbour and engaging
in a brutal war of aggression, one permanent member has
shown flagrant disregard for the Charter. In attempting
to defend the indefensible, Russia has increasingly
used the Council as a platform for propaganda and
disinformation. It has requested briefers on the
23-26019

05/09/2023

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

basis of their willingness to defend or distract from
Russia’s aggression, and it has allowed its narrative
to seep into other important issues on the Council’s
agenda. It is incumbent on all of us to maintain the
Council’s authority, integrity and legitimacy — all the
more so when the actions of one permanent member
threaten them.

S/PV.9410

in unison toward a common goal to address specific
practical issues regarding its working methods, it can
expeditiously take action.

The United States welcomes this annual
opportunity to hear the views of members of the United
Nations about what aspects of the Security Council’s
working methods serve us well and where there are
areas for improvement. It is vitally important that
the Council’s work, both substantive and procedural,
serves the interests of all Member States. In carrying
out its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, as provided for in
Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations, the
Security Council is acting on behalf of all Members of
the United Nations.

Regarding penholding, there have also been
positive developments. In particular, there has been a
welcome expansion of the practice of co-penholding,
with increasing positive and valuable contributions by
elected members of the Security Council. In our case,
we worked collaboratively with Mexico during its
Council tenure and then subsequently with Ecuador on
the situation in Haiti. Most recently, in collaboration
with Ecuador as co-penholder, we achieved the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2692 (2023), on
Haiti. Our successful co-penholding benefited the
negotiation process and has produced excellent
outcomes. The United States also worked together with
Ireland as co-penholder on an important and innovative
resolution establishing a humanitarian carveout across
United Nations sanctions regimes (resolution 2664
(2022)). And we work closely with Albania on draft
resolutions on Ukraine. We are also happy to see that
the African members on the Council jointly co-penned
an important press statement on the situation in the
Niger. The United States supports the prior notes the
Council has adopted on penholding, currently codified
as part of note by the President S/2017/507, and
continues to favour a flexible approach to penholding.
We stand ready to continue discussions of penholding
issues among Council members as we strive to improve
the practice of penholding in the Council.

The United States expresses its deep appreciation
to you, Mr. President, for ably chairing the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions with a smooth and deft guidance
that has produced concrete results. In particular, we
wish to congratulate you, Sir, on the recent adoption of
two notes by the President (S/2023/612 and S/2023/615)
that will improve the Council’s working methods.
Significantly, the latter note came about because the
Council was unable to reach a consensus decision on
the appointment of the Chairs of subsidiary bodies
by the end of last year. The result was that all those
important bodies were unable to function for several
weeks in January of this year. The Informal Working
Group, under the Chair’s leadership, negotiated and
adopted presidential note S/2023/615, deciding that
the Member State that holds the rotating presidency in
January would function as the Chair of all the subsidiary
bodies if the impasse continued into January. That
recent exercise shows that when the Council works

I would like to make one final comment on an
unfortunate practice by the Russian Federation, as
exhibited most recently in draft resolution S/2023/638,
on the Mali sanctions regime. The penholders
painstakingly facilitated the negotiations of the draft
resolution for a month with all Council members, and
the discussions made clear how isolated Russia was in
its demands. The penholders put into blue a well-crafted
compromise proposal that had the overwhelming
support of Council members. At the very last minute,
without consulting at all with Council members, the
Russian Federation put into blue a competing draft (draft
resolution (S/2023/639)). Russia then brazenly vetoed
the penholders’ draft resolution, which received 13
votes in favour. And Russia’s draft resolution received
only one vote in favour: that of the Russian Federation.
Therefore, in defiance of the Council’s usual working
methods, Russia singlehandedly killed the Mali
sanctions regime. Russia’s actions were in bad faith and
disrespectful of all the other members of the Security

We will continue to work with you, Mr. President,
in your capacity as Chair of the Informal Working
Group, and collectively with our colleagues around
this table to maximize the Council’s effectiveness and
uphold the Charter.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): As this is the
first meeting of the month, I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your presidency and wish you a
very productive September. And I also thank you for
convening this important open debate.

23-260195/34

S/PV.9410

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Council. Russia’s approach to working methods in that
manner undermines the unity of the Council, and we
urge it to alter its behaviour so that the Council can
work towards the fulfilment of its vital mandate.
Finally, we wish to express our heartfelt appreciation
to the Security Council Affairs Division, including its
Director, Claudia Banz, and all of its staff. Having just
served as the President of the Council in August, we
were reminded of the essential role that the Security
Council Affairs Division plays in making sure the
Council’s work goes smoothly. From its preparations for
the circulation of the formal documents of the Council
to its assistance in preparing the President prior to each
Council meeting and all its other unseen, unheralded
and behind-the-scenes work, the Council could not
function without the superb efforts of the Division.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your country’s assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council, and I assure you of France’s
full support throughout the month of September. I
thank you, Sir, for organizing today’s open debate
and for your work in your capacity as the Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.
The Security Council and the multilateral system
as a whole are facing major challenges, in particular
the consequences of Russia’s aggression against
Ukraine. To respond to those challenges, we need an
action- and results-oriented Council. For the Security
Council to be effective, it must first and foremost
undergo reform to make it more authoritative and
representative. France’s position on that is well-known.
We support the candidacies of Germany, Brazil,
India and Japan as permanent members, as well as an
increased representation of Africa, including among
the permanent members. An enlarged Council could
include up to 25 members. It is time to make progress
on this issue. The discussions have been ongoing for
years — now it is time to act.
Secondly, we need to strike the right balance
between public diplomacy and working behind closed
doors. The current balance is not the right one. Public
meetings are useful because they allow greater
openness and transparency. The voice of women is
also increasingly present, which we of course welcome.
However, we must be careful to preserve sufficient space
for consultations among permanent representatives, as
those are the discussions that enable us to tackle the
6/34

05/09/2023

most difficult issues head-on and reach compromises.
Our goal must not be to continue as a juxtaposition of 15
national positions, but rather to ensure that the Council
can work united in determining its decisions and
actions. Similarly, while the informal Arria Formula
meetings are valuable, there are too many of them, and
there is often a perverse used of them. We need to find
a way of controlling how many such meetings are held,
as well as how they are conducted.
Thirdly, we must improve our collective work
and together propose concrete solutions to all the
threats to international peace and security that need
to be addressed. France continues to shoulder its
responsibilities by coordinating the Council’s work
on a number of issues. We closely involve all Council
members in that work and even regularly suggest that
they draft texts jointly.
The best working methods will never replace the
spirit of responsibility and compromise, which remains
essential to finding solutions to crises. Nevertheless, the
Security Council has been used on several occasions in
recent months and years as a platform for disinformation,
with speakers delivering excessively long statements
to put forward arguable or even fantastical positions.
That misuse of the Council is dangerously weakening
its authority and must stop. The Council’s time must be
used in a spirit of responsibility. The strategies aimed
at saturating the Council’s agenda are problematic
because they hinder our capacity to respond. Showing
proof of our responsibility also means making necessary
compromises so that the Council can deliberate and
make decisions in the service of international peace and
security, as the Charter of the United Nations demands.
None of us can hope to achieve 100 per cent of our
goals. Multilateral negotiations do not work that way.
And for the permanent members, showing proof of
our responsibility means a reasonable use of the veto.
Together with Mexico, France has put forth an initiative
proposing the voluntary and collective suspension of
the use of veto in cases of mass atrocities. We call on all
Member States, especially permanent members of the
Council, to join the initiative, which has already been
formally supported by 106 States. Guided by the goal
of effectiveness and the spirit of compromise, which
France has always embraced, we will continue to work
as a responsible member of the Security Council.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
beginning of your country’s presidency of the Council
23-26019

05/09/2023

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

for the month of September. We hope that its working
methods will not disappoint you — and vice versa. We
thank you for your briefing, your leadership of the work
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions and for organizing
today’s meeting.
For a number of years now the Security Council
has been discussing its working methods in an open
format, with the participation of a wide range of
Member States. We believe that periodically reviewing
the Council’s arsenal is a useful practice that makes it
possible to identify areas that can be further improved.
We are confident that today’s discussion, along with the
external assessment of the current state of affairs, can
make a tangible contribution to the work of the Group
and help to enrich it with new ideas. Of course, that is in
the understanding that the working methods themselves
and any steps taken to modify them are and will
continue to be owned by the members of the Council.
The Russian Federation has consistently supported
the Security Council’s comprehensive discussion of the
subject in an open format with the participation of all
interested Member States. We believe in the practical
significance of the discussion, which now dates back
many years, to the extent that it provides an opportunity
to strengthen the Security Council’s coordination with
the Member States more broadly. We welcome the
results achieved over the years, as many of the ideas
expressed in the Council Chamber later went on to form
the basis of the note by the President S/2017/507, which is
particularly important as a compendium of the working
practices of the Security Council and is actively used by
the non-permanent members as an important primary
source. At the same time, given the sensitive nature of
the issue of the Council’s working methods, we believe
that any reforms must be aimed at genuinely improving
the Council’s effectiveness and efficiency in fulfilling
its main tasks of maintaining international peace and
security. Using populist rhetoric in this area, including
in the context of the never-ending aim of increasing the
level of transparency in the Council’s work, not only
does not get results but on the contrary often harms
the cause.
We note the efforts of the delegation of Albania to
improve the working methods of the Security Council
and the introduction of the practice of preparing an
annual report of the Informal Working Group (see
S/2022/1032). We welcome the Council’s adoption of
the presidential notes prepared by Albania (S/2023/612

S/PV.9410

and S/2023/615) aimed at improving the effectiveness
of the Security Council’s work, including that of its
subsidiary bodies. We see that the non-permanent
members are taking an active interest in the procedural
aspects of the work of the Security Council, which
unquestionably advances the collective development of
the Council’s best practices.
Regrettably, the Council has recently been
encountering increasingly substantive problems in
its activities. We have consistently emphasized that
cosmetic fixes in this area are not enough. We need
a serious, comprehensive discussion. The practice
whereby various members are using the Council to
pursue their own narrow national interests has taken
on threatening proportions. Thanks to their deliberate
pressure, the Security Council’s agenda is constantly
expanding to include issues of domestic politics, human
rights, climate and other matters, all of it done, needless
to say, on the most plausible pretexts. However, they
deliberately ignore the fact that in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, the Security Council
should not address such issues, not to mention the fact
that it cannot help to resolve them. Such actions once
again demonstrate that the true goal is to put pressure
on objectionable countries.
The real reasons that led to a particular conflict are
often deliberately ignored or glossed over. As a result,
some United Nations missions, including peacekeeping
operations, receive vague mandates with inappropriate
functions that they simply cannot fulfil. That leads
only to increased distrust in their impartiality and
effectiveness. One example is the situation with the
agreement on the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq. We also see attempts to
shift responsibility for emerging crises onto others,
as happened with the Council’s consideration of the
Afghanistan issue, when some members of the Council
kept trying to limit comprehensive discussion of it to
the issue of respect for human rights.
We continue to believe that it is unacceptable
to ignore the views of a country hosting a United
Nations peacekeeping contingent on its territory. For
example, the Lebanese authorities have repeatedly
sent the Council an unambiguous message about the
importance of strengthening the coordination between
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the
Government and the army of Lebanon, including in
order to ensure the protection and safety of the United
Nations personnel along the Blue Line. However, the

23-260197/34

S/PV.9410

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

informal penholders on the Lebanese file prefer to
simply ignore Lebanon’s views.
It is noticeable that our Western colleagues have
a policy of changing the focus of the discussion if the
issue raised does not correspond to their narrow national
interests. An obvious example of that is the discussion
on reviewing or lifting sanctions affecting countries
where restrictive measures have ceased to respond to
the current situation. It is no secret to anybody that
sanctions regimes are used by some States to exert
political pressure under the cover of an international
and United Nations umbrella, an approach that can
hardly be called constructive, including in ensuring the
effectiveness of sanctions regimes. Despite the fact that
the reasons for which the sanctions were introduced are
no longer actually relevant, new reasons keep on being
found to leave them in force. We should also point out
that the penholders on sanctions files are often guided
by the nature of their own interactions with countries
on the Security Council’s agenda. The Council has once
again been witnessing persistent attempts to extend
restrictions on the Central African Republic and Mali
for the sole purpose of maintaining external pressure
on them. The sovereign opinions of those countries
on the Council’s agenda, which have made significant
progress in stabilizing the situation on their territories,
have been blatantly ignored, as have their legitimate
concerns. And we have always been respectful in our
actions regarding Mali.
We note with regret the gradual decline in the
Council’s capacity for constructive discussion and
negotiation. Instead of seeking solutions to complex
issues, which does indeed demand both time and a
willingness to compromise, Western countries often
deliberately choose the easiest path, which leads to the
use of the veto or abstentions on resolutions. Again, a
recent example is the situation regarding the sanctions
on Mali, when our repeated calls to the authors of
the draft resolution to take a constructive approach
and show some sense were simply ignored. And we
certainly do not need to hear from anyone about the
painstaking efforts they made to agree on resolution
2690 (2023) on Mali, which wound up completely
ignoring the country’s concerns. Here is a little secret.
One of the permanent members of the Council said in
closed consultations that we are the Security Council,
and we do what we want, not what the country we are
considering wants. Is that not a neocolonial approach?
8/34

05/09/2023

I would like to emphasize one more thing. The
issue of the right of the veto does not fall under the
umbrella of the Council’s working methods but is
rather a cornerstone of the entire Security Council
architecture and a pledge to ensure the Council’s ability
to arrive at balanced decisions. However, it does not
obviate the need for working methods and approaches
that could help to reach compromise. The desire to
negotiate, demonstrate wisdom and pragmatism and to
hear out and listen to other colleagues on the shop floor
is essential.
Some permanent members of the Council are quick
to criticize the use of the veto while they conveniently
fail to mention the fact that they have no need for the
right to the veto, as they have eight votes ready in their
pocket, which is essentially a de facto veto that spares
them from resorting to its actual use. That is why
the Security Council does not stand in need of being
expanded through the addition of new like-minded
Western members. In-absentia accusations, labelling,
sabotage, diktat and manipulation have become some
of our Western colleagues’ preferred tactics. With
regard to some items, such as Ukraine, the Security
Council has long been a platform for voicing the most
absurd fabrications and propagandistic rhetoric by
Western States. Moreover, the opinion of the West is
categorically presented as the only correct one. Does
such a destructive approach contribute to Council
unity? Hardly.
Against that background, the issue of informal
penholdership on certain dossiers is becoming
increasingly critical. The situation in which only three
delegations continue to act as penholders on most issues
continues. Despite their long-lost status as colonial
empires, they are convinced of their own exceptionalism
and consider themselves regional experts and
condescendingly lecture other States, and even regions.
The views of the host country and regional stakeholders,
which are often more knowledgeable of the situation on
the ground, and sometimes even representatives of the
Secretariat, are ignored altogether.
Another example — that is still relevant — of misuse
of the penholder role is the procedure for negotiating
Security Council draft resolutions. The work is often
carried out under time pressure that is artificially
created and that does not allow for a comprehensive
expert review of the documents. In addition, in order
to obtain the desired voting outcome, our Western
colleagues have begun to favour the method of putting
23-26019

05/09/2023

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

unprecedented pressure on any country that disagrees
with this approach with the principle of “if you are not
with us, you are against us”.
What are we left with at the end of the day? We
are left with more half-baked documents that fail to
address the key concerns of Council members, provide
the Secretariat with unclear instructions and are
often unrealistic in their goals and objectives. Such
an approach is not conducive to effective conflict
resolution. Worse still, it undermines the authority of
the Security Council. We have consistently advocated
expanding the pool of informal penholders, primarily
by including non-permanent members. To that end, we
are guided by the premise enshrined in the note by the
President of the Security Council S/2017/507 that any
member of the Council may be a penholder and more
than one Council member may act as co-penholders. We
attach particular attention, in that regard, to taking into
account the views of African States. We are convinced
that revisiting the issue of informal penholdership will
contribute to strengthening the effectiveness of the
work of the Council. In that connection, we welcome
the launch, in which we actively participated, of an
ongoing discussion on the issue in the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions. We will continue to engage constructively
with interested colleagues to negotiate a draft note
on informal penholdership.
We have repeatedly drawn attention to the backlog
in the Council’s documentation flow. The Council
produces several hundred documents every year.
Unfortunately, the value added of some of them is
questionable. The excessive micromanagement of draft
resolutions regularly observed is not helpful either. We
have consistently maintained that the final products of
the Council should be concise, clear, understandable
and, most important, action-oriented. The issue of
the optimal ratio of open to closed Council meetings
remains a hot topic. Russia has consistently advocated
a balance between the two. However, we see that some
members of the Council who ostensibly advocate for
maximum transparency in discussions on individual
country-specific issues in fact use them solely for
propaganda shows, while still preferring to consider
sensitive and awkward issues behind closed doors.
In conclusion, I would be remiss if I failed to
mention the issue of inviting briefers to Council
meetings to speak on specific topics, which has become
a sore point. The persistent attempts of Western

S/PV.9410

colleagues to censor the participation of briefers
who, in their opinion, do not meet certain Western
criteria, which simply means that they are not ready
to sing to their tune and have an alternative view of
various international problems simply do not stand up
to scrutiny. Unfortunately, we have also noted cases
involving insults and personal attacks directed at
briefers voicing non-Western positions. Such actions
are unacceptable and do not contribute to fostering an
objective and balanced discussion.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): First,
I would like to congratulate Albania on its presidency
of the Security Council. I also thank the United States
for serving as President of the Council in August. With
regard to the agenda item for today, I would like to
thank Ambassador Hoxha for his briefing.
Since 2010, the Security Council has held an
annual open debate to discuss how to improve its
working methods, which is a valuable exercise. China
welcomes the participation of non-Council members at
this meeting today. Working methods as a reflection of
thinking methods have never been, and never will be,
mere technicalities. The work of the Security Council
is highly political, and its working methods therefore
will have to be approached from a political perspective.
In connection with the major issues related
to the Security Council, I would like to make the
following points.
First, the Council should focus on its core mandate.
The world is facing rapidly emerging crises and
challenges. The Council must carry out its mandate,
but it cannot take on too much. Hence the need to focus
its resources on addressing major issues that threaten
peace and security. We do not support thematic issues,
which take up excessive resources, or overlapping and
redundancy between the Council and other United
Nations bodies. Furthermore, we oppose certain
members’ politically motivated practice of promoting
the discussion of country-specific human rights issues
in the Council.
Secondly, the Security Council should be resultsoriented and committed to resolving practical issues.
The meetings, statements and documents of the Council
are the means to an end, not an end in and of themselves.
Holding a meeting does not translate into resolving
an issue. The same holds true for convening multiple
meetings on the same topic, which sometimes turn out
to be counterproductive. We could begin by taking

23-260199/34

S/PV.9410

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

small steps towards improving the Council’s efficiency
and effectiveness. The documents that we adopt should
be understandable and practical. Resolutions should
normally not be allowed to exceed 10 pages. The Council
currently meets on the Syrian issue two to three times a
month, with most members repeating their established
positions. We could effectively decrease the frequency
of deliberations by streamlining and combining them.
The practice of the African members of the Council of
making joint statements both is time-saving and helps
to increase their impact. The practice is commendable
and could be emulated by other Council members.
Thirdly, concerning the dynamics among Council
members, at the centre of the Council’s myriad working
methods lies the core principle of solidarity and
unity. Council members should show mutual respect,
consult one another as equals and take into account
one another’s concerns. Instead of paying attention
only to public effect and talking to the camera, we
should listen attentively to one another, enhance
mutual understanding and make an effort to seek
consensus. China is in favour of holding more informal
consultations. We also support the Security Council
strengthening its engagement and communication with
the countries concerned, Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General and non-Council members.
Fourthly, the Security Council should demonstrate
inclusiveness in its work. We support the Council in
continuing to invite civil society briefers. Nevertheless,
recent experiences have brought to light the need
to improve quality control concerning the briefings
themselves in order to deliver genuine added value.
Presidencies should shoulder the responsibility in
that regard. As things stand today, we are concerned
about the fact that some members seem to care only
about bringing different voices to the Council without
considering how to reach consensus. They seem
to care only about responding to issues raised by
non-governmental organizations or individuals and to
deliberately neglect the concerns of the Governments
of the countries involved.
Fifthly, on sanctions, China has always maintained
that the Council should approach sanctions prudently
and responsibly, carefully controlling their intensity
and scope and adjusting or lifting them to reflect
changes on the ground. It is regrettable that during the
past 20 years or so, sanctions once established tend
to be prolonged and expanded, making their reversal
nearly impossible. Sanctions cannot replace diplomacy
10/34

05/09/2023

or serve as a tool for certain countries to exert political
pressure. The Council’s sanctions on countries such as
the Sudan, South Sudan, the Central African Republic
and Guinea-Bissau, as well as those imposed under
resolution 1988 (2011), have become obsolete, and
the process of lifting them should be initiated as soon
as possible.
In addition to those points, I want to highlight
penholdership, an issue that has become so controversial
that its reform cannot wait any longer. Penholdership
derives from practice and is not regulated by the
Council’s rules of procedure. The reality is that a small
number of permanent Council members have long
monopolized the penholderships on the majority of
issues, with individual penholders sometimes placing
their national positions above those of our collective
organ. That has become the root cause of many issues.
Penholderships must be adjusted to ensure equity,
equality and openness. We therefore need more African
members serving as penholders on African issues. The
fact that African members cannot serve as penholders
on those matters is unjustifiable. We should also allow
more non-permanent members to serve as penholders,
as they are fully capable of doing so. In a great example,
over the past two years the United Arab Emirates, a
non-permanent member, has patiently consulted with
all members and facilitated the Council’s consensus
adoption of many important documents on the issue
of Afghanistan.
Existing penholders should discharge their
responsibilities honestly. As a voluntary service,
penholdership is a responsibility, not a prerogative.
Serving as a penholder requires objectivity and
impartiality. It comes with a duty to prioritize
the maintenance of solidarity and the forging of
consensus. At the same time, we need to seriously
study penholdership arrangements and undertake
appropriate reforms. Considering what the job actually
is, the term “penholder” is extremely misleading. In
Security Council practices, the role a penholder plays
goes far beyond taking notes or drafting documents.
The General Assembly has co-facilitators for its major
processes. The Security Council could learn from the
Assembly and consider having three coordinators for
each agenda item from among both permanent and
non-permanent members. Chairs of the subsidiary
bodies should also be involved in this process, which
would be a true demonstration of joint responsibility
and participation. In short, the issue of penholdership
deserves serious attention and treatment. We are
23-26019

05/09/2023

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

aware that the Council’s Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions is
already engaged in relevant discussions, and we hope
that its current and incoming Chairs will prioritize
reforming penholdership arrangements and expediting
substantive improvements.
Improving the Security Council’s working methods
is integral to its reform. China has consistently
supported reasonable and necessary reform of the
Council, prioritizing increased representation for
developing countries and paying heed to their voices,
and in particular making special arrangements to meet
the needs of African States. We are willing to work with
Member States to keep intergovernmental negotiations
in the General Assembly as the principal channel in
that regard and to seek a packaged solution through
patient and democratic consultations. The ultimate goal
of reform is for the Council to be better, not worse, to
move forward, not backwards, and for the entire general
membership, not just a few countries, to benefit.
It should be noted that the use of the veto is closely
related to the imbalance in the Council’s composition.
Many of its members belong to the same political
grouping and often take advantage of its numerical
strength to dominate the Council’s agenda and push
for votes by skipping extensive consultations, which
can ultimately result in the use of the veto. If we look
only at the use of the veto and ignore the unfairness and
irrationality of the Council’s composition and working
methods, we will not be able to grasp and address the
root causes of the problem correctly.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that China
stands ready to work with all parties to draw lessons
from our past experience, develop new ideas and take
practical action to promote continued improvement
in the work of the Security Council so as to better
safeguard international peace and security.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of
the 10 elected members of the Security Council (E10).
We commend Albania for organizing today’s
debate and Ambassador Ferit Hoxha for his briefing in
his capacity as Chair of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
Under his leadership, the Informal Working Group
adopted its first annual report and programme of work
(see S/2022/1032) last year, facilitating its activities in

S/PV.9410

the execution of its mandate guided by the principles of
openness, dialogue and inclusivity.
The Informal Working Group also adopted its first
set of selected indicators with the goal of enhancing
awareness and improving the implementation of
existing working methods — one of the E10’s primary
goals for making the implementation of the note by the
President S/2017/507 measurable. We commend the
digitalization of presidential note 507 in the Interactive
Handbook of the Working Methods of the Council,
sponsored by Japan. The note is a living document
that requires continued revision. In that regard, the
drafting of new notes by the President as necessary, in
response to current needs, is crucial to the Council’s
effectiveness. At the same time, it is equally important
for the Council to review, update and streamline notes
that are no longer relevant to current reality in the
interests of a more efficient and effective Council.
As elected members, we take seriously the
responsibilities and obligations entrusted to us through
our election by the General Assembly. We aspire and
are committed to a Council that lives up to its mandate
under the Charter of the United Nations and is able
to address the complex and interconnected threats to
peace and security that we collectively face.
There is widespread recognition of the need to
encourage more meaningful and effective participation
of elected members in the drafting of the Council’s
outcome documents. The legitimacy and effectiveness
of the Council has much to gain from a more inclusive
and transparent penholdership practice. The E10 have
consistently demonstrated the added value they can
bring as penholders and co-penholders.
There is a need to further improve working methods
to ensure equal opportunities for all Council members
and to ensure that all interested elected members act
as penholders or co-penholders to ensure inclusive,
fair and timely drafting processes. To that end, the
E10 put forward a proposal in the form of a note by
the President of the Security Council that encourages a
more equitable role for elected members and recognizes
that added values may include, but are not limited to,
experience, contributions, regional perspectives, the
chairmanship of relevant subsidiary bodies and special
interests. We hope that this proposal can be swiftly
adopted, as it represents a shared view and the aspiration
of the United Nations membership as a whole.

23-2601911/34

S/PV.9410

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

We will also continue to support efforts to
improve the best practices of penholders, with regular
reflections in the Informal Working Group on specific
Council products, and we will continue to support the
negotiations and the adoption of a note by the President
aimed at enhancing those practices. We stress that it
is paramount to ensure that all Council members have
adequate opportunities to participate, fully engage,
discuss, contribute to negotiations and influence
the decisions of the Security Council. In that regard,
sufficient time, and not less than 24 hours, should be
provided for the consideration of products under silence
procedure, and the sending of drafts over the weekend
should be avoided as far as possible.
We reaffirm the statement by the President of the
Security Council S/PRST/2021/23 and reiterate that
the Council should strengthen its engagement with the
wider United Nations membership and cooperation
and interaction with the General Assembly and other
United Nations bodies, in particular the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). That also means more opportunities
for all States Members on whose behalf the Council
acts, in accordance with Article 24, paragraph 1, of
the Charter of the United Nations, to interact with
the Council.
The Council should actively seek the valuable
advice that the PBC can provide, including on
preventive diplomacy and cooperation with local
actors and regional and subregional organizations,
on country-specific, regional and thematic files. The
PBC is in a unique position to enrich the discussion
on mandates and provide valuable advice and crosscutting perspectives. The PBC’s working methods
should be strengthened and improved. We welcome
the relevant recommendation made in the New Agenda
for Peace. Similarly, Security Council missions to the
field have proven to be a valuable tool for the Council
to understand, assess and prevent the escalation of
specific conflicts or situations.
We commit and call on all Council Presidents to
disseminate and implement their working methods
commitments. We underscore the joint commitments
on working methods of the three African members of
the Security Council as a reflection of how elected
members bring fresh perspectives and innovative
ideas. Furthermore, we seek to promote interactive
discussions during consultations and commend the
efforts of the Council Presidents, on the initiative of
Japan, to revitalize discussion in consultations. We also
12/34

05/09/2023

commend the United Arab Emirates for the inclusion
of International Sign interpretation in its presidency in
June. In addition, we thank the Security Council Affairs
Division for the live list of speakers made available at
open debates as requested by the E10, and we commend
Mozambique for initiating the practice of circulating it.
The Council needs to strike a healthy balance
between public and private meetings to both enhance
the transparency and the visibility of its work and to
encourage greater interactivity of discussions and
consensus-building. To that end, we support efforts to
agree on elements to be communicated by the President
following closed consultations.
We value the Arria Formula meetings as a means
for Council members to engage informally with
various stakeholders and the broader membership. In
that regard, in principle and in practice, the streaming
of Arria Formula meetings by United Nations Web
TV should not face objections when requested by
the organizers.
We also believe that the transparency and
accountability of the Council should be enhanced
regarding the documentation addressed to it by Member
States. The provision and the accessibility of Council
information and documentation, including from
previous years, to elected members needs to improve.
The full, equal and meaningful participation of
women in the work of the Council remains a priority.
We insist on the need to integrate a gender perspective
into all working methods. The shared commitments on
women and peace and security adopted by the majority
of its members demonstrate important progress, and
we encourage the continuation of those efforts. We
also encourage briefers to integrate those issues into
their briefings.
We strongly believe that the perspectives of civil
society add value to the Council’s deliberations and
should be supported and sustained. We stress the
importance of the Council striving for consensus
when inviting civil society speakers. The Council
must take responsibility for their suitability and safety
and must condemn all cases of reprisals. To that end,
the E10 encourages discussions, including on how to
promote best practices, in particular the possibility of
discussing guidelines.
Targeted sanctions by the Council are an important
tool for addressing threats to international peace and
security. They are therefore critical to the execution of
23-26019

05/09/2023

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

S/PV.9410

the Council’s mandate. We underscore the importance
of accountability and transparency in the work of the
subsidiary bodies. Those working methods should
align with international due process standards and be
continually improved.

On the appointment of Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General, we underline the need for
more transparent consultations with each of the E10
members, individually, so as to facilitate sufficient
time for due consideration.

We strongly believe in the need to strengthen the
fairness and the clarity of United Nations sanctions
procedures, thereby increasing the effectiveness of
its sanctions regimes. The listing and delisting of
individuals and entities under United Nations sanctions
regimes should be objective and evidence-based.
We recognize the contribution of the Office of the
Ombudsperson to the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities in providing an
independent review mechanism for delisting requests
in the 1267 Da’esh and Al-Qaida sanctions regime and
underline the need to continue its efforts to improve
its work. The E10 reiterates its conviction that the
establishment and improvement of independent review
mechanisms would strengthen the rule of law in United
Nations sanctions regimes, taking into account the
unique context of sanctions.

The E10 members underline the critical and urgent
need for a comprehensive reform of the Security Council
to reflect contemporary realities. While the Council
needs to be more effective, representative, legitimate,
transparent, accountable and democratic, it still lacks a
truly representative composition.

Expert groups can provide valuable reports on
the implementation, evasion and circumvention of
United Nations sanctions. The Council should work
to ensure that the panels of experts have full access to
their important investigations and are not restricted in
fulfilling their mandate.
As conflicts evolve, so must our collective
responses. The Council should take into account the
effectiveness of sanctions through the evolving phases
of conflicts. It should also ensure that sanctions do
not have adverse humanitarian consequences for the
civilian population or adversely affect humanitarian
activities carried out by humanitarian organizations. We
welcome the adoption of resolution 2664 (2022), which
introduced cross-cutting humanitarian exemptions for
United Nations sanctions regimes, and we underline the
need for its implementation at the national level. The
provisions introduced by paragraph 1 of resolution 2664
(2022) should continue to apply to the sanctions regime.
We note the importance of the role of the sanctions
committees in the effective implementation of resolution
2664 (2022) in assisting States in their understanding
and monitoring of the implementation of the resolution.

Improving the Council’s working methods
is a prerequisite for a more effective Council.
Working methods are also an issue in the process of
intergovernmental negotiations on Council reform. We
welcome the letters addressed this year by the co-Chairs
of that process to the Chair of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions and the Assembly’s recommendations to the
Council, including on issues relating to its working
methods, in particular those contained in the Assembly
resolutions on revitalization.
Since the most recent debate on working methods
(see S/PV.9079), the Council has been unable to adopt
four resolutions due to the use of the veto. The use or
threat of use of the veto can prevent the Council from
acting on vital issues. The E10 calls for restraint on the
use of the veto, especially in actions aimed at preventing
mass atrocities. The E10 also calls for restraint on
other forms of veto in subsidiary organs and urges
openness to compromise, in particular in cases where
unnecessary objections may impede the work of organs
or expert groups or panels and related processes.
The recent adoption by the Informal Working
Group of two Chair’s notes on the minute of silence
and the distribution of Chairs of subsidiary organs is
very encouraging. The latter’s contingency measure
should never be interpreted as meaning that we have
time until the end of January. On the contrary, we
should do our utmost to provisionally agree on the
appointment of next year’s Chairs by 1 October, at the
latest. We deeply regret that the lack of appointments
considerably delayed the work of the subsidiary organs.
Protracted negotiation creates unnecessary difficulties
for incoming members, which must prepare themselves
for the responsibilities they are assuming.
Most important, we believe that due respect
should be given to any proposals agreed by the elected

23-2601913/34

S/PV.9410

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

members. We stress the importance of completing the
process on time. We underline the role of the E10 in the
distribution of the 2023 Chairs.
We reiterate the letter circulated by Ecuador
on behalf of E10 on 27 January 2023 (S/2023/68),
unanimously supporting Japan as Chair of the Informal
Working Group for 2024.
In conclusion, the 10 elected members of the
Security Council speak with one voice to reaffirm our
commitment to live up to the responsibilities conferred
upon us by the United Nations membership through
our election — to work together for a more transparent,
inclusive and representative and more effective
Council, with a view to contributing to international
peace and security.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to limit
their statements to no more than three minutes in order
to enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mr. Peñalver Portal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The Security Council must be reformed in order to
effectively fulfil its primary responsibility to maintain
international peace and security. Closed meetings
continue to prevail. Annual reports on the Council’s work
contain only basic descriptive information; decisions
that do not address the concerns of non-members of the
Council predominate, and forced action is often taken
on draft resolutions where considerable differences
persist as to their content and scope.
The lack of special reports on measures to maintain
international peace and security, as required by
Articles 15 and 24 of the Charter of the United Nations,
is another shortcoming to be overcome. The tendency
of the Security Council to address issues beyond its
mandate, in particular those falling within the remit of
the General Assembly, is increasing.
We reiterate our support for a comprehensive and
thorough reform of the Security Council, including its
working methods, in order to make it a transparent,
democratic and representative organ. The transparency
of informal consultations should be ensured and
minutes of informal consultations of the organ should
be issued.
Informal closed meetings should be the exception
rather than the rule. The Security Council’s annual
reports should be comprehensive and analytical. The
Security Council should adhere to its mandate, without
14/34

05/09/2023

usurping the functions of other United Nations organs or
broadening the scope of the definition of international
peace and security, to the detriment of the roles and
responsibilities of the General Assembly.
It is essential to adopt the Council’s rules of
procedure and to put an end to the provisional status
that its rules have had since the creation of this organ.
With regard to the mechanism in place since 2022
on the explanation of the veto in the General Assembly,
the legitimate concerns expressed by various countries,
including ours, must be taken into account. We must
ensure genuine participation in the Security Council
and the democratization of its work. The Council
should be enlarged in both of its membership categories
with the aim of rectifying the inadequate representation
of developing countries. The veto power must be
abolished, and if any new permanent member seats
are created before that happens, those members should
have the same prerogatives and rights as the current
ones, including the power of the veto.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Cho (Republic of Korea): Let me begin by
commending your determined efforts, Mr. President, in
organizing this important annual debate. The Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions also introduced its first-ever annual report
(see S/2022/1032) and monitoring mechanism to
track the implementation of the note by the President
S/2017/507 last year, which has added an extra layer of
transparency to the working methods of the Security
Council. I would also like to take this opportunity
to commend the adoption of two presidential notes
(S/2023/612 and S/2023/615) under your chairmanship
of the Informal Working Group, Mr. President, which
exemplifies your excellent leadership of the Group.
As duly noted in the concept note (S/2023/630,
annex), the objective of this open debate is to envisage
working methods that enable the Council to fulfil
its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Its duty to address
such responsibilities and current geopolitical challenges
compels the Council to be more pertinent than ever,
but its ever-increasing workload hinders that vital role.
Against that backdrop, the Council needs to focus on
being responsive to more pressing threats, and I would
like to briefly underscore three points in that regard.
23-26019

05/09/2023

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

First, the Council must take measures to ensure
that the power of veto is not exercised in a way that
contradicts its previous decisions, which are usually the
result of extensive, meticulous negotiations designed
to address threats to international peace and security.
Ensuring their consistent and effective implementation
is a fundamental duty that the Council must meet if it is
to fulfil its primary responsibilities under the Charter
of the United Nations. The exercise of the veto in May
2022, which led to the first formal debate in General
Assembly history under the item entitled “Use of the
veto” (see A/77/PV.68), was a clear example of a selfcontradictory veto. Some five years ago, the Council
unanimously decided to take specific measures in the
event of a further intercontinental ballistic-missile
launch by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
However, later, when the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea actually launched another such missile, some
permanent members refused to take any action in the
Council and exercised their veto. That was literally selfcontradictory in that they were the exact same members
that had approved the Council’s taking further action in
such a situation. My delegation urges that permanent
members refrain from using the veto in such situations
in order to maintain the public’s trust in the Council’s
ability to discharge its primary responsibility. Korea
would also like to take this opportunity to reiterate
its support for initiatives such as that of France and
Mexico that call for refraining from the use of the veto
in certain circumstances.
Secondly, penholders should engage with the
relevant non-members of the Council in a more
systematic manner. In practice, non-members that
are invited to participate in the Council’s discussions
in accordance with rule 37 are also permitted to
sponsor proposals and draft resolutions and propose
amendments. That helps the Council in two ways.
Non-members’ input can assist the Council in having
a clearer picture of the situation at hand, and their
input can also prevent the Council from inadvertently
acting against their legitimate interests. I believe the
penholders can also benefit from such advantages by
allowing non-members to be engaged as soon as they
begin drafting documents. Encouraging penholders to
hold consultations with non-members that are likely to
be affected from the beginning will help the Council’s
work become more effective and efficient.
Thirdly, the Council should adopt inclusive
methods of work in order to enhance its efficiency and
effectiveness. A good example would be strengthening

S/PV.9410

the advisory role of the Peacebuilding Commission to
the Council, accompanied by broad consultation with
diverse partners, including regional organizations, the
private sector and civil society. In addition, the Council
should ensure women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation in its line of work. In that regard, the
Council should continue its efforts to facilitate the
discussion on the women and peace and security agenda
and its implementation.
It is never easy to keep the Council effective and
efficient while maintaining inclusive and transparent
methods of work. Efforts should be made to strike a
balance between the two. We need to streamline its
programme of work and focus on more pressing issues,
on the one hand, and encourage communication with
the wider United Nations membership, on the other.
My delegation remains committed to actively engaging
with the work of the Informal Working Group as an
incoming member of the Council and looks forward to
working with members soon.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Pretterhofer (Austria): I thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to speak at today’s
annual open debate on the working methods of the
Security Council.
We align ourselves with the statements to be
delivered by the representatives of Norway, on behalf
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
(ACT) group, and Ireland, on behalf of the Group of
Like-Minded States on Targeted Sanctions.
As a staunch supporter of multilateralism and a
member of the ACT group, Austria has consistently
advocated for a more transparent, accountable and
inclusive Security Council. We are guided by the belief
that the Council should better reflect the realities of
the twenty-first century in order to address today’s
challenges, tackle the interconnected nature of peace
and security and acknowledge the link between climate
and security, poverty, human rights and development
and peace. Let me therefore touch on some points in our
national capacity.
First of all, the credibility of the entire United
Nations hinges on a functioning and effective Security
Council, able to deliver on its mandate for the
maintenance of peace and security. We would therefore
like to welcome your efforts, Mr. President, as Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and

23-2601915/34

S/PV.9410

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

05/09/2023

Other Procedural Questions, to enhance the working
methods of the Council. We would especially like to
thank you for the meeting that took place between you
and the Permanent Representatives of Kuwait and my
own country, Austria, in their capacity as co-Chairs of
the intergovernmental negotiations on Security Council
reform during the seventy-seventh session.

order to make them more inclusive and interactive, we
encourage presidencies to organize them in a Toledostyle format, inviting other members of the Council
to engage with the wider membership alongside
the outgoing presidency. In addition, we encourage
presidencies to consistently advertise those meetings
and send out invitations to all Member States.

During the intergovernmental negotiation meetings,
delegations often raise issues pertaining not only to the
working methods of a future reformed and enlarged
Council, but also issues that relate to improvements
of the working methods in the current set-up of the
Council. Those issues have included questions related
to reviewing the current system of penholdership,
enhancing the opportunities for non-members of the
Security Council to participate in and contribute to
the work of the Council and increasing interaction
between the Security Council and the subsidiary organs
of the General Assembly, including the Peacebuilding
Commission. On 27 April, in order to draw the attention
of the current Chair of the Informal Working Group to the
issues discussed in the intergovernmental negotiations,
the Permanent Representatives of Austria and Kuwait,
in their capacity as co-Chairs of the intergovernmental
negotiations, sent you a letter, Mr. President, outlining
the main issues raised by delegations. We hope that the
letter has contributed substantially to the discussions
of the Informal Working Group and will be taken into
account in the future deliberations of that body. We also
hope that this exchange will be continued in the future.

Finally, it is hard to over-emphasize the Security
Council’s role in defending and upholding the rule of
law and the primacy of international law over unilateral
acts. It is our strong conviction that the Council, in
carrying out its mandate to maintain international peace
and security, has to step up to defend the Charter and
support compliance with international law. That may
seem obvious in view of the Council’s clear mandate.
However, over the past year and a half, we have seen
how the Council has been unable to act in the face of
a blatant breach of the Charter by one of its permanent
members.

Secondly, Austria has consistently advocated for
a Security Council that acts in recognition of the fact
that it draws its legitimacy from the wider membership
of the United Nations. Whether elected or permanently
mandated through the Charter of the United Nations,
Council members shoulder their responsibilities on
behalf of all Member States. All members around the
table serve on the Council for all of us.
That recognition entails the obligation to carry out
the work of the Council in an inclusive and transparent
manner. Besides the many important points contained
in the ACT group’s statement to be delivered, let me
emphasize that Austria advocates for a more consistent
consultation with affected Member States, such as
countries concerned and regional neighbours, as well
as troop- and police-contributing States.
In addition, an important moment to engage with
the wider membership of the United Nations is also
at the monthly wrap-up meetings of presidencies. In
16/34

We therefore support addressing the use of the
veto, particularly when it is used to halt action against
a member that violates the Charter. We welcome the
positive impact of the veto initiative on the work of the
Council and encourage additional countries to support
the ACT code of conduct. Moreover, we call on Council
members to explore opportunities for a consistent and
full implementation of the provisions of Article 27,
paragraph 3, of the United Nations Charter, as they
relate to the obligatory abstention of Council members
when they are party to a dispute.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Norway.
Ms. Brattested (Norway): We commend Albania
for convening today’s important debate and also for
its work as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions. I
am pleased to deliver this statement on behalf of the
27 members of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency (ACT) group.
The ACT group promotes a more transparent,
effective and inclusive Security Council and we would
like to set out a few concrete suggestions relating to three
themes — the Security Council’s reporting, its efforts to
promote transparency and its commitment to inclusion.
First, on reporting, the ACT group believes the
Council should ensure the timely completion of monthly
assessments by all Security Council presidencies. As
that is undertaken in a national capacity, assessments
23-26019

05/09/2023

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

can be more analytical and do not require unanimity
among Council members. We welcome that the
introduction of the annual report of the Council draws
from monthly assessments. We encourage a more
analytical report and the full implementation by the
Council of its agreed presidential notes, including
holding interactive informal exchanges of views with
the wider United Nations membership during drafting.
We also recall the group’s position on the addition
of a dedicated chapter on the veto in the annual report
(see S/2022/1032), where special reports could be
prominently featured. We encourage that addition in
the 2023 report. We welcome the Council’s consistent
production of special reports, in line with General
Assembly resolution 76/262, and expect that to continue.
We also welcome the steps taken by the current President
of the General Assembly to transmit summaries of
General Assembly discussions on the Council’s annual
report and veto initiative meetings, a practice we hope
will continue and would be strengthened should the
Council give due consideration to those summaries and
take action on their recommendations.
Finally, on reporting, the ACT group supports
verbal reporting and dialogue with the broader
membership, including through monthly wrap-up
sessions. We support a consistent practice of Council
Presidents issuing formal invitations and publishing
meeting announcements in The Journal of the United
Nations and on the Council’s programme of work.
While those issues may seem somewhat administrative
or technical in nature, they are important elements
of the Council’s accountability to the broader United
Nations membership and the public and we ask for their
consistent implementation.
Secondly, the ACT group supports a range of
improvements to ensure greater transparency by the
Council. We support the early and broad circulation of
live lists of speakers, no later than on the day before
open debates and, similarly, we welcome the use
by presidencies of digital programmes of work and
the public distribution of monthly working methods
commitments. We would also like to see more detail
included on the Council’s programme of work, including
all foreseen meetings, wrap-up sessions, Arria Formula
meetings and informal interactive dialogues.
Furthermore, we underscore that the early
distribution of concept notes for open debates helps
to promote better understanding and engagement
in Council discussions. We commend the recent

S/PV.9410

publication of the Interactive Handbook of the Working
Methods of the Council. The ACT group also supports
a return to the former agreed practice, which has fallen
out of implementation, whereby all draft resolutions
of the Security Council are shared with the wider
membership as soon as they are placed in blue and
before adoption.
We emphasize that the Council should commit
to returning to the once usual practice, lost during
the coronavirus disease pandemic, of agreeing press
elements from closed consultations. That is the bare
minimum of transparency we expect from closed
meetings of the Council. We believe that those
important and concrete improvements will bring
greater transparency to, and trust in, the Security
Council’s work.
Thirdly, on the issue of inclusion among members of
the Council with the broader membership and briefers
to the Council, we wish to point to the important
recommendations made by the Secretary-General to
the Security Council in his New Agenda for Peace,
particularly on the need to democratize its procedures.
We could not agree more with his three recommendations
for the Council to ensure first, more burden-sharing
or penholdership among all Council members, where
ACT would like to see co-penholdership become the
norm on all files; secondly, systematic consultations
with affected countries, such as host countries or
troop-contributing countries and police-contributing
countries, and, thirdly, promoting greater accountability
of permanent members for the use of the veto. Here,
ACT would also add the consistent implementation of
Article 27, paragraph 3, in line with the objectives and
purpose of the Charter of the United Nations.
We also echo recommendations made by the
Secretary-General on elevating the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), not only integrating
the PBC more in the work of the Council, including
perhaps in missions to the field, but for the Council to
ask for and use its advice better. To further improve
inclusion in the Council’s work, we also urge a more
consistent and broader approach to the acceptance of
rule 37 requests in all applicable meeting formats and
encourage a standardized approach to prioritizing and
encouraging group statements in open debates, which
we believe will improve efficiency.
Furthermore, we welcome efforts undertaken
through women and peace and security commitments
to ensure a greater number and diversity of female civil

23-2601917/34

S/PV.9410

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

society briefers, particularly their safe participation
and greater attention to the deeply concerning issue of
reprisals.
Just briefly on the annual distribution of Council
subsidiary body chairs, we cannot help but point to the
deterioration of the Council meeting its own deadlines
for that process. The Council must do better. Late
distribution is to the significant detriment of incoming
elected members, affecting their ability to be fully
included and active in shaping the work of the Council.
In conclusion, please be assured that the ACT
group remains a steadfast supporter of a transparent,
effective, efficient and inclusive Security Council. We
appreciate this opportunity to engage with the Council
today and will continue to do so. We welcome that
under your leadership, President, the Informal Working
Group continues to work on new presidential notes. We
hope the recommendations made today by the broader
United Nations membership will be taken into account
in that work, but we also underscore the importance
of continuous efforts by all members of the Council to
implement what has already been agreed.
As the Council faces ever-increasing pressures on
its work, it is vital to ensure that it has the trust and
confidence of the broader membership, and of course of
the billions of people on whose behalf it acts. Nothing
could be a better signal than the faithful implementation
of its own commitments.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark.
Ms. Lassen (Denmark): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic and Baltic States — Estonia,
Finland, Iceland, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Sweden
and my own country, Denmark.
I would first like to commend Albania for
convening this annual debate and for its efforts as Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and other Procedural Questions. As the past year has
shown, it is vital for the Security Council to engage
with all Member States on how to deliver on its
mandate and become more transparent, effective, and
inclusive. The recent engagement with the co-Chairs
of the intergovernmental negotiations process is a
small step in that direction. It is the Council’s working
methods, and their continuing innovation, that enable
the Council to function. But we have also seen that they
can be used to render it paralysed on the most important
matters of international peace and security. With a
18/34

05/09/2023

view to improving the performance of the Council and
strengthening its working methods at this juncture, the
Nordic and Baltic States would like to highlight three
priority areas that demand our collective attention.
First, opportunities for the wider membership
to engage meaningfully in the work of the Council
remain key to ensuring that the Council can draw on
their perspectives, knowledge and capacity, in line
with Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations.
In that regard, the Peacebuilding Commission can
offer valuable advice and cross-cutting perspectives in
support of the Council’s work. In addition to providing
written advice, its Chairs should be invited to brief
the Council whenever possible, and there is room for
the Council to make better use of that advice. We also
urge for a more inclusive approach on the acceptance of
rule 37 requests. We welcome the presidencies’ regular
interactive wrap-in and wrap-up sessions. We also
welcome efforts to include more female briefers from
civil society. Continued attention to ensuring their
safe participation and the deeply concerning issue of
reprisals is critical to that end.
Secondly, elected members continue to bring
invaluable innovation to the Council. Their ability
to participate meaningfully in the Council’s work
is indispensable, and we commend Ireland and the
United Arab Emirates for their recent publication of
the Interactive Handbook of the Working Methods of
the Council for its elected members. In that regard, we
align ourselves with the important recommendations
made by the Secretary-General to the Security Council
in his New Agenda for Peace, particularly on the need
to democratize its procedures. That includes more
burden-sharing among all Council members in terms of
penholderships, systematic consultations with countries
affected by Council decisions, such as host and troopand police-contributing countries, and promoting
greater accountability for permanent members in their
use of the veto.
Thirdly, with regard to the right of the veto,
the Nordic and Baltic States are of the view that the
use of the veto should come with transparency and
accountability. Permanent members should refrain from
using it in cases of mass atrocities, including the crime
of aggression. By adopting the veto initiative through
its resolution 76/262, the General Assembly introduced
an important accountability mechanism. We would
encourage the formal adoption of the special reports
produced to ensure their appropriate reflection in the
23-26019

05/09/2023

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Council’s annual report. Going forward, we would also
like to see the Council consistently implement Article
27, paragraph 3, in line with the Charter’s overall
objectives, particularly Article 2, paragraph 4. We
would also welcome a chapter dedicated to the veto in
the Council’s annual report.
In conclusion, we encourage Council members
to continue to innovate and engage through the
Working Group to create a more transparent, inclusive,
accountable and therefore more effective Council,
and we want to see its working methods implemented
consistently. We also hope that the recommendations
made today by the broader United Nations membership
will be taken into account in the Council’s future work
through adapting and improving its working methods.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Ruidíaz Pérez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile thanks Albania for convening this open debate.
We have taken note of the briefings and statements
that we have heard today and wish Albania every
success during its presidency of the Security Council
for September.
Chile aligns itself with the statements made today
by the representatives of Norway, on behalf of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group,
and Ireland, on behalf of the Group of Like-Minded
States on Targeted Sanctions.
We would like to reiterate the importance of
promoting transparency in the decision-making
process of the Security Council and accountability for
its decisions. We commend the Council for reaching
consensus on two issues of working methods last month,
that is, ensuring the orderly observance of a minute
of silence and the continued work of the Sanctions
Committees. We are certain that they will contribute to
improving and fostering orderly discussions.
We believe that the progress made in reforming
the Security Council to achieve greater inclusiveness
in its decision-making and work and expand its
membership has inevitably become more critical than
ever to ensuring the authority and effectiveness of
the universal multilateral system, and especially to
ensuring trust in it, as it is has become weakened and
besieged. We urge everyone to bear in mind that in
today’s global situation it is urgent that we show greater
political will for achieving Security Council reform.
Armed with that political will and an awareness of the

S/PV.9410

Security Council’s current deficiencies, we must bring
about a more democratic and representative Council,
while correcting the inequities and inefficiencies that
are affecting its work. We underscore the importance
of the participation of civil-society representatives in
Security Council briefings, as they bring us additional
information based on their experiences on the
ground, and in that regard we also encourage greater
participation by women.
The Security Council plays a key and tactical role
in providing greater security to civilian and uniformed
personnel during the implementation of its mandates,
which is why it must be provided with accurate and
timely information so that it can act quickly. For Chile,
defending and strengthening multilateralism will
continue to be a priority in which Security Council
reform plays a fundamental role in legitimizing not only
decisions on international peace and security, including
at the upcoming Summit of the Future, but also on the
Organization’s ability to arrive on the ground in time
and to fulfil its main task — the protection of civilians
and those who are disproportionately affected by
conflict and emerging threats.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Malovrh (Slovenia): I would first like to
thank Albania for providing the wider membership
with an opportunity to assess developments related to
the working methods of the Security Council over the
past year.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of Norway on behalf of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group. In
addition, we would like to make some remarks from our
national perspective.
Slovenia commends the decision of Albania, as the
Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and other Procedural Questions, to follow the practice
of other Security Council subsidiary bodies by issuing
an annual report on the activities of the Working Group,
as it did for the first time last year (see S/2022/1032).
While the results of the Working Group’s discussions
have been published in its notes by the President
(S/2023/612 and S/2023/615), an annual report with
additional insight into its deliberations is a welcome step
towards greater transparency in the Council’s work. We
also welcome annex II to the report with the indicators
on the implementation of presidential note S/2017/507

23-2601919/34

S/PV.9410

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

and hope for the possibility of adopting additional
ones if the need arises. Furthermore, we thank Albania
and Japan for the launch of the Interactive Handbook
of the Working Methods of the Council, which will
make our work much easier and presidential note 507
more accessible. I would now like to address three
further points.
Global challenges demand that we work together
and seek collective and sustainable solutions. In
deliberations on those solutions, it is essential to
maintain a dialogue with the States and regions
concerned, which can enable us to reach a fully
informed decision on the matter. We do not always
need to agree, but we should always listen to one
another. That pertains to the issue of open debates. In
the majority of cases, they are the only opportunity
that the wider membership has to communicate their
positions directly to the Security Council, which results
in a greater number of speakers and consequently
longer meetings. We agree with presidential note 507
on the need to focus such debates in order to make
them more efficient. That could be done by explicitly
identifying the goals of debates in which insight into
the positions of the wider membership on topical issues
would provide some guidance for the Council’s future
considerations and create a wider context with regard to
issues of peace and security.
To that end, we would like to see concept papers
provide guiding questions that are as specific as
possible, and most importantly that are issued before
the debate in a timely manner. We also support a return
to the practice of Council missions to the field. While
new technologies can facilitate and expedite flows
of information and should be used regularly, visiting
the field and gathering first-hand impressions and
experience can never truly be substituted.
As an incoming member of the Security Council,
we consider the shared thematic commitments on the
women and peace and security agenda an important
step towards mainstreaming that agenda into the work
of the Security Council. Slovenia intends to join that
initiative once we take our seat here in the Council.
In conclusion, we appreciate the progress achieved
under Albania’s leadership and welcome the fact that
two additional notes — on the orderly conduct of
minutes of silence (S/2023/612) and on the continuous
functioning of subsidiary bodies (S/2023/615) — have
been agreed upon. We look forward to engaging in the
20/34

05/09/2023

work of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions in the next two years.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Massari (Italy): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important debate on the Security
Council’s working methods. A more transparent and
functional Security Council is an absolute necessity in
order to regain the trust of public opinion in the capacity
of the United Nations in the area of international peace
and security. The most recent developments, with
important processes blocked by the use of the veto,
add to that narrative and make today’s open debate
even more timely and necessary. We also commend
your endeavours, Sir, in your capacity as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.
The revised note by the President S/2017/507
addresses the demand for the Council’s enhanced
transparency, inclusiveness and interaction with the
rest of the United Nations membership. Much has been
done in that regard to date, but we can all agree that
there are margins for improvement. We are convinced
that, within the Council, permanent and non-permanent
members should work on an equal footing as far
as possible, with the exception of what is currently
contemplated by the Charter of the United Nations in
terms of the veto power. More generally, the 10 elected
members of the Council should be allowed to play a
greater role in the work of the Security Council. The
distribution of duties among Council members should
be fairer and more balanced when it comes both to the
chairpersonship of subsidiary bodies and the practice
of penholdership and co-penholdership, including for
African members on African issues.
Moreover, it is essential that the views and interests
of the Member States affected by or concerned with any
matter on the Council’s agenda be heard and taken into
account in its work. It is essential to increase cooperation
between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), and we look forward to seeing the
Council regularly request, deliberate on and draw upon
the PBC’s specific, strategic and targeted advice.
We also strongly support the practice of inviting
briefers from civil society to Council meetings,
ensuring the adequate participation of women and
greater gender inclusivity and equality in order to allow
Council members to hear different voices and points of
23-26019

05/09/2023

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

view before deliberating. It is disappointing that fewer
women than usual were invited to brief the Council
in 2023. We commend the Albanian presidency for its
attention and dedication to the women and peace and
security agenda, as well as its commitment to the greater
involvement of women civil society representatives in
the programmed briefings during the current month
of September.
We believe it is important to hold public meetings
of the Security Council whenever possible, while
keeping closed meetings and informal consultations
to a minimum, in accordance with the fact that they
were originally intended to be the exception. We also
appreciate the organization by the Albanian presidency
of three open debates, which will allow non-members
of the Security Council to express their voices on issues
of concern.
The improvement of working methods is also part
of a broader discussion on the comprehensive and
effective reform of the Security Council, which should
be aimed at a more transparent, accountable, efficient
and, in our view, more democratic Council. The Council
must also be more inclusive, particularly with regard to
Africa and the global South.
In that regard, keeping in mind that the reform
of the Security Council is dealt with within the
intergovernmental negotiations, in order to promote
a more practical and concrete discussion in that
framework, we very much welcome and support the idea
put forward by the co-Chairs of the intergovernmental
negotiations during the seventy-seventh session of the
General Assembly. On 27 April, in a letter addressed
to the Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, they
asked to convene annual meetings between the Chair
of the Informal Working Group and the co-Chairs of
the intergovernmental negotiations. Such exchanges of
views could help identify ways for the two processes
to complement each other for the benefit of improving
the Security Council’s working methods, both now and
once it is reformed.
It is hard to speak of working methods without
reflecting at the same time on the root causes of the
Council’s inaction, which are directly and closely
linked to the veto power, regardless of whether it is
actually used or simply threatened. The vetoes cast
in the Council over the years, including recently, have
provided further confirmation of the paralysing effect
of the veto power on the Council’s ability to act. That

S/PV.9410

is why Italy supports all initiatives aimed at selfrestraint with regard to the exercise of the veto, such as
the Franco-Mexican initiative and the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group code of conduct.
Italy was also among the co-sponsors of the innovative
General Assembly resolution 76/262. It is also the
reason that we do not support the expansion of
the Security Council in the category of permanent
members, as that would generate additional veto
powers and further discrimination among permanent
and non-permanent members.
Finally, in order to enhance the effectiveness of the
Council, Italy would welcome the proper application of
the provisions of Article 27, paragraph 3, of the Charter
of the United Nations, according to which any member
of the Council involved in a dispute — including
permanent members — should abstain from voting on
decisions related to that dispute.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on Albania’s
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
also commend your leadership of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions and welcome your valuable briefing today,
as well as your commitment to bringing this issue
forward for discussion on an ongoing basis between
the Council and the wider United Nations membership.
That is indeed a practical contribution to improving the
Council’s working methods.
Egypt welcomes note S/2017/507 by the President
of the Security Council and other proposals that would
contribute to improving the working methods of the
Council and enhancing its efficiency. In that connection,
Egypt proposes the following points and suggestions to
improve the working methods of the Council and its
subsidiary organs.
First, the number of Council briefings to all
Members must be increased, taking into account
their views on the Council’s programme of work. The
Council must also present its activities and visits, while
the Chairs of the subsidiary organs and their relevant
committees should provide periodic briefings to the
Members at large.
Secondly, the number of open meetings, in whatever
form — whether in the Council, its subsidiary organs
or sanctions committees — must also be increased. We

23-2601921/34

S/PV.9410

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

would like to recall that the Security Council represents
the United Nations membership as a whole and works on
their behalf. Therefore, as a general rule, its meetings
and work should be accessible to all Members.
Thirdly, there must be genuine and serious
engagement between the Council and the general
membership. States Members should be informed of
the draft resolutions and presidential statements to be
adopted by the Council, and of the consultations in
that regard. All Members must have the opportunity
to express their opinions and proposals to the Security
Council concerning those draft resolutions and
presidential statements.
In that regard, I would specifically like to mention
the issue of penholdership. We welcome the broadening
of the scope of non-permanent members as penholders
for various draft resolutions and statements. We
reaffirm the need to apply that practice to all topics
before the Security Council to ensure that the issue of
penholdership does not become the exclusive right of
a handful of permanent members on the basis of their
own interests, while ignoring the views and priorities
of other States, particularly those that play important
and influential role in addressing the topics under
consideration and are directly affected by them.
Fourthly, there is a need for greater coordination
among the Security Council, neighbouring States
and regional organizations concerned by the conflict
situations on the Council’s agenda, particularly the
African Union and the League of Arab States. It
is inconceivable that the Council takes decisions
on specific issues without the involvement of the
regional mechanisms responsible for monitoring those
issues. The Council could benefit from their naturally
accumulated expertise, making its decisions more
relevant with regard to the situation on the ground.
Fifthly, it is necessary to step up consultations
between the Security Council and troop-contributing
countries to peacekeeping operations, as stipulated in
paragraph 91 of the valuable note S/2017/507.
Sixthly, the subsidiary organs of the Security
Council, in particular Sanctions Committees and
panels of experts, must consult with relevant countries
in preparing reports dealing with those countries.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that those
proposals are not new. Their implementation with the
other proposals that we have heard remains contingent
on genuine political will and on the conviction that, if
22/34

05/09/2023

the Security Council is more transparent and inclusive
in its work, it will be better able to carry out the tasks
entrusted to it and to respond to the challenges of today’s
world. Otherwise, the general membership will have
less trust in the Council’s abilities and its importance
and credibility within the entire international system.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Nasir (Indonesia): I congratulate Albania
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate.
Just hours ago, President Joko Widodo officially
opened the forty-third Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) Summit in Jakarta. He spoke of
how ASEAN is a large ship that is responsible for the
millions of people that sail together and how, through
stormy weather, ASEAN leaders must ensure the ship
continue to sail and be the captain of its own ship in
bringing about peace, stability and prosperity.
Similarly, the Security Council is also a large ship
bestowed with the responsibility to maintain peace and
stability for all Members of the United Nations. Despite
the rocky waters and great turbulence it faces, this great
ship must also continue to sail on. Its working methods
are the screws and bolts that keep the ship together and
allow it to continue its course.
Against this backdrop, allow me to highlight
three points.
First, promoting greater participation by the
wider United Nations Member States and relevant
United Nations entities is important. That will enable
the Council to gain broader perspectives and, at the
same time, promote transparency. The participation
of other relevant United Nations bodies, such as
the Peacebuilding Commission, would also offer
perspectives in bridging security and development in
post-conflict settings.
Secondly, better and more effective coordination
by the Council and related United Nations mechanisms
with regional organizations is needed. Regional
organizations could offer their first-hand knowledge,
cultural nuances and localized solutions that are often
overlooked in broader discussions. Incorporating
the perspectives of regional and subregional entities
helps the Council fortify its mandate and amplifies its
capacity to cultivate peace and stability.
23-26019

05/09/2023

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Thirdly, the Council should refrain from politicizing
established rules and working methods. Any attempt to
politicize the working methods could create a setback
to the integrity of the Council. We urge the Council
members to act responsibly and work towards a more
united Council.
Improving the working methods of the Security
Council is a continuous process. Council members
should set aside individual differences and reaffirm
their collective commitment to the purposes and
principles of the United Nations. Through that, a
common vision for the Security Council that is more
effective, inclusive, transparent and representative
will materialize.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Ms. Oehri (Liechtenstein): Especially in these times
of major threats to international peace and security and
attacks against the Charter of the United Nations, the
overall effectiveness of the Security Council remains
of great concern. Liechtenstein will continue to support
efforts to improve the Council’s working methods, both
in its national capacity and through the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group, whose
statement today we fully endorse.
The flow of communication between the Security
Council and the United Nations membership as a whole
is critical to the fulfilment of obligations stipulated in
the Charter of the United Nations, notably, in Articles
24 and 25. Those articles encourage the Council to
be transparent in its deliberations to the membership
it represents. Consultations on situations of grave
concern to the whole United Nations membership, such
as on Myanmar, as we saw last month, should be open
to the membership. If need be, a procedural vote must
be employed.
Open debates of the Council must also be truly open
to the membership. The added value of such debates
lies in their inclusivity and transparency, enabling
contributions by all United Nations Member States on
equal terms to Council members. With its occasional
practice of inviting select non-Council members only,
the Council risks creating a two-tier system, which
defeats the very purpose of the format. For factual
accounts and informed assessments of situations of
concern to the Council, it is important to hear relevant
experts, including women and civil society briefers
and briefers who may not speak in an official United

S/PV.9410

Nations language as long as interpretation is provided.
If the standard of relevant expertise is not being met,
members should be willing to employ a procedural vote.
The increased use of Arria Formula meetings by
members of the Council is only desirable as long as
the format’s original purpose is honoured, bringing the
Council’s attention to understudied topics and voices
and not distracting from its work or creating a negative
atmosphere. We welcome the well-established practice
of the Council presidency of holding wrap-up sessions
at the end of each month and encourage States to make
use of that opportunity for interactive exchange with
the Council.
The Council has engaged with the veto initiative
mechanism created in General Assembly resolution
76/262 and has produced special reports on each
of those occasions. Lichtenstein believes that those
exchanges of ideas and perspectives are crucial when
the Council cannot act owing to the veto of one or more
permanent members. We hope for a strong response
by the General Assembly following last week’s use of
the veto (see S/PV.9409), including by considering a
possible outcome.
The timely submission of the Council’s annual
report this year (A/77/2) is laudable. While we continue
to encourage a more analytical and substantive report,
we also welcome the use of the word “veto” this year and
suggest that the Council create a separate section in the
annual report to discuss special reports. It is likewise
encouraged that all United Nations Member States,
including Council members, attend and participate in
the General Assembly debate on the annual report.
We further hope to see continued improvements to
the system of co-penholdership and to more equitable
burden-sharing between the 10 elected members and
the five permanent members.
Despite a multitude of crises, the Council
continues to be paralysed and unable to act on many
of the core threats to international peace and security
today. Liechtenstein sees a variety of areas where the
immediate functioning and working methods of the
Council can contribute to overcoming blockages. We
remind all Council members of their obligations under
Article 27, paragraph 3, which stipulates that a party to
a dispute shall abstain from voting in decisions taken
under Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations.
That provision has not been applied accordingly, and
we hope to see it better reflected in Council practice
going forward.

23-2601923/34

S/PV.9410

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Furthermore, we remind all States that have signed
the ACT code of conduct of their responsibilities
and commitments. Signatories of the code regularly
constitute a procedural majority of Council members.
As such, the Council should be able to hold meetings
aimed at preventing or ending the commission of
genocide, crimes against humanity or war crimes
through timely and decisive Council action, and there
should be no doubts when it comes to the votes on
products addressing situations of atrocity crimes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Nguyen (Viet Nam): I would like to congratulate
Albania on assuming the Council’s presidency for the
month of September and thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important open debate.
In the evolving global context characterized by
increasing complexities and challenges, the Security
Council has proven its continued relevance in
maintaining international peace and security. However,
despite its commendable efforts to ensure continued
functioning through difficult times, including during
the coronavirus disease pandemic, the Security Council
has not always been able to effectively discharge its
primary responsibility. Deliberation on its working
methods can serve as an important tool to improve the
Council’s functioning. And this timely debate could
add further momentum to the renewed interest this year
in reforming the Security Council.
In line with Viet Nam’s consistent policy of support
for a comprehensive reform to make the Security
Council more representative, democratic, transparent
and efficient, I wish to highlight following points.
First, Viet Nam calls for greater unity and
responsibility among Council members in addressing
issues of high urgency related to international peace
and security. There are countries and regions in conflict
or at risk of conflict that deserve greater attention from
the Security Council, which could be better secured
through reinforcement of its solidarity.
Secondly, we urge the Council members to set
themselves as leading examples of compliance with
international law, particularly respect for sovereignty,
territorial integrity and the principles of non-interference
and resolving disputes through peaceful means.
Thirdly, the Council needs to foster greater
transparency, inclusiveness and efficiency. It should
24/34

05/09/2023

conduct more public meetings, which facilitate
interactive exchange and consensus-building. Closed
meetings and informal consultations should be kept to
a minimum and as exceptions.
We urge the Council to engage and interact more
with non-Council members and relevant regional
organizations when addressing issues related to them.
In addition, the Council need to consult more with
the troop- and police-contributing countries on issues
concerning the United Nations peacekeeping missions.
Along the same lines, the Council needs to strengthen
its coordination with the General Assembly and other
United Nations entities, including through more regular
consultations and reports. Non-Council members need
to be given more access and be allowed to participate in
the preparation of the Council’s documents, including
its annual reports to the General Assembly.
As a country that has served twice in the Security
Council, Viet Nam hopes that the discussion on this
important topic will bring about concrete outcomes
towards making the Council more efficient and
effective in carrying out its primary responsibility of
maintaining international peace and security.
To that end, we will continue to contribute
meaningfully to joint efforts to improve the Council’s
working methods, which need to be addressed as
part of the comprehensive Security Council reform
agenda, alongside other issues such as more equitable
representation among its membership.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Geisler (Germany): Germany welcomes
Albania’s initiative to discuss the working methods of
the Security Council.
The transparency, efficiency and accountability
of the Security Council’s working methods are not a
question of style, but of substance. We have always
believed that the Security Council must undergo a
profound reform to fulfil its mandate in a rapidly
changing world. That includes the Council’s composition
as well as how the Council is conducting business. The
reform of the Security Council has become even more
urgent since the Russian aggression against Ukraine,
which is not only a blatant breach of the Charter of the
United Nations, but also a blatant refusal of a permanent
member to fulfil its obligation to ensure the effective
functioning of the Council.
23-26019

05/09/2023

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Simply put, the question is whether the Security
Council can fulfil its primary responsibility — the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
need a Council that facilitates constructive debate
and is able to take the necessary and bold decisions to
address the issues we are currently facing.
Please allow me to make four points in that regard.
First, time and again non-members of the Council
are directly affected by situations that are discussed in
the Council. Those Member States have a legitimate
interest in making their voice heard. Therefore, Security
Council presidencies should, whenever possible,
give those countries the possibility to participate in
discussions, in accordance with rule 37 of the Security
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
Secondly, the Council has increasingly coordinated
with, and sought the advice of, other United Nations
organs. We welcome the increase in written advice
from the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), as well as
briefings by its Chair to the Council. We see a major
improvement in the quality and relevance of the advice
provided under the guidance of Kenya, and now Brazil.
We should foster an even stronger focus on the PBC’s
advice on matters pertaining to conflict prevention, as
well as transition planning during or in the immediate
aftermath of United Nations peacekeeping missions.
Thirdly, we continue to be very supportive of
having civil society briefers in the Council, as they
contribute valuable insight. But it is also our task to
protect them. Pressure and intimidation of civil society
representatives who brief the Council are inexcusable
and simply unacceptable. We urge the Council and
its members to actively promote the meaningful
participation of civil society briefers in Council
meetings and, at the same time, their active protection.
Fourthly, Germany supports all initiatives to limit
the use of the veto.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mr. Arrocha Olabuenaga (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): As we reiterated during our tenure as an
elected member of the Council, the area of working
methods is one in which there is real room for
improvement in the efficiency and effectiveness of the
Council. The work of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, which
you chair, Mr. President, is therefore critical.

S/PV.9410

This work can also benefit from the advisory role
of the Peacebuilding Commission, as suggested by
the Secretary-General in his Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982) report. That, in turn, will strengthen
collaboration among the principal organs of the
United Nations, in line with presidential statement
S/PRST/2021/23.
Another recent element that has contributed to the
accountability of the Security Council and strengthened
its relationship with the General Assembly is the
adoption of resolution 76/262, on the veto initiative,
already mentioned by many delegations. While it
is regrettable that this mechanism has already been
activated so many times despite its short lifespan,
including the veto exercised as recently as last week
(see S/PV.9408), its relevance lies in the empowerment
it offers to the membership, as a whole, to speak
out on Council inaction on international peace and
security issues that matter to all, thus furthering the
transparency and representativeness obligation that the
Charter of the United Nations imposes on the Council
in Article 24, paragraph 1.
We have said it before, and we will say it again:
the veto does not foster unity or promote the search for
mutual understanding. It is an act of power that is a
clear example of the abuse of a working method.
As a complementary effort to Assembly resolution
76/262, we continue to promote, alongside France, the
Franco-Mexican initiative to voluntarily restrict the
veto in cases of mass atrocities. The initiative now has
106 signatories. As it is directly related to their working
methods, we invite the Security Council members,
especially those elected members that have not yet done
so, to join this important initiative and thus show their
commitment to a more effective Council.
Finally, we reiterate the importance of the Council
responding in a relevant and effective manner to
communications sent to it by any United Nations
Member State regarding any dispute that may threaten
international peace and security. In particular, there
is a need to develop a practice of efficient handling
of situations falling under Article 35, paragraph 1, as
well as communications under Article 51 of the United
Nations Charter. It remains unacceptable that the
Council does not respond to or discuss cases in which
a State resorts to the use of force in self-defence in
matters where peace and security are clearly at stake.
That is particularly dangerous in cases where such a
provision is invoked to use force against non-State

23-2601925/34

S/PV.9410

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

actors, including in the context of combating terrorism,
in contravention of the United Nations Charter. Given
that any breach of international peace and security is
of concern to the international community as a whole,
transparency and prompt access by all Member States
to such communications should be ensured.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): I extend my warm
congratulations to Albania on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
The topic we are discussing today is an issue of
interest and importance to the entire membership of
the United Nations, particularly during the current
extraordinary circumstances, when the world is looking
to the Council for solutions and leadership. Given the
paucity of time, I will restrict my intervention to five
issues of key concern to India.
First, the selection of the Chairs of the Security
Council’s subsidiary bodies and the distribution of
penholderships must be made through a process
that is open, transparent and based on exhaustive
consultations, and with a more integrated perspective.
The five permanent members of the Council must
honour the consensus of the 10 elected members of the
Council (E10) on the Chairs of subsidiary bodies to be
assumed by the E10 themselves. For the Council’s five
permanent members to decide, even in the twenty-first
century, as to what roles should go eventually to the
E10 reflects a continuation of the mindset of the post1945 era in which the spoils belong to the victors. That
is simply unacceptable.

05/09/2023

the review of items on which the Council is seized in a
realistic and forward-looking manner, and note by the
President S/2017/507, on procedural matters, provides
ample guidance on that.
Fourthly, and most important,, merely fixing the
working methods of the Security Council will never
be good enough to rectify its fundamental flaw: its
lack of representative character. To continue to deny
the Member States of the global South a voice and
role in the Council’s decision-making only lowers the
Council’s credibility.
Fifthly, General Assembly decision 62/557,
subscribed to by all Member States, identifies five
pillars of comprehensive reform of the Security
Council — and improving its working methods is just
one of them. Therefore, unless we address the issue in
its entirety, we will continue to be accused of adopting
a piecemeal approach to a systemic flaw. What we
therefore need is a Council that better reflects the
geographical and development diversity of the United
Nations today — a Council in which the voices of
developing countries and non-represented regions,
including Africa, Latin America and the vast majority
of Asia and the Pacific, find their due place at this
horseshoe table. And for that, an expansion of the
Council in both categories of membership is absolutely
essential. It is the only way to bring the Council’s
composition and decision-making dynamics in line
with contemporary geopolitical realities.

Secondly, the working methods of the Security
Council’s sanctions committees continue to dent the
credibility of the Council. The blocking of genuine,
evidence-based listing proposals for globally sanctioned
terrorists without giving any due justification is
uncalled for and smacks of double-speak when it
comes to the Council’s commitment in tackling the
challenge of terrorism. The working methods of the
sanctions committees must emphasize transparency
and objectivity in listing and delisting and should not
be based on political considerations.

We can no longer hide behind the smokescreen
of the intergovernmental negotiations in the General
Assembly and continue to pay lip service by delivering
statements in a process that has no time frame, no text
and no defined goal to achieve. If countries are truly
interested in making the Council more accountable
and more credible, we call on them to come out openly
and support a clear pathway to achieve this reform in
a time-bound manner, through the only established
process in the United Nations — which is by engaging
in negotiations based on text and not through speaking
at each other or over each other, as we have done for the
past three decades.

Thirdly, some of the Security Council’s agenda
items are obsolete or irrelevant. There are items on the
Council’s agenda on which discussions have not taken
place since the establishment of the United Nations.
There is therefore a case for beginning a discussion into

As the threats to international peace and security
evolve, so indeed must the Council. We ask those
blocking progress on this vital issue to heed the calls for
genuine reform and to contribute to making the Council
truly fit for purpose for the twenty-first century.

26/34

23-26019

05/09/2023

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Ms. Zacarias (Portugal): Portugal aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Norway on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency (ACT) group, and I would like to add the
following remarks in my national capacity.
All Member States share the belief that the
Security Council must be reformed, even if we do
not yet agree on what a reform should specifically
entail. In the meantime, the only way to improve the
Council’s functioning and legitimacy — a concern that
underpins almost all calls for its reform — is through
measures that are feasible under the current rules. The
veto initiative and the continued consolidation of the
provisions of note by the President S/2017/507 are two
laudable examples of that. In any event, the Council
itself should strive continuously to boost its legitimacy,
transparency and accountability. That would make
its work easier, not harder. A more transparent and
accountable Council would benefit from greater trust
from its stakeholders, and therefore be better positioned
to carry out its mandate.
The Secretary-General’s policy brief on the New
Agenda for Peace is clear in that regard, affirming that
should the Security Council democratize its procedures,
the results of its decisions would be more durable. We
fully agree with the recommendations made in the policy
brief: first, that Council members that are not a party
to a situation in their region should have a more active
role on draft resolutions to address it; secondly, that
before renewing a given mandate, the Council should
more systematically consult the parties interested, such
as host States, regional organizations and troop- and
police-contributing countries; and thirdly, that greater
accountability for the use of the veto should be ensured.
In that regard, it would be important to include in the
Council’s annual report further details on the draft
resolutions the Council fails to adopt, describing
their purposes and main provisions and indicating the
procedural grounds for their rejection, which, when
applicable, should naturally include an analysis on the
use of the veto.
To further strengthen its coherence, the Council
would also benefit from cooperating more closely
with the Peacebuilding Commission. That could, for
instance, be ensured through joint visits to United
Nations missions in the field, which should take place
more frequently.

S/PV.9410

In conclusion, we echo the suggestion made by the
ACT group calling on the Council to maintain the good
practice of making statements to the press following
closed-door meetings. We further commend the
convening of a first annual meeting between the Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions and the co-Chairs
of the intergovernmental negotiations to consider the
recommendations made by Member States during
the intergovernmental negotiations. It is now time
to follow-up on those recommendations within the
Informal Working Group, together with those included
in the summary of the General Assembly debate on the
annual report of the Security Council. The outcome
of those considerations could then be included in the
newly issued annual report of the Informal Working
Group, a new practice for which we compliment you
and your team, Mr. President, in your capacity as Chair
of the Informal Working Group. I also wish you every
success in your presidency of the Council, Sir.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mr. Chindawongse (Thailand): I would like to
congratulate Albania on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of September and
to thank you, Mr. President, for prioritizing the issue
of improving the working methods of the Council in its
very first meeting of this month. Our congratulations
also go to the United States for its successful presidency
of the Council in August.
As the international community contemplates how
best to overcome the challenges of this generation and how
best to chart the direction of multilateralism for future
generations, it cannot overlook its foremost instrument
to attain all of that, which is the Security Council. At
the best of times a united and effective Council can
avert humanitarian disasters resulting from conflict and
indeed even prevent or resolve conflict. It is therefore
always beneficial to work for an effective and united
Security Council because that Council is at the heart
of the United Nations core mission — the maintenance
of international peace, security and stability — and is a
vital pillar of effective multilateralism.
Although reform of the Security Council will
involve many aspects, improving its working methods
can generate potential quick wins, wins that will
help ensure greater effectiveness, promote greater
transparency and endow the Council’s actions with
greater legitimacy. And that is a win for everyone.

23-2601927/34

S/PV.9410

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Thailand therefore welcomes the Council’s efforts to
implement measures contained in note by the President
S/2017/507. We support the ongoing efforts of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions to ensure full implementation of
presidential note 507 and other subsequent documents
and welcome its first annual report (see S/2022/1032),
released earlier this year under the chairmanship of
Albania. It is our hope that the views expressed in
today’s debate will help further enhance the work of the
Council in carrying out its mandate. In that connection,
there are five points that I want to underscore.
First, it is essential for the wider membership of
the United Nations to be involved in the process and
to be informed about the Council’s work and related
developments as much and as soon as possible.
Partnerships with countries in the regions affected
and relevant regional organizations are crucial to
peace across the entire continuum — from preventing,
responding to and resolving conflicts to peacebuilding
and sustainable development aimed at cementing
sustainable peace. In that regard, the voices and
wisdom of the region affected must always be taken
into account.
Secondly, as a majority of the Council’s
agenda involves situations in developing countries,
their viewpoints and perspectives should be a
high priority in the Council’s deliberations. That
should be complemented by inclusive and timely
information-sharing on the work of the Council to
enable non-members of the Council to express their
views and take part effectively in considering it.
Thirdly, the United Nations and its relevant
bodies should work in synergy to face our current
geopolitical tensions and interlocking challenges. As
sustaining peace must be anchored in the promotion
of human security and sustainable development, the
Council should aim at increasing its coordination,
cooperation and interaction with the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission. The Council should also
take forward the views and recommendations of the
Assembly on the Council’s working methods. Among
other things, Member States have called for greater
interaction between the two bodies, including by
requesting a substantive and analytical annual report
from the Council enabling increased transparency and
accountability to the General Assembly, a request that
has yet to be implemented.
28/34

05/09/2023

Fourthly, we welcome the initiative of the co-Chairs
of the intergovernmental negotiations on Security
Council reform in conveying Member States’ inputs on
improving the Council’s working methods through the
co-Chairs’ note and regular dialogue with the Chair of
the Informal Working Group. We hope that the Council
pays due attention to implementing them.
Fifthly and finally, while presidential note 507 and
the relevant processes are attempting to consolidate the
Council’s working methods and allowing flexibility
for further adjustment, the Council should continue to
work to adopt permanent rules of procedure, for greater
predictability and transparency in its work.
In conclusion, we sincerely hope that the wins
created by improving the working methods of the
Council will pave the way for a more effective,
reformed and united Council in future and therefore
a more effective multilateralism, which is in all of
our interests.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sierra Leone.
Mr. George (Sierra Leone): At the outset, let me
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your country’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
I commend Albania for organizing today’s open
debate. Let me further thank you, Mr. President,
for your briefing in your capacity as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. We also thank the United States
for its presidency of the Security Council in the month
of August.
As an incoming member of the Security Council,
Sierra Leone commends the work of the Informal
Working Group in adopting a first set of selected
indicators, with the goal of enhancing awareness
and improving the implementation of the Council’s
existing working methods. That will surely assist
in efforts by previous and current elected members
to make the implementation of note by the President
S/2017/507 measurable.
Regarding the question of the Council’s working
methods, I would like to reiterate Africa’s position,
which was endorsed by the African Union Assembly
and reflected in the continent’s submission in 2009 to
the then-Chair of the intergovernmental negotiations
on the question of equitable representation on and
increase in the membership of the Security Council and
other matters related to the Council, reflected in the
23-26019

05/09/2023

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

S/PV.9410

document and its annex of July 2015, also referred to as
the Framework Document.

and timely information on their activities to the general
United Nations membership.

The African position therefore proposes, especially
in an expanded format, an accessible, accountable,
democratic, representative and more effective Security
Council, responding to the demands of our times. We
acknowledge the important efforts to improve the
Council’s working methods, especially the increase
in the number of public meetings, briefings and open
debates, and consultations between the Presidents of the
General Assembly and the Security Council, as well as
the increase in penholderships and co-penholderships
for elected members of the Council. In that regard, my
delegation was pleased to note the digitalization of
presidential note 507 in the Interactive Handbook of the
Working Methods of the Council, sponsored by Japan,
and available online, which is helping to increase
awareness of the working methods of the Council.
That said, however, we are of the view that more needs
to be done to improve those working methods in the
following areas.

Fourthly, the Security Council should not be used
to pursue national political agendas and should ensure
the principles of non-selectivity and impartiality in
its work. It should keep strictly within the powers
and functions accorded to it by Member States under
the Charter.

First, the Security Council should enhance its
relationship with the Secretariat, troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) and police-contributing countries,
including through sustained, regular and timely
interaction. Meetings with TCCs should be held not
only when mandates are being drawn up but also in
their implementation, when the Council is considering
changes in the renewal and completion of a mission’s
mandate or when there is a rapid deterioration of
the situation on the ground. In that context, the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations should
involve TCCs more frequently and intensively in its
deliberations, particularly in the very early stages of
mission planning and subsequently throughout the
whole process of implementation.
Secondly, the Security Council should uphold the
primacy of and respect for the Charter of the United
Nations in relation to its functions and powers, and
to that end, refrain from the practice of engaging and
initiating formal or informal discussions on situations
in any Member State of the United Nations or on any
issue that does not constitute a threat to international
peace and security, which is contrary to the provisions
of Article 24 of the Charter.
Thirdly, the Security Council should establish its
subsidiary organs in accordance with the letter and
spirit of the Charter, and those organs should function
in a manner that ensures that they can provide adequate

Fifthly, the Security Council should give serious
and appropriate consideration in applying its Chapter
VII powers, and as a measure of last resort.
Sixthly, the Security Council should use sanctions
regimes appropriately and in line with the Council’s
overall mandate. Accordingly, sanctions must not be
employed on a pretext or with the aim of achieving the
political objectives of an individual State or a few States
rather than the interests of the international community
as a whole.
Finally, the Security Council, especially in
an enlarged format, should formalize its rules of
procedure, which have remained provisional for more
than 60 years, in order to improve its transparency
and accountability.
In conclusion, Sierra Leone notes that some
reassuring actions have been taken, as the Informal
Working Group recently adopted two presidential
notes on the conduct of minutes of silence (S/2023/612)
and on the distribution of Chairs and Vice-Chairs of
subsidiary bodies (S/2023/615). It is our fervent hope
that those actions signal a willingness on the part of
all members of the Council to adopt working methods
that will enable it to be more representative, effective,
efficient, transparent and inclusive.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Lagdameo (Philippines): The Philippines
thanks Albania for organizing this open debate during
its presidency of the Security Council.
Enhancing the efficiency of the Council’s working
methods will enable it to fulfil its primary responsibility
effectively and competently for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
First, the initial step towards improving its working
methods is to correct one fundamental problem — the
lack of representativeness in the Council. The Council
therefore should aim at increased participation by

23-2601929/34

S/PV.9410

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

non-members in the Council’s decision-making
process, thereby fostering greater transparency and
accountability on the part of the Council vis-à-vis
non-members. We recognize that reaching agreement
on enlarging the composition of the Council poses
challenges, not to mention amending the Charter of the
United Nations. However, that does not have to be the
case if we dedicate careful attention to reforming and
improving the Council’s working methods.
Secondly, reform of the Security Council’s working
methods is essential to facilitate a more efficient and
effective functioning of the Council, particularly in
the context of an enlarged and more representative
Council. Such reform should enhance accountability,
predictability, coherence and transparency in the
Council’s work. The improvement of the Council’s
working methods, particularly with respect to greater
transparency and participation in its decision-making
processes by the wider membership, must be part
of an overall agreement on Security Council reform.
Decisions in that regard should not rest solely with the
Council. Specific measures or procedures should be
identified for implementation.
While the Security Council remains the master
of its procedures, it is important that those measures
become more predictable and transparent, especially
with respect to the Council’s decision-making
processes. That is crucial given that the Security
Council operates under provisional rules of procedure.
It is imperative that the broader membership actively
engage in those processes in a meaningful way, not just
in a token or perfunctory manner, as outlined in Article
24, paragraph 1, of the Charter of the United Nations,
which emphasizes the Council’s duty to act on behalf of
the wider membership.
While the Security Council’s annual report
demonstrates its commitment to transparency by sharing
its activities, initiatives and decisions with the General
Assembly, there is room for improvement. More open
debates, for instance, should be encouraged to facilitate
the inclusion of diverse views and suggestions from
the United Nations membership. While the Security
Council’s comprehensive annual report enhances the
accountability of the Security Council, there is still
much to be done to ensure that the inputs of Member
States are duly considered and taken on board. The
Security Council’s decisions are binding on all United
Nations States Members, and they require compliance
under the rule of law.
30/34

05/09/2023

Thirdly, with regard to the use of the veto, the
Philippines reiterates its view that the veto power has
no place in a twenty-first-century Security Council.
The use, or threat of use, of the veto, can constrain
the Council from acting on vital issues related to
international peace and security. The exercise of the
veto power could still be part of a reformed Security
Council’s working methods. It would be a challenge
to remove it. However, we should exert every effort
and find ways to curtail its use. Otherwise, the
effectiveness and efficiency of the Council would
always be under threat, especially at times of great
geopolitical rivalries. The exercise of the right of the
veto carries an extraordinary level of responsibility and
should not be employed without due accountability. It
must be judiciously used to avoid undue constraints on
the Security Council’s primary mandate of maintaining
international peace and security.
Lastly, it is important that Security Council reform
be undertaken in conjunction with the ongoing efforts
to revitalize the General Assembly, especially with
respect to enhancing the role of Member States on
matters affecting international peace and security.
As we address the multifaceted challenges of
Security Council reform, let us remain resolute in our
commitment to enhance its working methods, improve
accountability and foster inclusivity. For those actions
are essential to equipping the Council so that it can
fulfil its paramount duty of upholding global peace and
security effectively and responsibly.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I would like to thank
Albania, as current President of the Security Council,
as well as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, for
convening this important open debate.
This statement is being delivered on behalf of the
Group of Like-Minded States on Targeted Sanctions,
namely, Austria, Belgium, Chile, Costa Rica, Denmark,
Finland, Germany, Ireland, Liechtenstein, the Kingdom
of the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland.
Ensuring transparency, efficiency and effectiveness
in the work of the Security Council includes the
strengthening of fair and clear procedures and due
process for United Nations sanctions regimes. The Group
is strongly committed to the effective implementation
of Security Council sanctions regimes. Targeted
23-26019

05/09/2023

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

sanctions are an important tool to address threats to
international peace and security. To effectively use the
tool, the Group considers that efforts to improve due
process standards must continue. The importance of
due process is threefold. It safeguards the human rights
of the targeted individuals. It safeguards the legitimacy
of United Nations sanctions. And it is fundamental to
Member States’ ability to implement the sanctions.
The effectiveness of United Nations sanctions goes
hand in hand with respect for international due process
standards, including safeguards for individual human
rights. Due process does not weaken sanctions. On the
contrary, it strengthens them.
The Security Council responded to due process
concerns by establishing the Ombudsperson for
the sanctions regime of the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities. But
the Ombudsperson is mandated only to review cases
from the ISIL and Al-Qaida sanctions list. The
Group welcomes the inclusion of a reference to the
Ombudsperson in resolution 2653 (2022), the framework
of the Haiti sanctions regime, and the expression of
intent to consider authorizing the Ombudsperson to
receive delisting requests in relation to that sanctions
regime, as well.
However the Group is of the view that the
Ombudsperson should have been mandated from
the outset to receive and examine petitions so as to
contribute to a process of review that safeguards due
process. In the absence of an effective and independent
review of Security Council listings at the United
Nations level, other than by the Ombudsperson, it is
likely that national and regional courts will continue
to review national implementation of listing decisions.
That already leads to situations where United Nations
States Members and other authorities face difficulty in
giving effect to such listings, as the legal basis for doing
so is found to be wanting. For example, in its judgment
of 20 April in the case of Council v. El-Qaddafi, the
Court of Justice of the European Union (EU) upheld
the decision of the General Court regarding the partial
annulment of EU sanctions against one individual,
which gave effect to her listing under United Nations
sanctions. That follows a number of other cases against
United Nations sanctions implementation in courts
around the world.

S/PV.9410

The Group urges the Security Council to continue
efforts to improve the Council’s working methods in this
area, including through the expansion of the mandate of
the Ombudsperson to all sanctions regimes. The Group
reiterates that the Office of the Ombudsperson should
be able to carry out its mandate in an independent,
impartial and effective manner, as set out in resolution
2368 (2017). The Group remains concerned that the
independence of the Office is being undermined
by the current contractual status and institutional
arrangements of the Office of the Ombudsperson within
the Secretariat.
We must continue to improve the relevant
mechanisms in order to safeguard the integrity of
Security Council decisions and ensure that the effective
and universal implementation of United Nations
sanctions is not disrupted. The Group stands ready to
support those efforts and welcomes the opportunity
presented by today’s open debate to discuss the various
ways in which the Council’s working methods and due
process can be improved.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Chatrnúch (Slovakia): At the outset, I would
like to thank Albania for organizing this important
open debate and to express Slovakia’s appreciation for
your apt leadership, Mr. President, of the deliberations
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions for the second year in your
capacity as Chair.
As you rightly pointed out in the concept note
(S/2023/630, annex), Sir, there is an alarming contrast
between the expectations regarding the Council’s ability
to react effectively to the current plethora of wars and
existential challenges to humankind, on the one hand,
and the growing mistrust, division and abuse of the
Charter of the United Nations that are preventing the
Council from meeting those expectations, on the other.
We have seen that fragmentation mostly in a decrease in
the unanimity of the Council’s decisions and an overall
increase in vetoes cast, which has impeded the action of
the Council on matters that continue to fundamentally
challenge international peace and security. We must
turn that worrisome trend into a much-needed impetus
to reform the Council. In the meantime, we would
like to remind everyone of the extreme importance of
the accountability mechanism for the use of the veto
adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution
76/262 and urge all Security Council members to join

23-2601931/34

S/PV.9410

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

and implement the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency code of conduct and the Franco-Mexican
initiative on veto restraint in cases of mass atrocities.
Regardless of specific matters that have arisen due
to geopolitical challenges, my delegation would like
to underline the need to fully implement the existing
measures and commitments set out in the updated note
by the President S/2017/507 and the subsequent 13 notes.
The work of improving the Council’s working methods
must remain a continuing process in the pursuit of
greater transparency, inclusiveness, representation
and accountability.
More specifically, first of all, we encourage further
strengthening of the substantive engagement and
information-sharing by the Council with troop- and
police-contributing countries in order to disseminate
information on the Council’s decision-making and
incentivize the general membership to support
peacekeeping operations.
Secondly, the further development of more active
and meaningful relationships with the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Human Rights Council and other
relevant bodies, as well as the International Criminal
Court, as appropriate, could increase the Security
Council’s effectiveness in responding to conflicts
and strengthen its role in conflict prevention and
sustaining peace.
Thirdly, the work of the subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council is crucial to the implementation of
Council decisions. Their working methods should
therefore be further improved, especially in instances
that can affect the human rights of the people concerned
and their right to due process. That is particularly
relevant for the Sanctions Committees, considering,
among other things, the judicial review that sanctions
decisions have been subject to in various jurisdictions.
Fourthly, interaction and dialogue between
the Security Council and other Member States,
particularly those directly concerned and affected,
should be enhanced. We appreciate the recent improved
application of rule 37 and encourage the continuation
of that practice.
Fifthly, visiting missions can bring the benefit
of a first-hand view of fragile settings on the ground
and the possibility of delivering messages directly to
key stakeholders. With travel restrictions now largely
lifted, and considering that there was not a single
32/34

05/09/2023

mission visit in 2022, we urge Council members to
revisit that practice.
Sixthly, the practice of monthly working-methods
assessments is a step in the right direction. For greater
transparency, that commitment could be further
formalized, and the implementation of working
methods could be duly assessed by each presidency. We
regret the decrease in monthly assessments in 2022, but
on the other hand we commend Albania for the first
annual report on the work of the Informal Working
Group covering 2022 (see S/2022/1032) and encourage
the continuation of that practice.
Lastly, my delegation encourages drawing on
good practices developed during the pandemic in
relation to two specific working methods — the
virtual participation of briefers, where circumstances
require it, and the submission of written statements by
non-members of the Council during open debates.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina thanks Albania for convening this open
debate on a subject that has always been of particular
interest to us.
Given the increasing demands on the Security
Council and the associated expectations, there is a
growing need for clarity on the Council’s procedure
and working methods. In that regard, the note by the
President S/2017/507 and subsequent notes have broken
new ground in addressing the Council’s working
methods, as they are valuable instruments that embody
best practices and contribute to increasing the Council’s
transparency, inclusiveness and efficiency. Argentina
has historically supported all efforts to improve
transparency, inclusiveness, openness, democratization
and efficiency in the work of the Security Council.
In that regard, we are guided by the conviction that
the Council can and should be more transparent and
democratic in its relationship with the States Members
of the United Nations without affecting the effectiveness
of its decision-making. There can be no doubt about the
improvements that have been made in recent years to the
working methods of this organ thanks to the endeavours
and initiative of its non-permanent members, who with
patience and commitment have been and continue to be
the architects of those achievements.
It is worth pointing out that during its presidency
of the Security Council in February 2000, Argentina
23-26019

05/09/2023

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

urged the adoption of a note by the President by which
newly elected members of the Council would be invited
to participate as observers in informal consultations
during the month prior to the beginning of their term as
elected members. During Argentina’s chairship of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions in 2013 and 2014, numerous
presidential notes were adopted on topics such as
consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries, dialogue with non-members of the Council
and the participation of Council members in the
drafting of Council products and their broader drafting
responsibility, among other things.
With regard to the Security Council’s annual report
to the General Assembly in particular, Argentina
advocates that it should be less descriptive and more
analytical in order to enable a broader consideration of
the Council’s work. Only then will the Security Council
be able to demonstrate its willingness to do its work
more efficiently, transparently and democratically while
improving the relationship between the two organs.
Argentina supports regular evaluations of the
implementation of presidential note 507 and subsequent
notes, and the identification of successful practices and
possible shortcomings, as well as the consideration
of necessary adjustments. In that regard, we call for
the Informal Working Group to continue working
on a single comprehensive document in order to
consolidate and streamline all decisions on working
methods. Beyond that, the Council’s dialogue with
other bodies, whether within the United Nations
system or elsewhere, is essential to the fulfilment of its
functions. Among the bodies that we consider crucial
to the Council’s fulfilment of its mandate are the
Peacebuilding Commission, the International Criminal
Court and humanitarian assistance organizations. The
Security Council has a multiplicity of responsibilities
and effective coordination with other actors is essential
if it is to fulfil them. However, that does not imply
that the Security Council, which is entrusted with the
maintenance of international peace and security, should
take over the functions of other organs.
While we recognize the efforts undertaken by
various States Members of the Organization in recent
years to improve working methods, much remains to
be done. Along those lines, we believe that progress
could be made in the following areas: improving due
process in the Sanctions Committees, improving the
quality of the contents of the annual report submitted

S/PV.9410

to the General Assembly, convening frequent briefings
for non-members of the Council on the issues discussed
in the Council’s informal consultations, minimizing
closed meetings and informal consultations in favour
of meetings in an open format, making draft resolutions
and presidential statements available to non-members
in a timely manner.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that what is
at stake in improving the Council’s working methods
is its decision-making culture and the effectiveness of
its performance. That is why Argentina welcomes the
constructive discussions that have taken place on this
matter within the framework of the intergovernmental
negotiations on Security Council reform.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Ms. Joyini (South Africa): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important annual
open debate. And we extend our appreciation for the
insightful briefing.
Today’s open debate offers yet another opportunity
for the Security Council to do a bit of introspection and
reflect on its methods of work by delving deeper into
developments concerning the implementation of note
S/2017/507 and its subsequent presidential notes. It
furthermore provides all Member States an opportunity
to contribute on how to improve the working methods,
which is pertinent, especially as the evolution of
dynamics in the Council requires adaptation and
repositioning to make it fit for purpose, effective, agile
and responsive in addressing protracted and emerging
threats to international peace and security.
Geopolitical challenges among Council members
have created a heightened level of fragmentation and
placed the Council under intense scrutiny. The lack
of unity on some of the agenda items discussed in the
Council has had a detrimental effect on its integrity
and the effectiveness of its decisions, especially when
it fails to act in fulfilment of its mandate. That has
laid bare the urgent need for the reform of the Security
Council. South Africa reiterates its view on the need
for comprehensive reform of the Security Council,
which is necessary to ensure a more representative and
equitable Council.
South Africa is encouraged by the positive
developments pertaining to burden-sharing in
the context of co-penholdership. We welcome the
consideration given to the elected members who wish

23-2601933/34

S/PV.9410

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

to share Council dossiers, especially those that have
both the knowledge of the issues as chairs of subsidiary
bodies, as well as the region concerned. In that context,
we reiterate that the automatic assumption by the chairs
of subsidiary bodies of the role of co-penholders on
related dossiers is necessary, should they prefer to do
so. Those arrangements are valuable for an exchange
of perspectives towards effective solutions and
actions, which attest to the need for formalization of
such arrangements.
We emphasize that equitable burden-sharing
of dossiers among all Council members is vital for
the effectiveness, transparency, accountability and
inclusivity of the Security Council. We regret that,
despite numerous attempts, the Council has not been able
to reach consensus on penholdership. Notwithstanding
that, we commend the unrelenting efforts of elected
members on that issue, which we hope will result in a
positive outcome flowing from the ongoing negotiations
of the elected members and the entire Council.
As part of the broader membership of the United
Nations with a vested interest in global stability and
security, we appreciate the opportunity to contribute to
the Council’s deliberations and offer concrete solutions
to matters of peace and security. We have noted the
upward trajectory in the number of open meetings in
recent years. However, the Council needs to consider
convening more open meetings on its country-specific
situations to allow all United Nations members,
specifically those with interest, to contribute to finding
a solution to the conflict. It is necessary that there be
consideration of both country-specific and thematic
issues by the broader United Nations membership
without selectivity or politicization.

34/34

05/09/2023

Furthermore, the Council may wish to consider
the establishment of an interactive engagement of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions and experts of the wider United
Nations membership on working methods. That would
create an additional platform for an in-depth discussion
and input beyond the annual open debates.
The calls for the promotion and inclusive
participation of women and youth in the discussions of
the Council are valid, as the sharing of information and
knowledge of the security situation on the ground has
proven to be useful in Council resolutions. Additionally,
the Council should consider the participation of youth
briefers not only during the annual youth, peace and
security open debates but also in country-specific
situations to benefit from their perspectives of the
situations that affect them in conflict settings.
In conclusion, it has become evident that, while
the Security Council is considered the master of its
own procedures and has the latitude to determine its
own practices, as provided for by Article 30 of the
Charter of the United Nations, the working methods
of the Security Council are essential in ensuring
that it is able to conduct its daily engagements in an
efficient, transparent, inclusive and effective manner,
particularly as its decisions have a direct bearing on the
wider United Nations membership.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. Given
the lateness of the hour, I intend, with the concurrence
of the members of the Council, to suspend the meeting
until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.05 p.m.

23-26019
