S/PV.7859

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7859th meeting

Wednesday, 11 January 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Skoog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Sweden)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Halima
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Akahori
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Kyslytsya
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Colombia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia
(S/2016/1095)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-00716 (E)
*1700716*

S/PV.7859

The situation in Colombia

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

was a short but very active period that has brought
about some very encouraging results.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council
(S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in Colombia
(S/2016/1095)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Colombia to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jean Arnault,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Mission in Colombia, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/1095, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission
in Colombia.
In December, the members of the Security Council
welcomed the ratification by the Colombian Congress
of the new Final Peace Agreement between the
Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo. It is
important to ensure that the international community
continues to fully support the Peace Agreement’s
implementation so that it can rapidly deliver tangible
benefits that will enable the people of Colombia to live
in peace.
I now give the floor to Mr. Arnault.
Mr. Arnault: I would like to thank the Security
Council for this opportunity to brief it on the work
of the United Nations Mission in Colombia and on
developments in the implementation of the Colombian
Final Peace Agreement since the end of the period
covered in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/1095),
dated 23 December. In spite of the holiday season, it
2/8

11/01/2017

I will begin with the legislative agenda. As the
Council may recall, in early December Colombia’s
Constitutional Court empowered Congress to fasttrack the adoption of laws deriving from the Peace
Agreement. As a result, on 28 December Congress
was able to pass an amnesty law — one that excluded
serious crimes, however — which President Santos
Calderón ratified two days later. That responded to a
key request of the guerrilla organization, and besides
paving the way for the release or conditional release
of some 4,000 prisoners, it should facilitate the first
major step towards the lay-down of weapons, which
involves moving the members of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC) to the 26 zones
where the lay-down will take place.
Next week, on 16 January, Congress will take up two
more critical pieces of legislation, a draft constitutional
law that will enable the establishment of an integral
system for truth, justice and reparation, including
a special jurisdiction for peace, a truth commission
and a missing persons search unit. According to
the Colombian Government, approximately 20,000
cases may be brought before the special jurisdiction
for peace. Congress will also consider the inclusion
in the Constitution of a provisional article granting
constitutional rank to provisions in the Agreement that
are directly connected to international humanitarian
law and the fundamental rights recognized in the
Colombian Constitution.
I would now like to say a few words about the
implementation of the Agreement itself. A key
dimension of that, of course, is the reintegration of
FARC members into civilian life, which, as the Council
can imagine, has a very direct relationship to the
success of the process of laying down weapons. As
the Secretary-General’s report mentions, reintegration
in Colombia faces some unique challenges, including
those relating to the thriving illegal economy in
conflict areas. A national reincorporation council was
established on 20 December, and has since held four
meetings devoted primarily to reintegrating pardoned
FARC members and preparing a socioeconomic
census of FARC combatants. Unfortunately, some
disagreement remains regarding attention to children,
which we hope will be resolved soon.
17-00716

11/01/2017

The situation in Colombia

The logistical dimension of the implementation
of the ceasefire and weapons lay-down agreement has
posed perhaps the most difficult challenges so far, due in
part to the political uncertainty surrounding the peace
process in the wake of the October plebiscite, but also
to the large number and remote location of the zones
where the process of disarmament is to unfold. As the
Secretary-General’s report mentions, in early December
the tripartite monitoring mechanism pointed out the
need to redouble efforts on the logistical front. Good
progress has been made in the past three weeks with
regard to setting up the mechanism’s local headquarters.
The Monitoring and Verification Mechanism is now
deployed in 18 of the 26 headquarters at local level and
has established a presence in another three temporary
locations. Conditions are still spartan, of course, but
there is enough accommodation available to enable
the Mission to deploy around 350 of the 450 observers
required for the full implementation of its mandate.
The observers will be joined at local headquarters by
33 civilian staff before the end of the month.
Let me note in passing that, at 15 per cent, the
United Nations Mission in Colombia currently has the
highest percentage of female observers of all our peace
operations, that with the inclusion of civilian observers
deployed at the local level, the number reaches 21 per
cent, and that today women constitute 55 per cent of
the Mission’s substantive personnel. Among other
things, that has enabled the Mission to develop close
ties with women’s organizations at national and local
levels. Indeed, a special effort has been made to engage
with women’s groups in order to include their views
and recommendations on the ceasefire process and the
Mission’s activities, and to establish the confidence
required to prevent and deal with potential genderbased violence.
With the Mission and the Monitoring and
Verification Mechanism now deployed at 21 local sites,
the monitoring of the FARC camps, the army units in
the vicinity and the 3 kilometre security zone between
them has now intensified. Monitoring activities have
tripled since early November. In that regard, I would
like to stress the dedication and professionalism of
the Mission’s staff, both observers and civilians, who
have been doing their work in the too-often precarious
conditions of a start-up. Incidentally, I should add that
we are delighted and relieved that an agreement was
reached last night between the Government of Colombia
and United Nations Headquarters on providing full

S/PV.7859

casualty evacuation, medical evacuation and medical
coverage to all observers. With regard to health care for
FARC members, an equally sensitive and urgent issue,
progress has also been made in the past couple of weeks;
in fact, on 28 December, 2,500 FARC members became
affiliated with the national subsidized health system.
The main focus of the effort must now be on setting
up the FARC camps. To date, construction has begun in
one third of the zones and preparations are ongoing in
another third, while the remainder still face difficulties.
Last week, I accompanied President Santos Calderón on
a visit to one of the zones in southern Colombia where
he reviewed progress. He gave specific instructions on
overcoming existing obstacles and redoubling efforts
to enable the 26 camps to be ready as soon as possible.
At yesterday’s meeting of the Council of Ministers,
he emphasized the urgency of that endeavour and
tasked the Cabinet with prioritizing implementation
in the zones. That is an important decision and will
hopefully allow the arms lay-down process to begin in
the next few weeks. As the Council is aware, the United
Nations Mission bears responsibility for verifying that
process, and observers will be deployed permanently
in all FARC camps for that purpose. In anticipation of
the operation’s start, the equipment required for the
initial storing, marking, recording and monitoring of
weapons is being distributed to the Mission’s regional
and local offices.
For a number of reasons, including the logistical
issues I just mentioned, it has proved impossible to
meet the first benchmark of the ceasefire timeline,
which was achieving the full concentration of FARC
combatants and militias in the zones by 1 January. I
must also confess that it will hardly be possible to meet
the 30 January deadline for the destruction of all the
unstable ammunition that is spread in caches around
the country. In spite of that setback, last week President
Santos Calderón and the FARC secretariat reaffirmed
their determination to do everything possible to meet the
original goal of a comprehensive lay-down of weapons
by early June. We share the perception that an overly
protracted process and a loss of momentum would be
in nobody’s interest. Fast-tracking the ceasefire process
alongside fast-tracking of the legislative agenda makes
sense. Even with determination on all sides, it will not be
impossible to accomplish that objective. Among other
things, there is room to review the timelines once the
logistical imperatives have been met. Some of the more
complex processes, such as the destruction of unstable

17-007163/8

S/PV.7859

The situation in Colombia

ammunition, could begin right away and extend beyond
the very short deadline originally specified in the Peace
Agreement. The timetable for storing weapons under
United Nations monitoring could also be adjusted. Such
flexible adjustments could be made without extending
the overall 180-day time frame.
The Colombian peace process has faced, and
still faces, a host of challenges, many of which are
mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report. But it
also has very solid assets. In the first place, it has the
resolve of the Colombian Government and the FARC
leadership to persevere in spite of difficulties, and the
overwhelming support and aspiration of the people
of Colombia for bringing one of the world’s longest
armed conflicts to an end. The support of the region
and the broader international community will also
continue to be a very significant success factor. I want
to once again thank the countries that are contributing
observers, and the Governments and the organizations
that have responded to the parties’ call for assistance
in implementing the Peace Agreement provisions. I
would also like to acknowledge the united effort of
United Nations agencies and programmes in Colombia
to bring help to the people and areas most affected by
the conflict.
Finally, I would like to recall that almost exactly
one year ago, on 19 January, the parties invited the
Council to oversee the United Nations monitoring of the
ceasefire and weapons lay-down process. In Colombia,
across political lines, that was widely viewed as a
guarantee of success. As the process of implementation
of the Peace Agreement gets under way, the Council’s
attention and unanimous support to the peace process,
and its encouraging voice, will continue to be a very
important source of confidence and strength.
The President: I thank Mr. Arnault for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Mr. Jean Arnault, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Mission in Colombia, for bringing us up to
date. Ukraine welcomes the Secretary-General’s first
report (S/2016/1095) on the implementation of the
Mission’s mandate.
We welcome the new Final Peace Agreement
between the Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas
4/8

11/01/2017

Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC), which
has ended more than 50 years of armed conflict in their
country. The ability of the parties to move forward and
work together during the period between the plebiscite
and the approval of the new peace agreement has
affirmed their determination to ensure a transition to
peace that benefits all Colombians.
There was an extensive debate, which led to the
revision of the agreement; as such, the main concerns
of various sectors of Colombian society were addressed
and the necessary commitment was achieved. It is
now essential that the open dialogue that led to the
agreement continue. The swift implementation of this
historic agreement must remain the main task for all
the parties involved. All political forces and all sectors
of Colombian society must actively participate in this
crucial task. Greater unity around the Peace Agreement
is essential to achieve its objectives, in particular with
respect to the ceasefire and the surrender of weapons,
as well as rural reform, combating illicit drugs and
expanding political participation. The issue of training
and the functioning of the FARC camps, as well as the
implementation of the Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism are fundamental at this stage. In that
regard, we commend the Government’s commitment to
redouble its efforts to address those unique challenges.
We realize that the transition from conflict to peace
will be complicated by social, economic, political
and security difficulties. Given the complexity of the
process, we believe that it is important to maintain
focus on the needs and interests of the children affected
by the conflict, as well as a gender perspective.
Ukraine reiterates its determination to support
the implementation of the Final Peace Agreement,
in accordance with resolutions 2261 (2016) and 2307
(2016). We commend the efforts of the international
actors supporting the implementation of the Peace
Agreement, in particular those Member States that
have provided observers to the United Nations Mission
in Colombia, as well as the role played by the guarantor
and supporting countries during the peace process.
The Security Council should continue to play a
proactive role in supporting the parties as they move
forward with the implementation of the provisions
of the Final Peace Agreement, and in ensuring the
effective functioning of the Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism. We hope that the Colombian experience
of involving the United Nations as the international
17-00716

11/01/2017

The situation in Colombia

component of the tripartite mechanism will become
an instructive success story for the region and for
the Organization.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Swedish presidency for having
included this meeting in the programme of work for
January an issue of such great importance to Colombia,
the American continent and to the international
community in general. I would also like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Jean Arnault, for his thorough briefing.
To begin, I would like to congratulate the
Government of Colombia as well as the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia — Ejército del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) for having given us once again an
example of a commitment to peace in signing a new
Final Peace Agreement on 24 November in Bogotá,
which was ratified by the Colombian Congress, thereby
beginning the process by which the FARC-EP will
lay down its arms. The Agreement is the result of a
successful negotiation that included various national
actors from the political, social and religious sectors, as
well as victims. We wish to extend our congratulations
to them all. We note that the task was not a simple
one, and that there are still many challenges along this
complex path. However, the firm will to conclude the
conflict and to build a stable and lasting peace, which
has been evident in different aspects of the process,
gives us hope that the implementation of the Final
Peace Agreement will also be successful.
The six points of the Agreement are a sign of the
breadth and the complexity of the tasks that remain
ahead. The establishment of the truth and verification
commission for the Final Agreement as well as
the framework plan for the implementation of the
agreements are important measures that were planned
in order to guarantee the implementation of all that was
agreed. We are pleased to note the announcement that
the framework plan will include, as a matter of priority,
the practical and strategic needs of women, and we
congratulate the protagonists of the process for paying
special attention to the fundamental rights of women as
well as of vulnerable social groups.
The latest report (S/2016/837) of the SecretaryGeneral on children and armed conflict in Colombia
indicates that there has been a decrease in the number
of violations committed against children since the
beginning of the peace process in Colombia in 2012. At

S/PV.7859

the same time, it highlights the work that has been done
by the Government of Colombia in order to strengthen
the framework designed to prevent and put an end to
violations committed against children and adolescents,
and also to respond to them via legislation and public
policies. The report points out that the Peace Agreement
has been the most important achievement in the area of
the protection of children. Among its many provisions
in this area, worthy of mention are those that refer to
the reintegration of minors who left FARC-EP camps
at the beginning of the peace talks, as well as those
who who will emerge through the end of the process of
laying down arms. Minors will be the object of special
protection measures that take a differentiated approach
to guarantee the restitution of their rights, prioritizing
their access to health and education, their return to
their families whenever possible, as well as their
final placement in their communities of origin. The
Agreement also establishes that the implementation of
all the provisions refering to children guarantees the
protection of the higher interests of children, as well as
their rights and the prevalence of their rights over the
rights of others.
Uruguay places very high priority on the protection
of civilians in situations of conflict and in post-conflict
situations. We are of the view that the provisions of the
Peace Sgreement in Colombia, among which we find
those referring to the protection of women and children,
can serve as a model for other peace agreements to be
implemented in other parts of the world.
With the same spirit and hope with which a year ago
we adopted resolution 2261 (2016), we take note of the
fact that the FARC-EP and the Government of Colombia
have agreed that they will require the international
support of various countries as well as international
entities when it comes to implementing the agreements.
In that respect, we will accord particular attention to
any request made to the Security Council, as well as
the regional organizations, such as the Union of South
American Nations.
In conclusion, we would like to reaffirm the support
and the commitment of Uruguay to peace in Colombia,
and to highlight the importance of the principle of
sovereignty in each stage of the process, given the fact
that — as we said earlier — this is a process that was
initiated and led by Colombians themselves, and one
that belongs entirely to them. We trust that the peace
agreements in Colombia, along with international
support from the United Nations, will soon become an

17-007165/8

S/PV.7859

The situation in Colombia

example of good practice or a success story, as referred
to in recent days by the Secretary-General, Mr. António
Guterres, and that it can be presented as such.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important briefing.
We would also like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Colombia and Head of the
United Nations Mission in Colombia, Mr. Jean Arnault,
for sharing with the Security Council the first progress
report (S/2016/1095) of the Mission under his charge.
Allow me also to welcome the presence of my sister
the Permanent Representative of Colombia and other
members of her Permanent Mission at this meeting of
the Security Council.
After over half a century of armed conflict, seven
attempts over 34 years to reach a peace agreement, six of
which were unsuccessful, a long path has been followed
by the Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia — Ejército del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) to arrive at the achievement of this
historic Final Peace Agreement in the brethren country
of Colombia. Today Colombia has become an example
for the world. Furthermore, this historic process has
given the Security Council an opportunity to fulfil
the main responsibility that the peoples of the world
have entrusted to it: maintaining international peace
and security.
The signing, on 24 November 2016 in Bogotá, of
the Final Peace Agreement — with all of its necessary
ammendments so that all parties could commit to
a cessation of hostilities and an establishment of a
lasting peace — fills us with hope and satisfaction.
We acknowledge the important contributions of
the brotherly nations that supported the process of
dialogue between the Government of Colombia and the
FARC-EP. There is no doubt that regional cooperation
in resolving conflicts is essential in order to reach
understanding. The Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States (CELAC) has clearly expressed
that and endorsed the peace process. CELAC has also
underscored that
“a definitive end to the conflict in Colombia would
benefit the region, and we reaffirm the principles
agreed to by the Heads of State of CELAC in the
Declaration of Latin America and the Caribbean
as a Zone of Peace, which was adopted in Havana,
Cuba, on 28 and 29 January 2014”.
6/8

11/01/2017

As President Evo Morales Ayma said to his
counterpart His Excellency President Santos Calderón
of Colombia, everyone knows that the peace process
has not been easy, and sustaining the Agreement will
require as much effort as it took to achieve it. Sidelining
the enemies of peace and the warlords who stalk our
peoples will require an outsized effort, and in that
regard we make ourselves available with the greatest
humility. In that regard, and with the same humility, it
is an honour for me to point out that Bolivia is among
the countries contributing a significant number of
observers to the United Nations Mission in Colombia.
We would also like to highlight the importance of
the establishment of a national commission of security
guarantees and the establishment of the national council
of reintegration so that members of the FARC-EP can
lead normal lives within Colombian society. That will
be an important contribution to the objectives of the
cessation of hostilities and the establishment of a lasting
peace. We encourage the United Nations Mission in
Colombia to work closely with both of those entities.
We also take note of the observations presented by
the Secretary-General in his report. We would like to
underscore a number of points that merit the Council’s
attention. First, it is essential to establish conditions for
increasing the flow of information from the parties to
the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism. Secondly,
it is necessary to ensure the necessary logistical support
in order to facilitate the work of the Mechanism. Thirdly,
it is necessary to have support for the verification of the
destruction of dangerous materials and hidden caches
of FARC-EP weapons. Finally, as a third component
of the Mechanism, we should constantly encourage
the development of trust between the members of the
Armed Forces of Colombia and the FARC-EP.
I would like to conclude by congratulating the
Government of Colombia and the FARC-EP, as well
as the United Nations Mission in Colombia, for the
commitment that they have demonstrated in building a
society that can develop peaceful coexistence. As Evo
Morales Ayma has said,
“Dialogue and negotiations have triumphed in
Colombia. Peace has won, and we have all won
because of that. We extend congratulations
to Colombia”.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Jean Arnault
for his strong commitment.
17-00716

11/01/2017

The situation in Colombia

As this is the first time that, as a member, we
participate in the Security Council in a meeting with
the delegation of Colombia, we would like to take
this opportunity to commend the agreement signed in
Colombia and to encourage all stakeholders to contribute
to peace and to strengthen efforts so that peace
dividends will be delivered by the agreed deadlines.
On 15 and 16 December 2016, President Santos
Calderón attended the International Conference on the
Rule of Law and Security in Latin America, organized
in Rome. On that occasion, he met Italy’s President
Mattarella, Prime Minister Gentiloni Silveri and he
heard of Italy’s strong commitment to assuring the
success of the peace process in Colombia. On that
occasion, three bilateral agreements on judiciary
cooperation were signed. We are two countries that have
a lot of know-how with respect to fighting international
criminal organizations.
I want to point out something very important to
us regarding the recruitment and use of children in
the armed conflict. Italy commends the Government
of Colombia for structurally including the separation
of children in the framework of the Final Peace
Agreement. We believe that such an approach could
establish best practices and serve as a good example
for other countries that face similar challenges. We
also welcome the agreement in May 2016, which laid
out a way forward for the separation for children under
the age of 15 and for a special programme for the
restoration of rights and the reintegration of all children
under the age of 18. We encourage moving forward
with its implementation. Italy is willing to support
the Government of Colombia in that endeavour. We
are ready to cooperate with the Council in the vested
interest of its people. Congratulations to Colombia.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as the representative of Sweden.
I would just like to echo the last point by the
representative of Italy, which related to the way that
the peace agreements have dealt with, and how the
Colombian Government deals with, the particular issue
of the children.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
After all those very encouraging and supporting
statements, I now give the floor to the representative
of Colombia.

S/PV.7859

Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Jean Arnault and the members of
the Security Council. As you just said, Mr. President,
it is very encouraging to not only receive the briefing
of Mr. Arnault and the report (S/2016/1095) of the
Secretary-General, but also to receive the support that
Colombia has always felt from the Security Council
since we started along this long path a year ago.
On 2 October 2016 — I think it was a surprise
for everyone — the referendum voted “no” by a
narrow difference. This had an obvious consequence
of a delay of the beginning of the actions that were
proceeding for the implementation of what we had
agreed upon. However, and I believe that it required a
huge commitment and singular perseverence, it was an
opportunity that opened the door to President Santos
Calderón to initiate a national dialogue to conclude a
new peace agreement, which we were finally able to
celebrate on 24 November 2016. It incorporated a good
number of the changes that were based on the proposals
of the political leaders of the “no” movement. The new
Final Peace Agreement was ratified by the National
Congress 30 November 2016.
The first day of December 2016 was set as the date
to start the demobilization schedule — to group the excombatants of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) into
temporary territories while they transitioned to the
agreed upon zones — as well as for the handing over
and collection of weapons, which must be completed
within a 180 days.
Thanks to a spirit of great commitment on the
part of the Colombian legislature, the Constitutional
Court approved the fast-track. The approved period
of six months has made it possible for the legislature
to introduce six important legal reforms — the first
of which was mentioned by Mr. Arnault, namely, the
amnesty law for those members of the FARC who have
not committed crimes against humanity, as well as a
subseqeunt law on a special peace jurisdiction, both of
which flowed from the special capacities conferred on
Colombia by the Constitutional Court.
The personal commitment of President Santos
Calderón to go to a gathering site and meet with the
tri-party mechanism, along with the Foreign Minister
and Mr. Arnaud and his entire team, is another way in
which we will manage to overcome the time that — well,

17-007167/8

S/PV.7859

The situation in Colombia

11/01/2017

I do not want to say “lost” but, rather, the setback of
the referendum. I shouldl ike to inform the Council
that, following President Santos Calderón’s visit to
the field, a commitment was ratified by all the parties
involved — the Government, the FARC-EP and the
United Nations Mission in Colombia — to complying
with the 180-day period, with modifications and
adjustments, as the Mission has mentioned, in order to
ensure the handing over of all weapons.

including the letters of assist, all of which can sometimes
take a great deal of time and be an impediment. It is
important to find a flexible mechanism to provide
speedy assistance from the Secretariat.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
isued on 23 December 2016. I thank Mr. Arnault and
his entire team. It was not an easy task. There are in fact
two Colombias: the urban Colombia, which members
are familiar with and which is developed and thriving,
and another rural Colombia, which is perhaps neglected
and, owing to the conflict, is often very difficult to
reach. We trust that, with the arrival of security thanks
to the deployment of the police and the Colombian
army; with the modifications and construction in
the new zones, the majority of which, as members
have been able to see for themselves, have no roads,
drinking water, electricity or any sort of infrastructure;
with the establishment of the Mission’s structures; and
with the deployment of international observers and the
investigation of incidents by the Mechanism, which has
in the past been a behind-the-scenes task — we have
managed to move forward in ensuring the alignment
of the three components: the rebel forces, the United
Nations and the national police. However, implementing
the ideas from Havana and from the negotiation period
was not an easy task, as we had to actually implement
them in the field, which owing to the tripartite nature
of the Mechanism, occurs sui generis and is perhaps
a disappointment. Despite the progress, we must
acknowledge the difficulties in the implementation of
the Mechanism itself.

As I said at the beginning of my statement, the
assessment of the first three months is generally
favourable. The Mechanism, as it has been designed,
generates trust among the parties. The spirit that
characterized the Havana negotiations must be
reflected at both the regional and local levels. We are
sure that we will be able to continue to count on the
support of the Security Council and the new SecretaryGeneral. I am sure that, based on the conversation he
had with President Santos Calderón, as well as in future
conversations, that major commitment will continue,
including, of course, the commitment of the United
Nations Mission.

In that context, it is important not to lose the
momentum and commitment shown by all. We must to
intensify our efforts — by the Government, the FARCEP and the United Nations — to conclude as soon as
possible the establishment and structure of the Mission
in order to begin activities that have to do with the
specific task that the Council entrusted to the Mission
related to the laying down of weapons, including the
technical installations that are required and that will
help us comply with the Council’s mandate in the
agreed timetable. I would like to emphasize that we
need to conclude as soon as possible the administrative,
logistical and legal aspects that are still outstanding,

The President: I thank the representative of
Colombia for her very personal dedication to a Colombia
in peace.

8/8

Colombia believes that the professionalism and
neutrality of the Mission’s members must be maintained
at all times in order to fully fulfil the mandate that was
entrusted to them.

The support of the Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States has been very important. At
yesterday’s debate (see S/PV.7857) we talked about the
importance of the commitment of regional organizations.
This is a clear example of how, with observers and forces
from our region, and with empowerment rooted in a
decision taken by the Latin American and Caribbean
region that this process belongs to us, the oldest and last
conflict in our hemisphere has been overcome. Amid
so many concerns before the Council and before us as
Member States, Colombia is pleased to bring news of
peace to the Security Council.

Let me also take this opportunity to once again
stress the importance, in an open meeting like this
before the international community, that we all come
out in strong support for the implementation of this
peace agreement.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.45 p.m.
17-00716
