S/PV.8113

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8113th meeting

Monday, 27 November 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cardi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Italy)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skau
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-39785 (E)
*1739785*

S/PV.8113

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Expression of sympathy concerning the terrorist
attack in North Sinai, Egypt
The President: On behalf of the members of the
Security Council, I would like to condemn in the
strongest terms possible the unconscionable terrorist
attack in North Sinai, Egypt, which targeted civilians at
a place of worship. The members of the Security Council
express their deepest condolences to the families of
those killed and their sympathy to the people and the
Government of Egypt. I ask those present to now rise in
a moment of silence for the victims.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria, to participate in this meeting. Mr. de
Mistura is joining the meeting via video-teleconference
from Geneva.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. De Mistura.
Mr. De Mistura: I am briefing members of the
Council from Geneva as we prepare for the eighth
round of the United Nations convened intra-Syrian
talks. Allow me to explain how we got here over the
past month and decided on the approach to the talks at
the moment.
Last month (see S/PV.8076), as those present
will remember, I said that after Raqqa and after Deir
ez-Zor — and let us now perhaps also say after the
Government of Syria recently defeated the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in its last stronghold
of Abu Kamal — the operation to combat and defeat
the territorial foothold of ISIL in Syria would have
completed its main tasks and there would be a moment
of truth to bring about a real political process. I still
believe that the moment of truth has arrived, although I
want to register my serious concern over the tremendous
2/7

27/11/2017

escalation of violence in eastern Ghouta in recent
weeks and the ongoing restrictions of humanitarian
access in that area. As ISIL is being defeated, neither
side should turn their guns back on the de-escalation
areas. I therefore would like to urge, together with
those present, the Astana guarantors to address those
challenges in order to avoid the problem reaching the
de-escalation areas.
With respect to the talks, in order to prepare for
real talks in Geneva I have been calling and asking for
real diplomacy. My messages have essentially been the
following. First, the Government delegation should
come ready to negotiate. Secondly, we need a united
opposition delegation with common positions that will
come ready to negotiate. Thirdly, negotiations will take
place in Geneva and with no preconditions. Fourthly,
they should initially negotiate a work plan, focusing on
the essential 12 living principles and the constitutional
and electoral issues with a view towards implementing
resolution 2254 (2015). Fifthly, all other initiatives
should support the United Nations mediation process
that the Security Council has mandated that the United
Nations alone conduct.
We have seen signals on all those points, and we
will now see what happens in Geneva. I note with great
interest that in Danang, Sochi and Riyadh, important
meetings have taken place that might help us, in my
opinion, to begin a genuine negotiation process in
Geneva. International players are clearly looking for
some common ground based on the implementation
of resolution 2254 (2015), resulting from our urging
Syrians to begin to find some common ground, too.
In Danang, President Putin of Russia and President
Trump of the United States affirmed that the political
process
“[m]ust include the full implementation of United
Nations Security Council 2254 (2015), including
constitutional reform and free and fair elections
under the United Nations supervision, held to the
highest international standards of transparency,
with all Syrians, including members of the diaspora,
eligible to participate”.
The statement of the two Presidents followed their
taking note of what they termed
“President Assad’s recent commitment to the
Geneva process and constitutional reform and
17-39785

27/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

elections as called for under United Nations
Security Council resolution 2254 (2015)”.
As a mediator, I also noted that President Al-Assad
said in Sochi, after meeting President Putin on
24 November, “We do not want to look back. We will
accept and talk with anyone, who is really interested in
a political settlement”.
Notwithstanding those potential interesting
and frankly, important signals, when my Deputy,
Ambassador Ramsay, held consultations in Damascus
with the Government over the weekend, the Government
had not yet confirmed its participation in Geneva, but
indicated that we would be hearing from it soon. Last
night, we received a message that the Government
would not travel to Geneva today. Naturally, we hope,
and indeed expect, that the Government will be on its
way shortly, particularly in light of President Al-Assad’s
commitment to President Putin when they met in Sochi.
Turning our attention to the opposition, last week
over three intensive days — and I witnessed at least one
and a half, if not two of them — an expanded opposition
conference was convened in Riyadh. The participants
reflected components of the Syrian mosaic and the
ideological diversity within the Syrian opposition
and society. Resolution 2254 (2015) mentions three
meetings by name: Riyadh, Cairo and Moscow. They
were all present.
Armed groups controlling territory inside Syria,
including those involved in Astana and the various
de-escalation arrangements, were active participants in
Riyadh. There was finally significant participation by
women. There was a strong presence of independents,
including activists, business people and tribal figures.
Several parties based inside Syria were actually
represented through their own political umbrellas. As
the Riyadh initiative was clearly designed within the
framework of advancing resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva process, which speaks clearly of three by name
and others, I was glad to attend it to urge the participants
to move ahead. I therefore took note of the international
attendees at the opening of the conference, including
Russian President’s Special Envoy Lavrentiev.
After I left to travel to Moscow for useful
consultations, Foreign Minister Lavrov and I were both
active in assisting the efforts of Saudi Foreign Minister
Al-Jubeir, whose determined efforts we really should be
appreciating in order to obtain the outcome that we saw.
The Syrian High Negotiations Commission formed in

S/PV. 8113

Riyadh is arriving in Geneva as we speak. I expect
all arrivals from various locations to be complete by
tomorrow morning. I publicly noted that participation
in Riyadh was an unequivocal rejection of terrorism
and an affirmation that the only solution to the crisis is
political and not military.
I noted that a united opposition delegation was
formed, its composition reflecting that of conference
participation. I noted that the delegation was tasked
to negotiate in Geneva without any preconditions,
to discuss all issues on the agenda and to use the
implementation of relevant United Nations resolutions
as the sole reference for the negotiations. Assuming
that both parties arrive in Geneva, we will seek to assist
them in commencing serious discussions and, I hope,
negotiations. I should like to make one thing in particular
clear — we will not accept any precondition from either
party. Let us be clear what a precondition is. It is when
one party says “I will not begin to negotiate with the
other side unless they do or say the following …”. I
hope that both parties hear this message.
I will also assess, as a mediator should do, the
parties’ engagement by what they do in the room, how
positively they engage on a work plan, and whether
they show genuine readiness to discuss and negotiate,
regardless of their publicly stated positions on any
issue. We know there will always be differences; that
is why negotiations are needed. All sides have the
right to express their opinions, which may not be
pleasant for the other to hear, as long as they do not put
preconditions or refuse to talk to the other side. That is
what negotiations are all about.
Resolution 2254 (2015) is a guideline for this
endeavor. What, then, will the work plan look like,
more or less? We can get an idea by working backwards
from the end goal of resolution 2254 (2015). Members
will recall that that resolution culminates in the
end goal of free and fair elections held under United
Nations supervision and meeting the highest standards
of accountability and transparency, with all Syrians,
including members of the Diaspora, eligible to vote.
This includes refugees, of course; there can be no
exclusion. The elections must be preceded by the
popular ratification of a new constitution. The draft
constitution should be prepared through an inclusive
process and according to an inclusive schedule set, as
resolution 2254 (2015) says, via a process in Geneva.
Clearly, the drafting and approval process must be
include everyone. A national dialogue and/or national

17-397853/7

S/PV.8113

The situation in the Middle East

27/11/2017

conference would be important components of the
overall process.

problems on the ground and their own insights and ideas
in order to strengthen our ongoing mediation efforts.

Syria’s engagement in and negotiation on these
matters should proceed on the basis of resolution
2254 (2015) and be guided by the 12 living principles
developed during the process, which project a clear
vision for the future of Syria that can be shared by all.
I believe that, with good will, it should be possible to
bridge the gaps regarding these principles. If possible,
we will also begin to explore issues pertaining to baskets
1 and 4: governance and counter-terrorism, and security
governance and confidence-building measures.

I note the initiative of France to bring together in
Geneva representatives of the five permanent members
of the Security Council for a preparatory meeting
tomorrow, in which I have been invited to participate
and give further detail on the agenda of this round. I
warmly welcome any expression of support by the
international community, including in particular the
Security Council, for efforts to implement resolution
2254 (2015) through a United Nations-led political
process in Geneva.

I will engage all those in Geneva in discussion
on all of this. I will share with them thoughts on and
a work plan for the negotiation process. And as I
do so, I will remind them that the time has come to
demonstrate, not to us, but to the Syrian people, that
they care about their survival, their lives and the lives
of their loved ones through immediate, unhindered,
sustained humanitarian access, medical evacuations
from the besieged areas, a willingness to address the
plight of detainees, abductees and missing persons, and
a concrete belief in negotiations on a political process.

As Council members are aware, the Russian
Federation has continued to pursue plans for a large
gathering related to Syria, on a date in the relatively
near future to be confirmed. It has been reported that
the Presidents of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Russian Federation and Turkey met recently in Sochi.
The Russian Federation has indeed sought United
Nations support for this conference. I have been in
continuous and open consultation with them. I have
also continued to assess the views of Syrians and the
wider international community, including all members
of the Security Council, bearing in mind the mandate
entrusted to the United Nations by the Council. It is
therefore, as far as I can see, premature for me to say
anything regarding this initiative at this stage. I will
continue to view this proposal and all other initiatives
through the same prism — does it contribute to effective
United Nations-led intra-Syrian negotiations in Geneva
to implement resolution 2254 (2015)?

Throughout the process, various ideas have
emerged on a wider gathering of Syrian stakeholders.
Indeed, the Geneva process itself does call for such
a gathering of Syrians, and I have been building the
foundation for it by inviting Syrians from all walks
of life, from inside and outside, to participate. In this
context, I also wish to stress that more than 200 — I
repeat, 200 — civil society actors will be engaged here
in Geneva in the United Nations-led political process
over the coming weeks as part of the intra-Syrian talks.
In the coming days, the Women’s Advisory Board will
be fully engaged once again, just as I hope it will be in
the real negotiations.
I will engage a group of Syrian legal and
constitutional experts and hear their advice and
expertise. I will engage with a civil society organization
with human rights expertise, including on detainees,
abductees and missing persons. Aided by technology,
we will be able to get in touch with refugee community
leaders in Lebanon, Jordan and Turkey, and with civil
society actors working in hard-to-reach and besieged
areas. All of this will be done from here in Geneva.
I count on their commitment to the political process,
sense of citizenship and real contact with the real
4/7

Syria has been at war for the past six years. Half
of its population has fled their homes. Reconstruction
will cost at least $250 billion. There have been myriad
obstacles to this settlement: a constellation of actors, a
variety of shifting agendas, and a real and continuing
danger of soft but concrete fragmentation of Syrian
territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence. We
have also witnessed the largest terror group in history,
bringing terrorists from over 100 countries, and the
use of force against civilians on a horrific scale. All
of that has transpired before our eyes over the past six
years. This crisis — one of the worst in the history of
the United Nations — now has the real potential to
move towards a genuine political process. A clearer
map of the de-escalation, ceasefire and de-confliction
arrangement has emerged, largely enabled by the Astana
and Amman processes. We now see the emergence of
international consensus. We must begin to stitch the
17-39785

27/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

process together into concrete results, thereby enabling
Syrians to determine their own future freely. The united
support of the international community, centred in the
Council, will be vital for negotiations to move forward
in a concrete way.
The President: I thank Mr. De Mistura for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish): As we did with the delegation of France in
October, we commend you, Mr. President, on your
decision to hold this meeting as an open briefing.
We encourage other Council members and the new
members that will join the Security Council next year
to continue with this practice.
As we do every month, we would like to thank
Special Envoy Mr. Staffan de Mistura for the
information he has provided us and for all the work that
he does in the intervals between the Council meetings
and the rounds of negotiations in Geneva and Astana.
He and his team continue to work to achieve a political
solution to the crisis in Syria. His unshakable optimism
and determination to achieve a political solution to the
Syrian crisis by implementing the road map provided
for in resolution 2254 (2015) is genuinely praiseworthy.
Once again, we express to him our gratitude for his
excellent work and that of his entire team. We hope that
the steadfastness and the single-minded commitment
to achieve the eagerly sought-after goal prevails until
we are all able to celebrate peace in Syria and have
an opportunity to reunite and rebuild the country and
thereby alleviate the suffering of its afflicted people.
We trust in his efforts, but the Council must also live
up to its obligations and responsibilities and support his
work resolutely and must, in particular, unequivocally
and constantly assert that all the actors who have been
involved in the conflict must understand that a solution
to the crisis can be achieved only through a negotiated
political solution with the widest possible participation
of all Syrians.
The situation we see today is very different from
what we saw exactly one year ago in Syria, when the
siege or the liberation of Aleppo, depending on one’s
perspective, generated levels of violence, destruction
and death that had rarely been seen before in this long
crisis. We cannot deny that flash points of violence
continue to exist in Syria, but it is clear that the situation

S/PV. 8113

on the ground has changed radically, through the
establishment of de-escalation areas, local ceasefires
and a significant reduction in the levels of fighting and
armed clashes.
We must first and foremost commend the almost
total loss of power and territory on the part of terrorist
groups, in particular of Da’esh, which terrorized Syrians
during the past three years and committed unimaginable
atrocities against civilians in Raqqa, Deir ez-Zor and
other areas. Sooner or later, accountability for those
war crimes and crimes against humanity will have
to become a reality, just as with what is beginning to
happen in Iraq. There is no doubt that in recent months
important events have taken place for the settlement of
this conflict and the achievement of the eagerly awaited
political transition.
Secondly, in addition to the facts already mentioned,
the military upper hand of the Syrian Government over
the dozens of armed groups that it has been fighting
since 2011 is a fact that will make it possible to move to
the next stage, which must be a political and diplomatic
stage and not a military one. A victory, if it happens, will
be one of the most pyrrhic and sad military victories in
history, since the human, social and economic cost of
this conflict has been, and will continue to be, of titanic
proportions, not only for Syria but for other countries
of the region that have been involved in this conflict.
As in many other cases, this was an avoidable
conflict. It would have been entirely possible, six years
ago, to hold negotiations on elections, constitutional
reforms and other elements that are on the negotiating
table today, yet the influence of the powerful prevented
it. Had that happened, Syria would have avoided
400,000 deaths, its complete destruction and the tragedy
of having to save entire generations from the poverty
and the psychological trauma that Syrian children and
young people are suffering from today.
Uruguay continues to support every effort and
initiative that contributes to ensuring the cessation of
hostilities, humanitarian access and the continuation
of the political process lead by the Special Envoy. We
reiterate that there will be no military solution to this
conflict and that it will be possible to end this horrific
war only through a Syrian-led political transition process
and with United Nations mediation, in accordance with
the road map provided for in resolution 2254 (2015).
We appreciate the recent efforts that have been
made to unite the Syrian opposition under a single bloc

17-397855/7

S/PV.8113

The situation in the Middle East

and to ensure the genuine commitment of the Syrian
Government to the Geneva process. We congratulate
Mr. De Mistura on the progress he has achieved in
his visits to Riyadh and Moscow, and in particular
on his insistence on the participation of women in the
delegations representing the opposition. The Astana
process has paved the way for a successful effort to
reduce clashes following the implementation of various
de-escalation of violence areas.
We interpret as a positive sign that the press release
of the three Presidents in Sochi agrees with the Geneva
process that resolution 2254 (2015) should serve as the
ultimate guide and that the goal should be inclusive
general elections under United Nations auspices and
constitutional reform in the country. We call on the
three guarantors of the Sochi process to finalize the
details of the agreement in order to understand the
implications with regard to humanitarian access in the
de-activation areas, the free movement of people and
confidence-building measures, such as the release of
those who have been kidnapped and detained and the
identification of disappeared people, all of which will
lead to improving the conditions for a strengthened
political transition process. The defeat of Da’esh will no
doubt contribute to the acceleration of that momentum.
We emphasize that it is essential that de-escalation
areas have a transitional status so that the unity and
the territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic can
be preserved and new tensions that could lead to new
armed conflict in the future can be avoided.
In conclusion, we are concerned that humanitarian
access continues to encounter serious difficulties, even
under circumstances that are relatively better than
those that we faced months ago, owing essentially to
the reduction in the levels of violence.
We wish Mr. De Mistura every success during the
eighth round of intra-Syrian negotiations, which will
begin tomorrow, and the negotiations that will be held
in December. We hope that they will once and for all
lead to a discussion of substantive issues, especially
with regard to the process on a constitution and the
convening of elections in Syria.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, for his briefing. We once again reiterate
to him our support and gratitude for the work he
is undertaking.
6/7

27/11/2017

My delegation recognizes the efforts that the
people and the Government of Syria are carrying out
in the fight against Da’esh. We reiterate our vigorous
condemnation of all acts of terrorism and underscore
that any such act is by its very nature criminal and
unjustifiable, irrespective of where, when and by
whom it is committed. In that regard, we believe it is
important to take all the measures necessary to avoid in
the short term the re-organization or emergence of new
terrorist groups. We stress that it is imperative to pool our
efforts to ensure the full implementation of resolution
2254 (2015) and achieve the four key objectives of the
Geneva negotiations, namely, combating terrorism
and ensuring governance, a new constitution and new
elections to be held under the supervision of the United
Nations. We believe that any unilateral military action
is totally illegal and contravenes the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. Moreover, such actions
undermine the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Syrian Arab Republic and jeopardize the roll-out
of the road map put together under the framework of
resolution 2254 (2015).
We welcome all the meetings that have been held at
various levels aimed at a stable peace, and we encourage
all the relevant stakeholders to align their efforts to
achieve the political decisions that are urgently needed.
In that regard, we highlight the agreements reached
this month by the Presidents of Russia and the United
States on the sidelines of the Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation meeting. We underscore their commitment
to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria, to
a reduction of violence and to compliance with the
ceasefire agreements and conditions that will make
possible a lasting political solution to the conflict.
We also welcome the memorandum of principles
reached in Amman on 8 November among the Kingdom
of Jordan, the Russian Federation and the United States,
which reinforced the ceasefire initiative to continue
efforts to reduce and eliminate the presence of foreign
terrorist fighters and foreign combatants in Syria in
order to guarantee lasting peace.
We highlight the meeting hosted in Sochi on
22 November, whose outcomes and commitments
between Russia, Iran and Turkey reaffirm the resolve
to eliminate terrorist organizations, such as Da’esh
and the Al-Nusra Front. Such commitments will help
pave the way to reduce violenc and halt the flow of
refugees and allow us to begin the work to ensure the
17-39785

27/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

safe and dignified return of refugees and internally
displaced persons.
We welcome, and are following, the outcomes of the
latest meeting in Riyadh, where the opposition reached
agreements that could contribute to a peaceful solution
to this stage of the conflict. We also welcome the
efforts made in the framework of the current meetings
in Astana, which to date have become an important
aspect of the process of setting up de-escalation areas,
and thereby serving as a way of reducing violence
and ensuring stability in Syria. We hope that in the
upcoming rounds of the Astana process in December
we will be able to forge new agreements to benefit the
Syrian population.
We also look forward to the upcoming fresh rounds
of the Geneva consultations, where the implementation
of resolution 2254 (2015) should continue to serve as
the road map, all the more so if there is a commitment
on the part of the parties concerned to move further
along that path.

S/PV. 8113

Nevertheless, we believe that it is also important to
make headway on the issue of detainees, hostages and
missing persons. That is a subject on which much more
needs to be done. It is also an issue that must feature
on the agenda of the upcoming Geneva meeting and in
further upcoming rounds of talks.
In conclusion, we reiterate our view that the only
way of resolving this conflict is through an inclusive
political process, which is led by and for the benefit of the
Syrian people. That will allow for a peaceful resolution
of the dispute between all parties involved. Such a
political transition must also safeguard the sovereignty,
unity, territorial integrity and independence of Syria
through the means provided for under the Charter of
the United Nations.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite the Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

17-397857/7
