S/2017/713

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 August 2017
Original: English

Letter dated 15 August 2017 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Following the deaths of Ms. Zaida Catalán and Mr. Michael Sharp, members
of the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in March 2017, a
United Nations Security Management System Board of Inquiry was convened to
establish the facts related to the incident. The Board of Inquiry was also tasked with
evaluating the United Nations response to the incident, reviewing the application
and adequacy of relevant security risk management procedures, rules and
regulations, and providing recommendations on actions that sho uld be taken to
avoid such incidents in the future.
By this letter I wish to transmit to you the executive summary of the report of
the Board of Inquiry, which provides a synopsis of the findings and
recommendations contained therein. A copy of this executive summary will also be
provided to the families of Ms. Catalán and Mr. Sharp, and to the Permanent
Missions to the United Nations of Chile, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Sweden and the United States of America.
While the Secretariat looks forward to the opportunity to brief the members of
the Security Council on the report of the Board of Inquiry, I wish to note that the
Board has indicated that further investigations and judicial processes would be
required to fully ascertain the identity, affiliations and motives of the individuals
involved in the killing of Mr. Sharp and Ms. Catalán.
In this regard, I intend to discuss with officials of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and consult with Council members regarding the establishment of a
follow-on mechanism and its mandate.
In its report, the Board of Inquiry also provided recommendations on actions
that the Organization could consider to strengthen the management and support
arrangements of Groups of Experts reporting to the Security Council and its
sanctions committees, as well the manner in which Groups of Experts should
comply with the requirements of the applicable security policies and procedures
established under the United Nations Security Management System. The Secretariat
is currently reviewing these recommendations, some of which carry financial
implications, with a view to developing a plan for their implementation, as
appropriate.
I wish, once again, to pay tribute to the dedication of Ms. Catalán and
Mr. Sharp to the United Nations, in the service of peace in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, to which they paid the ultimate price.
(Signed) António Guterres

17-14115 (E)

220817

*1714115*

S/2017/713

Annex
Report of the United Nations Security Management System Board
of Inquiry on the critical security incident resulting in the deaths
of two members of the Group of Experts in Kananga, Democratic
Republic of the Congo
Executive summary

Introduction
1.
On 24 April 2017, the Under-Secretary-General for Safety and Security, in
consultation with the Executive Office of the Secretary-General and the UnderSecretaries-General for Political and Legal Affairs, convened the United Nations
Security Management System Board of Inquiry on the critical security incident
resulting in the deaths of two members of the Group of Experts in Kananga,
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Mr. Michael Sharp (United States of America)
and Ms. Zaida Catalán (dual national of Chile and Sweden) were members of the
Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Mr. Sharp was the
Coordinator of the Group and also one of the two designated armed group experts,
while Ms. Catalán was the humanitarian issues expert.
2.
The Group of Experts was mandated by Security Council resolution 1533
(2004). The mandate of the Group of Experts was subsequently renewed, inter alia
by resolution 2293 (2016), by which the Experts were directed to provide
information to the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) on,
among other issues, violations of human rights or international humanitarian law;
support for armed groups or criminal networks involved in the illicit exploitation of
natural resources; recruiting or use of children in armed conflict; designation of
individuals or entities involved in non-compliance with the sanctions; and attacks
on the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).

Board of Inquiry
3.
The Board of Inquiry comprised former (retired) members of the Department
of Safety and Security, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Political Affairs. Mr. Gregory Starr, the former Un der-SecretaryGeneral for Safety and Security, was the Chair of the Board. The Board operated
with full independence and impartiality.
4.
The terms of reference of the Board included the review of all preliminary
investigation reports, establishment of the facts related to the incident, including
circumstances leading to the incident and the identification (to the extent possible)
of the attackers, evaluation of all actions taken by the United Nations in response to
the incident, determination of whether relevant security risk management
procedures, rules and regulations were followed properly and whether they were
adequate, and providing recommendations concerning any actions, steps or
measures that should be taken by the United Nations Security Management System
to avoid such incidents in the future.
5.
The Board of Inquiry commenced its work on 8 May 2017 in New York by
reviewing preliminary investigation reports, records relevant to the activities of the
Group of Experts and their mandate and interviewing relevant United Nations
officials at Headquarters. From 6 to 17 June 2017, the Board travelled to the
2/6

17-14115

S/2017/713

Democratic Republic of the Congo including to Kinshasa, Goma and Kananga, to
conduct further interviews and review relevant information. The Board submit ted its
final report on 2 August 2017.
6.
In the course of its inquiry, the Board interviewed and obtained witness
statements from United Nations officials and non-United Nations personnel, had
discussions with representatives of the Government of the Demo cratic Republic of
the Congo, met with officials from eight Permanent Missions of Member States to the
United Nations, and conducted discussions with non-United Nations organizations
and national investigation authorities of the Member States concerned. The Board also
met with the families of the two Experts who were killed.
7.
A Board of Inquiry is an analytical and managerial tool to review investigation
reports, establish facts related to critical security incidents involving organizations
of the United Nations Security Management System, including whether the incident
occurred as a result of the acts or omissions of any individual(s). The purpose of a
Board of Inquiry is to identify gaps or deficiencies in security risk management
policies, procedures or operations, to strengthen security risk management controls
(lessons learned) and to improve accountability for security risk management. A
Board of Inquiry is neither an investigative nor a judicial review mechanism.

Facts related to the incident established by the Board
8.
On 8 March 2017, Mr. Sharp and Ms. Catalán arrived in the city of Kananga in
Kasai Central Province, Democratic Republic of the Congo, via a United Nations
humanitarian air service flight from Goma, North Kivu Province. Their visit
followed a previous trip to Kananga in January 2017. The primary purpose of their
visit, in accordance with their mandate, was to gather information on armed groups,
inquire into sources of violence in the Kasai provinces, and look into reports of
purported use of children in conflict.
9.
On 11 March, Mr. Sharp and Ms. Catalán met with a small group of people
presenting themselves as having connections with the Kamuina Nsapu militia. The
meeting led to a decision by the two Experts to travel the next day through parts of
Kasai Province to the town of Bunkonde for meetings with the Kamuina Nsapu
militia leaders in that area. An audio recording of the meeting was reviewed by the
Board.
10. On the morning of 12 March, the two Experts departed their hotel in Kananga
en route to the town of Bunkonde (90 km south-east of Kananga) in furtherance of
their investigation. They were accompanied by a locally hired Congolese citizen
who served as their interpreter. They travelled on motorcycles driven by three
locally hired Congolese citizens.
11. The Board was informed that the two Experts and the four Congolese persons
passed through two Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo
checkpoints on the way to Bunkonde, and two Kamuina Nsapu militia checkpoint s
thereafter. Sources reported that a militia group gathered near the Moyo River
crossing close to the village of Moyo Musuila on the route to Bunkonde and fired a
shotgun to stop the motorcycles, wounding one of the drivers.
12. Before arriving at their destination, the two Experts and their party were
accosted by persons who appeared to be members of a local militia group. This
militia group killed Mr. Sharp and Ms. Catalán near the village of Moyo Musuila, a
location approximately 10 to 15 km from the to wn of Bunkonde. These facts were
established on the basis of a video recording of the incident by a member of the

17-14115

3/6

S/2017/713

militia group. There are reports that the Congolese interpreter and the three
motorcycle drivers were also killed, but their bodies have not b een found to date.
13. On the basis of information from witnesses, 10 individuals seen in the video
have been identified. There remains a lack of additional physical or forensic
evidence of the involvement of individuals in the attack beyond the video. The
United Nations has provided all relevant information and evidence in its possession
to the national authorities. At the time of the issuance of the Board’s report, the
Congolese authorities had arrested two men who appeared in the video. The
Congolese authorities had also arrested 10 men who did not appear in the video but
who are believed to be members of the militia group involved. The Board was
informed that proceedings against the suspects were being conducted in a military
court because the military prosecutor has jurisdiction over crimes committed in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo involving the use of firearms. The Board was
also informed that Kasai Central Province had been declared a military zone by the
authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and that the military prosecutor
in Kananga has taken the lead in the investigation.

Facts subsequent to the incident established by the Board
14. By nightfall on 12 March, it was confirmed that Mr. Sharp and Ms. Catalán
had not returned from their trip, and repeated attempts to contact them were
unsuccessful. United Nations Headquarters and senior mission staff members were
immediately informed. On the morning of 13 March, United Nations crisis
management procedures were activated, and the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as well as the Embassies and Permanent Missions of Sweden
and the United States and subsequently Chile were apprised of the situation
involving the two missing Experts. 1
15. From 13 to 28 March, MONUSCO conducted a search for the two missing
Experts. The Uruguay Battalion in Tshimbulu was dispatched on the morning of
13 March with additional resources immediately mobilized in Kinshasa, Goma,
Kananga and Headquarters in New York. The Uruguay Battalion con ducted both air
and ground patrols in the Bunkonde area starting on Tuesday, 14 March. In the
course of the search efforts, additional formed units of Tanzanian Special Forces,
helicopters, communications equipment, and other additional resources were flow n
into Kananga to bolster the search operation. The difficult terrain made it necessary
for the ground patrols to search on foot, and they encountered numerous armed
elements, some of them belligerent.
16. A dedicated information management unit comprising staff from the mission’s
Joint Operations Centre and Joint Mission Analysis Centre was established for
gathering, analysing and sharing information for the search effort.
17. On 27 March, a shallow grave with two bodies, one male and the other female,
appearing to be Caucasian, was discovered. The site was secured overnight by
United Nations forces and the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Swedish and United States Embassies in Kinshasa were informed.
On 28 March, forensic officers of the police component of MONUSCO exhumed
the bodies and transported them to the United Nations compound in Kananga. On
29 March, the two bodies were identified as those of Mr. Sharp and Ms. Catalán. On
29 March, the families of Mr. Sharp and Ms. Catalán were informed of the positive
identification of the bodies by a senior United Nations official in the presence of a
stress counsellor.
__________________
1

4/6

The Security Council was also notified of the situation on 13 March.
17-14115

S/2017/713

18. On 1 April, following a United Nations ceremony in their honour, the remains
of Mr. Sharp and Ms. Catalán were transferred by United Nations aircraft to
Entebbe, Uganda, for autopsies and embalming procedures. On 2 April,
Ms. Catalán’s autopsy was conducted in Kampala. On 4 April, Mr. Sharp’s autopsy
was conducted in Kampala. Following the autopsies, the remains of Mr. Sharp and
Ms. Catalán were repatriated to the United States and Sweden.

Deliberations and conclusions of the Board
19. The Board found that a group of Congolese, likely militia members from Kasai
Central Province, was responsible for the deaths of Mr. Sharp and Ms. Catalán and
was likely also responsible for the deaths of the Congolese translator and the three
motorcycle drivers. It also found that there was a reasonable likelihood that the
killings were committed after consultation with other local t ribal actors. The Board
noted that investigative support by United Nations police to the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as well as investigative activities by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo provided information that led to the
identification of the individuals in the video recording. The Board held that without
further investigation and the necessary judicial processes, the identity, affiliations
and motives of the group that participated in the killing of Mr. Sharp and
Ms. Catalán cannot be fully established, but the video recording leaves no doubt
that Mr. Sharp and Ms. Catalán were murdered.
20. The Board was informed of several alternate causes of the incident. It is the
judgment of the Board that information circulating regarding the possible
involvement of various government individuals or organizations does not provide
proof of intent or motive on the part of any individual(s). It noted that an absence of
evidence however does not preclude the possibility that others ar e involved.
Additional investigations, including those conducted by national authorities, may
provide greater clarity on this issue.
21. The Board found that the two Experts were performing their official duties at
the time of the incident. The purpose of their trip was to conduct first-person
interviews and make first-person observations in accordance with the Committee
mandates and Security Council resolution 2293 (2016).
22. Through interviews of United Nations personnel in Kinshasa, Goma and
Kananga, as well as with personnel in New York, the Board found the overall
United Nations response from the time it became apparent that Mr. Sharp and
Ms. Catalán were missing was capable, timely, well-coordinated and caring. The
Mission was highly focused on finding the two missing Experts and the four
accompanying Congolese, and mobilized all available assets in this effort. Regular
updates were provided to the families of the missing Experts, the other members of
the Group of Experts, the Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Chile, Sweden and the United States of America.
23. The Board found that the United Nations had a fully functional, in -depth
security programme in place that was adequately staffed and resourced to perform
required security functions. Security training was readily available for United
Nations personnel and for the personnel of the organizations that participate in the
United Nations Security Management System. Adequate checks ensured that
mandatory training was generally taken and security procedures for personal
security, home security, travel security and facilities security functioned as they
should.
24. The Board has identified several areas of concern, however. The Board fou nd
through interviews and observations that the members of Groups of Experts do not
17-14115

5/6

S/2017/713

believe that the United Nations Security Management System regulations pertain to
them. The Board did not believe that the actions of either Mr. Sharp or Ms. Catalan
contributed to the outcome.

Recommendations
25.

The Board made a number of recommendations in the following areas:

(a) Advocacy for the criminal investigation to be conducted and completed
by the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, under its jurisdiction,
and with the support of other Member States, in a transparent and conclusive
manner, ensuring that the perpetrators of this crime are brought to justice;
(b) Review and strengthening of the management of the activities of Groups
of Experts, including training, coordination frameworks, reporting lines, and
support to their activities by field missions;
(c) Inclusion of all security aspects of the activities and personnel of Groups
of Experts into the mandatory framework of the United Nati ons Security
Management System, including the application of programme criticality and
security risk management processes to enable informed decisions on acceptable
security risks;
(d) Review, evaluation and adjustment of the support arrangements for
Groups of Experts, in consultation with relevant legislative and budgetary bodies, to
enable the safe and effective implementation of their mandates.
26. The United Nations Secretariat is now reviewing all these recommendations
with a view to developing a comprehensive implementation plan, as appropriate.

6/6

17-14115
