UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/43
11 August 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3415th meeting of the Security Council, held on 11 August 1994, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Afghanistan", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council notes with appreciation the efforts of the
United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 48/208, headed by Ambassador Mahmoud Mestiri, and
welcomes his progress report of 1 July 1994 (S/1994/766), in particular the
recommendations contained in paragraph 40 of the report.
"The Council expresses its appreciation for the cooperation the Afghan
people and leaders provided to the Special Mission. It calls on all
Afghans to continue to work with the Special Mission as it seeks to help
Afghans begin a peaceful political process to end their differences.
"The Council deplores the continuing civil war in Afghanistan which
has brought death and destruction to the people of Afghanistan and has
created a threat to the stability and security of other countries in the
region. The Council calls on all parties to end hostilities and embark
upon the process of political reconciliation, reconstruction and
development.
"The Council calls on all States to take the necessary steps to
promote peace in Afghanistan, to stop the flow of weapons to the parties,
and to put an end to this destructive conflict. It also urges the
international community to assist Afghans in rebuilding their shattered
country as conditions permit.
"The Council commends the efforts of the United Nations humanitarian
agencies in Afghanistan and stresses the need for all States to continue
contributing to those efforts.
"The Council reaffirms its readiness to assist the Afghan people in
their efforts to return peace and normalcy to their country and encourages
the countries neighbouring Afghanistan to continue their efforts to the
same end.

94-32565 (E)

110894

/...

S/PRST/1994/43
English
Page 2

"The Council reaffirms its commitment to the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Afghanistan."

-----
