VIII.

Considering that, in order to cover the substantial losses
caused by inflation and monetary instability, there is a need
for an additional procedure that would help meet the costs
they account for in the regular budget of the United Nations,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a detailed
study on the impact of inflation and monetary instability on
the regular budget of the United Nations and to submit it
to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session;
2. Also requests that the above-mentioned study should
include the amounts which, over the last three bienniums,
have resulted from inflation and monetary instability in the
developed countries where United Nations organizations
have their headquarters.
105th plenary meeting
18 December 1981

36/231.

221

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Scale of assessments for the apportionment of
the expenses of the United Nations
A

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the Committee on
Contributions, 54
Recalling its resolutions 14 (I) of 13 February 1946, 1927
(XVIII) of l l December 1963, 2118 (XX) of 21 December
1965, Z961 C and D (XXVII) of I 3 December I 972, 3 I 195
A and B of 14 December 1976 and 34/6 B of 25 October
1979,
Bearing in mind that the real capacity of Member States
to pay is the fundamental criterion on which the scales of
assessments are based,
Taking into account the difficult and even critical economic and financial situation of developing countries,
Mindful of the obligations of each Member State towards
the Organization.
Recognizing once again the need for an improved methodology to assess the real capacity of Member States to pay,
in order to increase the fairness and equity of the scale of
assessments,
Considering the need to prevent extreme and excessive
variations of individual rates of assessments between two
successive scales,
Noting the views expressed in the Fifth Committee during
the debate on the report of the Committee on Contributions.
l. Reaffirms its previous decisions that, in the measurement of the capacity of Member States to pay, the following elements should be taken into account, in order to
preverit anomalous assessments resulting from the sole use
of estimates of national income:
(a) Due consideration to developing countries, in general, and to the countries with the lowest per capita income,
including the least developed countries, in particular, in
view of their special economic and financial problems;
(b) The continuing disparities between the economies
of developed and developing countries;
(c) Conditions or circumstances which adversely affect
the capacity of Member States to pay;
(d) The particular situation of Member States whose
earnings depend heavily on one or a few products;
(e) The ability of Member States to secure foreign
currency;

" Official Records of the General Assemh/_y. Thirtv-sixth Session, Supplement No. 11 (A/36/1 I); and A/36/1 I/Add. I and Add. I/Corr. I

(j) The concept of accumulated national wealth;
(g) The existence of different methods of national accounting of Member States, including the level of different
inflation rates and their effects on the comparability of national income statistics;
2. Requests the Committee on Contributions to prepare
a set of guidelines for the collection and presentation of
data by Member States, in order to ensure that adequate
data and statistical information are submitted to the Committee on a uniform and comparable basis;
3. Requests the Committee on Contributions to submit
to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session a thorough study on alternative methods to assess the real capacity
of Member States to pay that takes fully into account Assembly resolution 34/6 B, all the elements listed in paragraph I above, including a new statistical base period, a
revised upper limit of the low per capita income allowance
formula and a limit for increases between two successive
scales of assessments;
4. Decides that, pending fulfilment by the Committee
on Contributions of the directives set out in paragraph 3
above, the following criteria will be observed in the subsequent review of the scale of assessments:
(a) The statistical base period should be ten years;
(b) The upper limit of the low per capita income allowance formula will be raised from $US 1,800 to $US 2,100
and the gradient of the relief granted will be raised from 75
per cent to 85 per cent. so as to compensate at least partially
for the effects of world inflation since the last revision of
the values of the formula;
(c) Efforts should be made to limit the increase of individual rates of assessments to a reasonable level, and, in
this context, special measures should be taken in favour of
countries whose rates of assessments have already been
increased at the previous review of the scale of assessments;
(d) In view of the extremely serious economic situation
of the least developed countries, their individual rates of
assessment should not in any way exceed the present level.

105th plenary meeting
18 December 1981

B
The General Assemblv
Resolves that:
I. The rates of assessment for the following States,
admitted to membership in the United Nations on 25 August
and 16 September 1980. respectively, shall be as follows:
Member Stal<'

Per cent

Zimbabwe ......................... 0.02
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines ......... 0.01
For 1982, these rates shall be added to the scale of assessments established under General Assembly resolution 34/6
A of 25 October 1979;
2. For the year 1980, Zimbabwe and Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines shall contribute at the rate of one ninth of
0.02 and 0.01 per cent. respectively, such contributions to
be taken into account as miscellaneous income under regulation 5.2 (c) of the Financial Regulations of the United
Nations:
3. For the year 1981, Zimbabwe and Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines shall contribute at the rate of 0.02 and 0.01
per cent, respectively. such contributions also to be taken
into account as miscellaneous income under regulation 5. 2
(c) of the Financial Regulations of the United Nations:

222

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

4. The contributions of Zimbabwe and Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines for 1980 and 1981 shall be applied to
the same basis of assessment as for other Member States,
except that in the case of appropriations or apportionments
approved under General Assembly resolutions 34/7 C of 3
December 1979 and 35/45 A of 1 December 1980 for the
financing of the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force, and resolution 35/115 A of 10 December 1980 for
the financing of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, the contributions of those States, as determined by
the group of contributors to which they may be assigned by
the Assembly, shall be calculated in proportion to the calendar year;
5. The advances of Zimbabwe and Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the Working Capital Fund, under regulation 5.8 of the Financial Regulations of the United
Nations, shall be calculated by the application of the rates
of assessment of 0.02 and 0.01 per cent, respectively, to
the authorized level of the Fund, such advances to be added
to the Fund pending the incorporation of the new Members'
rates of assessment in a 100 per cent scale.
105th plenary meeting
18 December 1981

36/232.

Respect for the privileges and immunities of
officials of the United Nations and the specialized agencies and related organizations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 35/212 of 17 December 1980,
Recalling the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations of 13 February 1946, 55 the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the Specialized
Agencies of 21 November 1947, 56 the Agreement on the
Privileges and Immunities of the International Atomic Energy Agency of 1 July 1959 and the agreements between
the United Nations and the specialized agencies and related
organizations and the respective host Governments,
Noting the report of the Secretary-General, 57
Noting also the position consistently upheld by the United
Nations in the event of the arrest and detention of United
Nations staff members by governmental authorities,
Reaffirming the responsibility and authority of the Secretary-General as the Chief Administrative Officer of the
United Nations under the Charter,
Mindful of Article 100 of the Charter of the United
Nations, under which each Member State has undertaken
to respect the exclusively international character of the responsibilities of the Secretary-General and the staff and not
to seek to influence them in the discharge of their
responsibilities,
Mindful also of the fact that under the same Article of
the Charter, the Secretary-General and the staff shall not,
in the performance of their duties, seek or receive instructions from any Government or from any other authority
external to the Organization,
Recalling that the International Court of Justice has held
that international organizations have the power and responsibility to protect members of their staff,
Recalling also the obligations of the staff in the conduct
of their duties to observe the laws and regulations of Member
States,

" Resolution 22 A (I).
'° Resolution 179 (II).
51
AIC. 5136131.

Reaffirming the relevant staff regulations,
Aware of the absolute necessity that staff members be
enabled to discharge their tasks as assigned to them by the
Secretary-General without interference on the part of any
Member State or any other authority external to the
Organization,
Realizing that staff members of the specialized agencies
and related organizations enjoy similar privileges _and i~munities in accordance with the instruments mentioned m
the second preambular paragraph above,
1. Appeals to any Member State which has placed under
arrest or detention a staff member of the United Nations or
of a specialized agency or related organization to enable the
Secretary-General or the executive head of the organization
concerned, in accordance with the rights inherent under the
relevant multilateral conventions and bilateral agreements,
to visit and converse with the staff member, to apprise
himself of the grounds for the arrest or detention, including
the main facts and formal charges, to enable him also to
assist the staff member in arranging for legal counsel and
to recognize the functional immunity of a staff member
asserted by the Secretary-General or by the appropriate executive head, in conformity with international law and in
accordance with the provisions of the applicable bilateral
agreements between the host country and the United Nations
or the specialized agency or related organization concerned;
2. Requests the Secretary-General and the executive
heads of the organizations concerned to ensure that the staff
observe the obligations incumbent upon them, in accordance
with the relevant staff rules and regulations, the Convention
on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations, the
Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the Specialized Agencies and the Agreement on the Privileges and
Immunities of the International Atomic Energy Agency;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present
resolution to the attention of all specialized agencies and
related organizations of the United Nations system, with the
request that they furnish information to him on cases where
there are clear indications that the principles expressed in
paragraph I above or the status of the staff members of such
an organization have not been fully respected;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at each regular session, on behalf of the
Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, an updated
and comprehensive annual report relating to cases in which
the Secretary-General or the competent executive head has
not been able to exercise fully his responsibility in respect
of the protection of staff members of the United Nations or
of a specialized agency or related organization in accordance
with the multilateral conventions and applicable bilateral
agreements with the host country.
105th plenary meeting
18 December 1981

36/233.

Report of the International Civil Service
Commission
The General Assembly,
Having considered the seventh annual report of the International Civil Service Commission, 58
Recalling that it established the Commission for the regulation and co-ordination of the conditions of service of the
United Nations common system as set forth in article I of
the statute of the Commission,

"Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 30 (A/36/30 and Corr.I).
