S/PRST/2005/39

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 August 2005
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5248th meeting of the Security Council, held on 19 August 2005, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Guinea-Bissau”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council acknowledges with satisfaction the successful
holding of the presidential elections in Guinea-Bissau and the announcement
by the National Electoral Commission of the final results of the ballot. This
marks an important step towards the restoration of constitutional order. The
Security Council takes note of the appeal filed with the Supreme Court of
Justice by one of the contenders and strongly encourages all parties to honour
their commitments and accept the final ruling of the Court. The Security
Council urges them to refrain from any actions that could jeopardize the
efforts towards peace and stability in Guinea-Bissau.
“The Security Council commends the people of Guinea-Bissau for their
encouraging participation in the electoral process.
“The Security Council pays tribute to Guinea-Bissau’s partners and
neighbours, which provided indispensable support for the holding of the
elections. The Security Council also congratulates international observers on
the essential role they played throughout the country, and welcomes their
statement recognizing the presidential elections as free, fair and transparent.
“The Security Council expresses its appreciation for the contribution
made by the African Union, the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries, the Economic Community of West African States, the European
Union, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, the Special Envoy of the
Chairperson of the African Union, the Representative of the Secretary-General
in Guinea-Bissau and the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS), bilateral partners and international financial
institutions. The Security Council underlines the importance of their timely
diplomatic efforts aimed at promoting national dialogue and respect for the
rule of law.
“Considering the challenges still facing Guinea-Bissau, the Security
Council urges all relevant national and international parties to reaffirm their
commitment to peace and democracy in Guinea-Bissau, and calls upon
bilateral development partners of Guinea-Bissau, international financial

05-46607 (E) 190805

*0546607*

S/PRST/2005/39

institutions and United Nations agencies to increase their support for economic
and social development and the consolidation of national institutions, as well
as the promotion of good governance and human rights, in particular by
providing emergency financial assistance and technical support, in the short
run, and by participating actively in the Donor Round Table Conference to be
held in November 2005.
“The Security Council therefore welcomes the decision taken by the
Economic and Social Council on 26 July 2005 to extend the mandate of the Ad
Hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau, and commends the group for its work.
“The Security Council invites the Secretary-General to present
recommendations in his next report regarding the updating of UNOGBIS’s
mandate and role in the consolidation of peace and stability in Guinea-Bissau
in the post-transition period.”

2
