UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1998/3
5 January 1998
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: FRENCH

LETTER DATED 2 JANUARY 1998 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to transmit to you herewith a copy of a letter dated
2 January 1998 which I received from the Chairman of the International
Monitoring Committee established pursuant to the mandate of the Inter-African
Mission to Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB).
By means of this letter, the Chairman of the International Monitoring
Committee has transmitted to me the second periodic report of the Member States
participating in MISAB, as requested by the Security Council in its resolution
1136 (1997) of 6 November 1997. I should be grateful if you would bring the
letter and its enclosure to the attention of the members of the Security
Council.

(Signed)

98-00098 (E)

050198

050198

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1998/3
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 2 January 1998 from the Chairman of the International
Monitoring Committee addressed to the Secretary-General

I have the honour to transmit to you herewith the second report, covering
the period from 5 December 1997 to 4 January 1998, requested by the Security
Council in paragraph 7 of its resolution 1136 (1997) concerning the situation in
the Central African Republic.

(Signed) Gen. Amadou Toumani TOURÉ
Chairman of the International
Monitoring Committee

/...

S/1998/3
English
Page 3

Enclosure
Second report to the Security Council pursuant to
resolution 1136 (1997) concerning the situation
in the Central African Republic
(2 January 1998)

INTRODUCTION
1.
At its 3829th meeting, the Security Council unanimously adopted its
resolution 1136 (1997), which was essentially a continuation of its earlier
resolution 1125 (1997). The Council requested the Member States participating
in MISAB, namely, the International Monitoring Committee to supervise the
implementation of the Bangui Agreements, which represents them, to provide
periodic reports to the Council at least every month through the SecretaryGeneral.
2.
This second report describes developments in the situation in the Central
African Republic from 5 December 1997 to 4 January 1998.

POLITICAL LEADERSHIP
3.
The International Monitoring Committee to supervise the implementation of
the Bangui Agreements, chaired by General Amadou Toumani Touré, is the body that
directs the actions of MISAB, since it receives the necessary political guidance
directly from the heads of State concerned, and especially from the President of
the Gabonese Republic, who is Chairman of the International Mediation Committee.
4.
The International Monitoring Committee has adopted a plan of action that
reflects the gist of the main provisions of the Agreements of 25 January 1997 in
the form of a timetable, a significant part of which has already been
implemented or is currently being implemented.
5.
MISAB is under the patronage of President El Hadj Omar Bongo of Gabon,
senior head of State of the International Mediation Committee. It is under the
political authority of General Amadou Toumani Touré, Chairman of the
International Monitoring Committee.

LOGISTICAL AND TECHNICAL SUPPORT TO THE
INTERNATIONAL MONITORING COMMITTEE
6.
It should be noted that since its establishment by the heads of the States
members of the International Mediation Committee, the International Monitoring
Committee has received logistical and technical support from the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP). The continuation of such support will make it
possible to carry out, inter alia, diverse operations, namely:

/...

S/1998/3
English
Page 4

Political monitoring of the pursuit of disarmament operations in Bangui and
later in other parts of the country;
Pursuit of the implementation of the provisions of the Bangui Agreements
that have not yet been implemented;
Coordination of activities relating to the organization and conduct of
various seminars and conferences provided for in the context of national
reconciliation.
7.
The International Monitoring Committee is relying on the continued support
of UNDP to enable it to carry out its tasks.

LOGISTICAL SUPPORT TO THE MISSION
8.
As indicated in the previous reports, MISAB receives logistical support
from the participating States, France and the Government of the Central African
Republic. It also received support previously from the Organization of African
Unity (OAU).
9.
While recognizing the generous efforts that the States participating in
MISAB, France and the Government of the Central African Republic continue to
make to assist the African contingents based in Bangui, it must be acknowledged
that the material conditions of the troops stand in need of improvement, as they
are far inferior to those enjoyed by other similar forces operating in other
conflict areas. An appropriate solution to this state of affairs should be
urgently found in order to avoid demoralization among the troops, which up until
now have been carrying out their work with selfless dedication.
10. The International Monitoring Committee welcomes the establishment of a
trust fund for the Central African Republic and the appeal by the Security
Council to Member States concerning contributions to this Fund. It is important
to emphasize that the ability to maintain security in the Central African
Republic in a particularly sensitive subregional context will depend on the
dispatch with which States Members of the United Nations contribute to the Fund.

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE BANGUI AGREEMENTS
Provisions already implemented
11. The provisions of the Agreements of 25 January 1997 on the formation of a
Government of national union, the adoption of an amnesty law covering offences
in the context of the third rebellion and the situation of former heads of State
have already been implemented, which is to be commended.
Suspension of the parliamentary audit
12. The bill on the abandonment of the judicial enforcement of the
parliamentary audit has not yet been able to be adopted following the intense
debate on the subject that took place in November. This first bill was rejected
/...

S/1998/3
English
Page 5

by a majority of deputies. Currently, the Presidency of the Republic and the
Government are redrafting the bill for submission to the National Assembly for a
second reading. An awareness campaign concerning this resubmission is currently
being conducted among members of Parliament. It should be noted that the
adoption of the bill is an important point of the Bangui Agreements. It is
generally agreed that a second reading would be needed in order for an
appropriate solution to be found. As an interim measure, President Patasse
reaffirmed for the International Monitoring Committee his decision of
31 December 1996 to suspend the judicial enforcement of the findings of the
report on the parliamentary audit. In other words, no judicial proceedings will
be initiated until a definitive solution in keeping with the spirit of the
Bangui Agreements has been found.
Disarmament
13. A coordination and security meeting took place on 8 December under the
chairmanship of President Amadou Toumani Touré with the participation of the
Minister of State for Territorial Administration, responsible for Public Safety
and Disarmament, members of the International Monitoring Committee, the Command
of MISAB and the principal officials responsible for various national defence
and security services. The meeting made it possible to recognize that the
strategy defined on 10 November has fallen far short of achieving the hoped-for
results, which has given rise to suspicion and frustration among certain
opposition political parties.
14. While some hope remains, certain indications lead us to believe that the
recovery of light arms will not be as extensive as that of heavy weapons.
Consequently, it was decided to return discreetly to the methods adopted during
the first phase, which made it possible to achieve the results that have been
noted.
15. The results obtained are described below. Some success has been noted
since the decision of 8 December, particularly in the area of heavy weapons:
all 120 mm and 81 mm mortars and all 14.5 mm machine-guns and 75 mm recoilless
guns are now in the hands of MISAB.
16. Since the signing of the truce agreement of 28 June 1997 and the ceasefire
agreement of 2 July 1997, the following weapons have been turned over to MISAB:

/...

S/1998/3
English
Page 6

Heavy weapons

Designation

Quantity

Increase
(4 December31 December 1997)

120 mm mortars

surrendered:

4 out of a total of 4

2

81 mm mortars

surrendered:

15 out of a total of 15

2

60 mm mortars

surrendered:

14 out of a total of 19

1

14.5 mm machine-guns

surrendered:

6 out of a total of 6

12.7 mm machine-guns

surrendered:

2 out of a total of 3

75 mm recoilless guns

surrendered:

2 out of a total of 2

73 mm anti-tank rocket
launchers

surrendered:

66 out of a total of 67

Rocket-propelled grenades

surrendered:

7 out of a total of 11

surrendered:

116 out of a total of 127

Total

(weapons recovered:

91.33 per cent)

5
3.93

per cent

Light weapons

Designation

Quantity

Increase
(4 December31 December 1997)

Hand-guns (misc.)

surrendered:

16 out of a total of 111

Submachine-guns

surrendered:

304 out of a total of 459

2

Assault rifles

surrendered:

265 out of a total of 541

4

MAS 36-49/56-M14 rifles
+ muskets

surrendered:

662 out of a total of 1,181

10

Light machine-guns

surrendered:

52 out of a total of 80

.30-calibre
machine-guns

surrendered:

15 out of a total of 17

surrendered:

1,315 out of a total of 2,389

Total

(weapons recovered:

55.04 per cent)

17
0.71 per cent

17. In the light of the various factors listed in the previous reports, it is
easy to understand why the recovery of all light arms remains uncertain in spite
of all the resources brought to bear and the strategies employed.

/...

S/1998/3
English
Page 7

Status of munitions and explosives recovered and packaged from
4 to 31 December 1997
Designation
5.56 mm rounds

Quantity

Remarks

69 092

+7

7.5 mm SLC rounds

14 000

7.5 mm S/B rounds

123 954

7.5 mm X rounds

34 719

7.5 mm X S/B rounds

135

7.62 mm rounds, NATO

15 962

7.62 mm Kalashnikov rounds

42 060

7.62 mm long rounds

121 261

+624

+640

7.62 mm Tokarev rounds

2 811

+1

9 mm Para rounds

5 546

+23

.12-calibre riot control rounds

731

12.7 mm rounds

3 191

+991

14.5 mm rounds

15 855

+421

37 fragmentation hand grenades

1 858

+1

Fragmentation hand grenades, China

3 174

+9

GR FLG AP34

16

RPG 7 rockets

1 172

+21

9

+3

.37 stun hand grenades

1 047

+1

FL LAC F4 hand grenades

1 305

+1

73 anti-tank rocket launchers

F4 hand grenades

316

Russian grenades

3

+2

60 mm mortars

1 821

81 mm mortars

852

120 mm mortars

211

75 mm recoilless rifle rounds, US

168

75 mm recoilless rifle rounds, China

223

No weapons in inventory

M79 40 mm rounds, US

6 060

No weapons in inventory

Time fuses (inactive)

2 325

7.5 mm grenade cartridges

+98

755

Pyro detonator

6 100

Total:
Various rounds

449 317

Explosives and detonators

26 659

/...

S/1998/3
English
Page 8

Recommendations from the General Meeting on National Defence
18. This provision of the Bangui Agreements remains a bone of contention
between those in power and the opposition. Indeed, although everyone is in
agreement in recognizing that the rational and consistent implementation of the
282 recommendations from the General Meeting on National Defence can and should
form the basis for the solution of many problems facing the Central African
Armed Forces, it has proved difficult to find common ground for their
implementation.
19. Of all the recommendations, two or three hold the attention of all
political circles. These are the recommendations concerning the "dissolution"
of the Centre national de recherche et d'investigation (National Research and
Investigation Centre (CNRI)) and the Section d'enquête, de recherche et de la
documentation (Survey, Research and Documentation Section (SERD)) and the
recommendation relating to the reduction of the staff of the Presidential Guard.
20. These recommendations touch on sensitive areas in which it is at present
difficult to find a modus vivendi between the head of State, supported by the
political parties of the presidential majority, on the one hand, and those in
the Group of Eleven, on the other. The International Monitoring Committee is
very much aware of this situation and will pursue its efforts to find a solution
in keeping with the spirit of the Bangui Agreements.
21. The restructuring of the Central African armed forces, the National
Gendarmerie and the Central African Police Force, as advocated in a number of
recommendations, appears to be the key to the response to be given to those
recommendations. This restructuring was inaugurated on 8 December 1997 by
President Ange Félix Patasse, together with President Amadou Toumani Touré, the
members of the International Monitoring Committee, the commanders of MISAB, the
Minister of National Defence, the deputy ministers in charge of army
restructuring and disarmament and the heads of the defence and security
services.
22. The general guidelines of the restructuring process were indicated by the
head of State, namely, that the future Central African army should be a
national, republican and multi-ethnic army that will participate in development
and will be low in cost. As interpreted at the practical level by the MISAB
general staff, the President's idea is based on the following essential
constraints:
-

The size of the future Central African army should be in line with the
national budgetary capacity, i.e., the Central African army should be
able to support itself, equip itself, teach itself and train itself
with a minimum of external support;

-

The army should be a representative sample of all the ethnic groups
living in the Central African Republic and of all its regions;

/...

S/1998/3
English
Page 9

-

The army should operate on an apolitical, non-sectarian and non-tribal
basis, i.e., according to the republican model, which is the only
appropriate model for ensuring stability, territorial integrity and
national independence;

-

The army should have multidisciplinary capacities to enable it to
participate in national development efforts, especially in the
agricultural sector, and in the opening up of the interior for the
necessary engineering projects.

23. A national commission has been established by the head of State and placed
under the supervision of the Chairman of the International Monitoring Committee.
It is chaired by the Minister of National Defence and includes the members of
the International Monitoring Committee, the MISAB Command and the heads of the
national defence and security services. This commission has been asked to
develop a restructuring plan following the guidelines indicated by the head of
State. It has been meeting since 15 December 1997.
24. The implementation of the demobilization, retraining and reintegration
project will help the army to become more capable of operating as a truly
republican army. This project would already have been launched if
administrative problems had not delayed the arrival of the project head,
Mr. Gonzales, who will finally arrive in Bangui on 3 January 1998.
National reconciliation
25. This is the culmination of the long but exciting process of the
implementation of the Bangui Agreements. As indicated in the previous reports,
this phase is in itself a delicate process in view of the fact that its ultimate
aim is to exert a positive influence on the individual and collective psychology
of brothers who have confronted each other and maintained, or even cultivated, a
climate of general distrust from the outset of the crisis. In practice it has
fallen to the International Monitoring Committee, and more particularly to its
Chairman, General Amadou Toumani Touré, to carry out the twofold task of
managing and then eliminating this climate, hence the need to take a number of
actions envisaged in the spirit of the Bangui Agreements with a view to
restoring the climate of harmony and concord which prevailed in the Central
African Republic at the time of the revered patriot, Barthélémy Boganda.
26. The International Monitoring Committee and the Ministry of Human Rights,
National Reconciliation and Democratic Culture, with the logistical, financial
and technical support of UNDP, organized awareness-raising seminars in various
regions of the country between 18 November and 10 December 1997.
27. The systematic coverage of the country has made it possible to reach,
within a reasonable period of time, all the populations of the country. The
same messages have been brought to all of them, and rich, in-depth discussions
have been held on the need to achieve peace and national reconciliation,
conditions conducive to the economic recovery and sustainable development of the
country. The conclusions reached during these seminars will no doubt constitute
a useful contribution made available to the participants in the National
Reconciliation Conference, to be held in February 1998.
/...

S/1998/3
English
Page 10

28. With regard to the National Reconciliation Conference scheduled to be held
from 10 to 14 February 1998, the preparatory committee established on
17 October 1997 is now working on the objectives of the Conference. The
committee members are becoming aware, as they proceed, that the National
Reconciliation Conference must offer the Central African Republic a framework to
enable it to:
-

Realize the dimensions of the crisis and the resulting climate, so as
to be convinced of the need to create objective conditions for
national reconciliation;

-

Define the general guidelines for the sustainable development of their
country, with an emphasis on ways and means of effectively fighting
poverty, the main source of the suffering of the Central African
Republic for the past two years;

-

Recommend the establishment of appropriate mechanisms for promoting
good governance, a precondition for building a democratic, modern
nation;

-

Draw up a final act in the form of a pact that could serve as a basis
for the Government to elaborate a national constitution.

29. It should be recalled that, in addition to the regional seminars referred
to in paragraphs 21, 22 and 23 of the previous report, preparatory workshops for
the National Reconciliation Conference are scheduled. A youth meeting under the
auspices of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) took place from 10 to 13 December 1997. Another, larger meeting of
youth will be held on 16 and 17 January 1998, and a women's forum will be held
on 13 and 14 January 1998. All the preparatory workshops have played and will
continue to play a significant role in the country's consciousness-raising
activities.
30. With regard to the National Reconciliation Conference, it is widely agreed
in various circles that a favourable climate for reconciliation should be
created, with the following necessary and useful conditions:
-

Full application of the various provisions of the Bangui Agreements,
in other words, completion of the activities included in the timetable
of the International Monitoring Committee (pursuit of disarmament
operations, settlement of the issue of the parliamentary audit,
indication of political will to make use of the recommendations of the
General Meeting on National Defence);

-

Continuation of the necessary and useful efforts (including a stepping
up of the diplomatic offensive) to find a solution to the financial
situation, which remains a cause of concern;

-

Launching of initiatives designed to find a solution to the problem of
the victims of the rebellions;

/...

S/1998/3
English
Page 11

-

Reassuring indications of prospects of reconstruction, rehabilitation
and economic recovery.

COOPERATION WITH THE CENTRAL AFRICAN AUTHORITIES AND THE
VARIOUS GROUPS OF POLITICAL PARTIES
31. General Amadou Toumani Touré, Chairman of the International Monitoring
Committee, took advantage of his recent stay in Bangui to examine the evolution
of the situation with the main protagonists in the country's political and
social life. Thus he applied himself to:
-

The evaluation of the progress made in the implementation of the
Bangui Agreements;

-

The search for solutions to those provisions which have not yet been
implemented or those which are being implemented at a slow pace;

-

The study of the various possible hypotheses during the post-MISAB
period, in other words, after 6 February 1998, the date on which the
mandate authorized by the Security Council in resolution 1136 (1997)
expires;

-

The joint search for ways and means of finding a solution to the
thorny problem of arrears of wages and salaries;

-

The study of the elements of the strategy to be adopted to convince
the international community of the need to provide direct and
effective assistance to the Central African Republic by organizing a
round table of donors to be held during the second quarter of 1998.

32. From the summary he made while chairing a meeting of the International
Monitoring Committee, the following conclusions made be drawn:
-

Considerable progress has taken place since the signature of the
Agreements on 25 January 1997 and has made a major contribution to
defusing the situation;

-

Much nevertheless remains to be done: some important provisions of
the Bangui Agreements are still encountering difficulties in their
implementation; these provisions must be meticulously listed and
receive particular attention from the International Monitoring
Committee, which will make new approaches to the various parties
involved;

-

Everyone in Bangui (the political class, civil society, the military
and foreigners) is convinced of the need for the presence after
6 February 1998 of a military and security force which would help
consolidate the peace and stimulate the process of national
reconciliation; everyone recognizes that even though the elections are
not an end in themselves, they deserve to be held in peace, calm and
transparency;
/...

S/1998/3
English
Page 12

-

The Central African army needs to be restructured into a true
republican army, drawing on the cooperation of available friendly
countries; in other words, the Central African army must be capable of
taking over from MISAB the various functions the latter is currently
performing;

-

The social situation continues to give rise to concern, and risks
throwing everything back into question if an adequate solution is not
found right away. The International Monitoring Committee urges the
Government to do everything possible to place the national financial
system, which generates resources, on a sound basis, and invites
better understanding on the part of the international community,
particularly the Bretton Woods institutions, in order to help the
Central African Republic avoid social disruption;

-

A national forum should be organized to discuss the important and
delicate issue of the victims of the rebellions and make specific
proposals to the Government;

-

With the involvement of UNDP as lead agency, a round table of donors
should be organized, to take place in the second quarter of 1998, with
a view to the reconstruction and rehabilitation of the country.

33. On 17 December 1997, the President of the Republic dismissed one of the
ministers from his party, the Mouvement de Liberation du Peuple Centrafricain
(MLPC), namely Mr. Charles Massi, Minister of Agriculture and Livestock Farming,
who has been charged with offences which, according to the Government spokesman,
took place while he was still serving as Minister of Mines in a previous
Government. It should, however, be noted that Mr. Massi, who on
29 November 1997 had established a political association, the Forum Démocratique
pour la Modernité (FODEM), wrote to the International Monitoring Committee on
28 December 1997 denouncing a manoeuvre designed to keep him out of the
forthcoming elections.

COOPERATION WITH INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
34. Pursuant to the Security Council's request to the Secretary-General in
resolution 1136 (1997) to provide a report within three months on the
implementation of that resolution, a multidisciplinary mission from the United
Nations Secretariat visited Bangui from 6 to 13 December 1997 to collect the
elements necessary for the preparation of the report. The mission, eight strong
and headed by Mr. Youssef Mahmoud, Director of the Africa II Division in the
Department of Political Affairs, met the head of the Central African State, the
Prime Minister, the President of the National Assembly, the Chairman of the
International Monitoring Committee, the main ministers concerned, the UNDP
Resident Representative and Resident Coordinator of the United Nations system in
Bangui, heads of diplomatic missions, the MISAB Command, the Command of the
French Operational Assistance Elements, the Chief of General Staff of the
Central African armed forces, the Director of the National Gendarmerie, the
various groups of political parties, officials of the groups of affiliated trade

/...

S/1998/3
English
Page 13

unions, leaders of women's organizations, employers, banking officials and heads
of United Nations agencies based in Bangui.
35. The multidisciplinary mission thus had an opportunity to appreciate the
evolution of the political, military, security and economic and social
situation, and will be able to report a new assessment to the Secretary-General
of the United Nations.
36. Despite the excellent results obtained in agricultural production (in both
cash crops and food crops), the Central African Republic, where industrial and
commercial activities have clearly been in a state of paralysis for several
months, is still experiencing difficulties in meeting its internal obligations
(wages and salaries, pensions, scholarships, the functioning of the State
apparatus) and its external commitments, in particular the repayment of the
arrears due to the Bretton Woods institutions.
37. Moreover, the thorny problem of arrears of wages and salaries, pensions and
scholarships provides a reason for the strike which is still taking place in
certain sectors, such as education. The greatest concern of the Central African
authorities is therefore to find the necessary resources to resolve this problem
of six months' arrears of wages and salaries and several further months' of
pensions or scholarships. The groups of affiliated trade unions, which hitherto
have demonstrated a great deal of understanding and moderation given the
situation, are beginning to show serious signs of discontent: in a memorandum
made public on 12 December 1997, they threatened to express their frustration
through serious protests. A demonstration scheduled for 15 December was banned,
and its participants dispersed.

DEPLOYMENT OF THE FORCE
38. There has been no significant change in the arrangements made since the
submission of the previous report. MISAB is continuing to ensure security in
all neighbourhoods of the Central African capital by occupying 20 surveillance
posts and is participating in joint security patrols in conjunction with the
Central African security and defence forces in all districts of Bangui.
Hold-ups, armed robberies and other criminal acts have become very rare thanks
both to the progress achieved in disarmament and the constant vigilance
instituted by the system of joint patrols.
39. With regard to MISAB activities, it is worth noting the moving ceremony
held on 18 December 1997 during which the commemorative medal of the
Inter-African Force was posthumously awarded to Brigadier-General
Augustin Mombo-Moukagni by Colonel Alioune Ibaba, Coordinator of the
International Monitoring Committee, deputizing for its Chairman,
Amadou Toumani Touré, and acting on behalf of the President of the Gabonese
Republic. A number of other individuals (officers, non-commissioned officers
and other ranks of MISAB, the Central African armed forces and the French
Operational Assistance Elements, as well as prominent civilians from the Central
African Republic and the International Monitoring Committee) were also decorated
on this occasion by Colonel Talla Niang, Chief of Staff and Acting Commander of
MISAB and his main colleagues, the commanders of contingents.
/...

S/1998/3
English
Page 14

40. This ceremony is the second of its kind organized by MISAB following that
which took place in July 1997, during which President Amadou Toumani Touré,
Brigadier-General Edouard N'Killi, then Commander of MISAB, Colonel Talla Niang,
Chief of General Staff and the commanders of the six contingents, the members of
the International Monitoring Committee and officers, non-commissioned officers
and other ranks of the French Operational Assistance Elements and the Central
African armed forces received this commemorative MISAB medal awarded by the
President of the Gabonese Republic in his capacity as Chairman of the
International Mediations Committee.

CONCLUSIONS
41. The success of the deployment of MISAB will depend above all on the
understanding shown by the international community, specifically in the
consistent application of paragraph 6 of resolution 1136 (1997); the Special
Trust Fund established by the Secretary-General of the United Nations at the
request of the Security Council needs to be provisioned within a reasonable
period of time. Pending the adequate provisioning of that Fund or any other
decision of the Security Council, an interim solution is desirable, namely
extension of the effect of Security Council resolution 1136 (1997) relating to
the mandate of MISAB for a two-month period.
42. The International Monitoring Committee hopes to continue to enjoy the
logistical and technical support of the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) in order to pursue its twofold mission of ensuring the political
direction of MISAB and monitoring the implementation of the Bangui Agreements
through continuing mediation.
43. In order to avoid any slippage or any risk of a return to square one which
might lead to social disruption, it is urged that all measures should be taken
at the appropriate levels, including the level of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, to arouse a greater awareness among States Members of the United
Nations, international organizations and financial institutions with a view to
providing the necessary assistance to the development of the Central African
Republic, as requested by the Security Council in paragraph 9 of resolution
1136 (1997). All of these measures will of course accompany the essential
efforts of the Central African authorities. Any other approach might compromise
that country's chance of turning the page of the crisis once and for all, and
thus lead irrevocably to the failure of this special experiment in internal
settlement which the current mediation in the Central African Republic
constitutes.
44. As it has stated on many occasions, the International Monitoring Committee
will continue to spare no effort in urging all the parties to the Central
African crisis to continue to work with wisdom and dignity towards the effective
implementation of the Bangui Agreements. This is the price of genuine and
lasting peace.

-----
