S/PV.8221

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8221

st meeting
Wednesday, 4 April 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Meza-Cuadra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zambrana Torrelio
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 28 March 2018 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2018/283)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-09443 (E)
*1809443*

S/PV.8221

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

especially fitting date to reiterate and underscore those
views, as well as to remember the victims of the attack.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 28 March 2018 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2018/283)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Thomas
Markram, Deputy to the High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/283, which contains a letter dated
28 March 2018 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council.
I wish to encourage speakers to deliver brief
statements, in accordance with note S/2017/507.
I now give the floor to Mr. Markram.
Mr. Markram: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the implementation
of resolution 2118 (2013), on the elimination of the
chemical weapons programme of the Syrian Arab
Republic. The High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, is away on official
travel. I am honoured to be able to address the Council
in her stead.
Before providing the Council with the latest
information on the status of the implementation of
resolution 2118 (2013), I would first like to recall
the tragic anniversary today of the use of chemical
weapons — specifically the nerve agent sarin — in Khan
Shaykhun. The Director-General of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
referred to this attack as an atrocity. The SecretaryGeneral, in speaking of the same, stated that there can
be no impunity for such abhorrent acts. Today seems an
2/18

04/04/2018

As per established practice, I met with
representatives of the Syrian Arab Republic in advance
of these consultations. The Office for Disarmament
Affairs has also continued its regular contact with the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
In view of the fact that, just over two weeks ago, the
Director-General briefed the Council on developments
related to the OPCW’s work on the elimination of Syria’s
chemical weapons programme, my own intervention
today will be brief.
Efforts have continued towards the destruction
of the two remaining chemical weapons production
facilities by the Syrian Arab Republic. The destruction
of these facilities, which will be verified by the
OPCW, is expected to be completed within two to
three months from the start of destruction. The longawaited and verified destruction of these two facilities
is an essential step towards the full implementation of
resolution 2118 (2013).
On the outstanding issues related to Syria’s
declaration, discussions between the OPCW Technical
Secretariat and the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic are continuing. However, these discussions
have not permitted the resolution of any of those
remaining issues. The OPCW Technical Secretariat
continues to be unable to confirm the completeness and
accuracy of Syria’s declaration. The Secretary-General
has repeatedly urged cooperation by the Government
of Syria with the OPCW. Resolving these outstanding
issues will permit shared confidence in Syria’s
declaration within the international community.
The OPCW Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian
Arab Republic is continuing its work. An Mission team
is currently in Damascus, looking into allegations of
the use of chemical weapons that were brought to the
attention of the Director-General by the Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic. I understand that the next
report of the Fact-finding Mission will be submitted
when it considers that it has sufficient information and
is in a position to draw a conclusion.
However, and as we are all aware, conclusions of
the Fact-finding Mission do not entail attribution of
responsibility in those cases where the use of chemical
weapons is determined. The OPCW-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM) was created
for that purpose, but regrettably its mandate was not
18-09443

04/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

renewed. While allegations of the use of chemical
weapons have not stopped, the consideration of a
mechanism for accountability has apparently slowed, if
not come to a standstill.
The persistent allegations of the use of chemical
weapons in Syria underscore the need to identify
solutions and to reach agreement on an appropriate
accountability mechanism. The Secretary-General and
the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs have
repeatedly underlined the need to avoid impunity and
to ensure that those responsible for the use of chemical
weapons are identified and held responsible. Let me take
the Organizationpportunity to reiterate that conviction
once again. Unity in the Security Council — unity of
the kind that gave rise to resolution 2118 (2013), to the
OPCW-United Nations joint mission and to the JIM
itself — provides the best foundation for success. The
Office for Disarmament Affairs stands ready to assist.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Markram for his informative briefing.
I shall now give the floor to Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): We
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and
the delegation of Peru on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. The
United States stands ready to support you in every way
possible. I thank Mr. Markram for his briefing.
We often talk about chemical weapons. However, I
am concerned that we sometimes lose sight of the human
side of those attacks. I want to begin by providing some
insight into what such attacks are like for the people
actually on the ground who experience them. We have
two different accounts. This is the first account:
“Something hit me on the head ... I was dazed,
knocked down ... I got several breathes [sic] of the
strong solution right from the shell ... My eyes were
running water and burning, so was my nose, and
I could hardly breathe. I gasped, choked and felt
the extreme terror of a man who goes under in
the water.”
This is the second account:
“The situation is more desperate than I can
describe. There are no words. It was like Judgment
Day — the apocalypse. You just cannot even
describe the scene. You cannot even begin to

S/PV. 8221

scratch the surface of explaining what happened.
We did not have any protective equipment for gas.”
The first account is from the diary of an American
soldier, Stull Holt. He was gassed on the First World
War battlefield Verdun, France, in 1917. The second
account comes from a doctor named Mamoun Morad.
On 4 April 2017, he was one of the only doctors on duty
in the small Syrian town of Khan Shaykhun. A hundred
years had passed between what Lieutenant Holt and
Dr. Morad experienced, but the horror and the terror of
experiencing the use of chemical weapons are exactly
the same.
Chemical weapons were first used in the First
World War. However, over the decades that followed,
an international consensus grew. The world saw the
unique destructive power of such weapons and rightly
turned away in disgust. As early as in 1925, the Protocol
for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating,
Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological
Methods of Warfare banned the use of chemical weapons
in armed conflict. Decades later, the Chemical Weapons
Convention banned their production, stockpiling and
use. It was an unambiguous ban. We dared to believe
that one day, chemical weapons would be something
that we would only read about in history books. We
dared to believe that we could banish the threat forever.
Then came Syria. The Al-Assad regime used
chemical weapons against its own people. In 2013, the
world reacted with horror at the pictures of hundreds
of men, women and children dead as a result of the
regime’s use of sarin on the outskirts of Damascus.
Although we disagreed about almost every aspect of
the war, we once again found consensus on chemical
weapons. Our shared disgust led us to act together.
In 2013, we adopted resolution 2118 (2013), which
mandated the destruction of the Al-Assad regime’s
arsenal of chemical weapons. In 2015, we established the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism so that
we could identify anyone who used chemical weapons
in Syria. The United Nations found definitively that the
Al-Assad regime, as well as the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, had been responsible for such use.
Once again, we dared to believe that, despite all
our differences over Syria, the consensus against the
use of chemical weapons by anyone would persist. Of
course, we know what happened next. The Al-Assad
regime continued to use chemical weapons against the

18-094433/18

S/PV.8221

The situation in the Middle East

Syrian people. One member of the Council shielded
the Al-Assad regime from any consequences, and then
prevented us from renewing the mandate of the Joint
Investigative Mechanism. Our consensus broke down.
Today, the world is a far more dangerous place
because of that. The Al-Assad regime continues to drop
chlorine bombs on innocent men, women and children.
In only the past few weeks, when the regime seized
eastern Ghouta, there were credible reports of chlorine
gas attacks. It is a sad fact that just a few years ago, a
single chemical weapons attack would have united us
in shock and anger. That would have been enough for
us to take immediate action. We now have a regime that
uses chemical weapons practically every second week.
Our lack of action has consequences. When we let
one regime off the hook, others take notice. The use
of nerve agents in Salisbury and in Kuala Lumpur is
testament to that point and reveals a dangerous trend.
We are rapidly sliding backwards and moving back into
a world that we thought we had left. No one wants to
live in a world where chemical weapons are used. No
one wants to live in fear that a colourless and shapeless
gas will suddenly seep into their lungs and leave them
gasping for air. If we do not act and do not stop and
change the course, that is the world that we could be
fast approaching.
Even as the Security Council has remained
deadlocked, some have stood up to demand
accountability for the use of chemical weapons. The
General Assembly overwhelmingly endorsed the
establishment of the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, which is
collecting evidence for future prosecutions. The United
States also fully supports the International Partnership
against Impunity for the Use of Chemical Weapons,
initiated by France. Such efforts are vital.
However, we must not forget that, while we sit
here debating chemical weapons, there are people on
the front lines in Syria who face the terrifying reality
of those heinous weapons. Dr. Mamoun Morad, whom
I mentioned earlier, is among them. A year ago, he
was on duty in Khan Shaykhun, where the Al-Assad
regime used sarin gas in an attack that killed nearly 100
people and injured more than 500 others. Dr. Morad is
a humanitarian. He saw that his countrymen were in
4/18

04/04/2018

need. He risked everything, including his own life, to
help save others.
Dr. Morad is no stranger to working under the
toughest circumstances. In 2015, the hospital where
he worked was struck by a missile. Nevertheless, he
continued to save lives. In 2016, Dr. Morad ran out
through the door of a hospital hit by an airstrike only to
see the building completely destroyed by another strike
moments later. Nevertheless, he continued to save
lives. In 2017, a missile struck the entrance of the clinic
where he worked. He was hit by debris. Nevertheless,
he continued to save lives. On 4 April 2017, just
after leaving the town’s hospital, Dr. Morad saw the
warplanes over Khan Shaykhun. He did what he had
always done — he told his driver to turn around and to
go back. What Dr. Morad saw was a living hell — one
victim of the sarin attack after another kept arriving.
He recalled:
“A boy arrived gasping for breath, with foam
coming out of his mouth and with pinpoint pupils.
We washed the boy. We washed and we washed and
we washed. We gave him what treatment we could,
and tried to resuscitate him, but he did not make it.”
Even as he felt himself being contaminated by
sarin, Dr. Morad did not stop. He was just one person,
with almost no staff. The hospital had almost no
medicine. Much of what was left had expired years ago.
However, Dr. Morad did not stop. He did whatever he
could to revive the unconscious and to clean off the
toxic chemicals from their bodies before they died. He
never ceased trying to save lives. Dr. Morad is a hero.
He has made the journey to be with us today. I ask him
to stand up.
We salute Dr. Morad for his bravery, courage and
determination to help any Syrian who is in need. Dr.
Morad is here today to be an inspiration to all of us. He
works to save the lives of the Syrian people even after
living through missile attacks and air strikes — even
after being gassed at Khan Shaykhun. Dr. Morad does
not stop; he does not give up. And if he is not going to
stop, we must not stop. We must not stop working to rid
this world of chemical weapons and holding to account
anyone anywhere who uses them.
We have done this before. We have committed to a
world without chemical weapons. We have signed the
treaties banning them. We have destroyed stockpiles.
We have launched truly independent and impartial
investigations to know who is responsible for using
18-09443

04/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8221

them. As Dr. Morad once said, “I do not care about
politics”. What he wants is for the world to speak out
about the suffering of the Syrian people and for us to do
our jobs and make the suffering stop. We owe him and
the Syrian people that much.

we remain deeply concerned — about this fact, and
we reiterate our call upon the Syrian regime to extend
its full and timely cooperation to the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in
The Hague.

On 4 April 2017, the people of Khan Shaykhun
suffered an unspeakable tragedy. On this day, 4 April
2018, let us reflect on this tragedy. Let us remember
what Dr. Morad witnessed, and let us use this meeting
as the start of a renewed partnership and a renewed
commitment to putting an end to the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. We have done it before. Even with all
of the profound divisions on the Security Council, the
United States refuses to believe that we cannot come
together once again to stop chemical weapons, not just
to protect the Syrian people but to protect us all.

As to my second point, the commemoration of the
sarin attack at Khan Shaykhun, today we commemorate
the horrendous sarin attack by the regime against
Khan Shaykhun on 4 April 2017, as Thomas Markram
highlighted in his briefing. The conclusions of the
United Nations-OPCW Joint Investigative Mechanism
(JIM), mandated by the Security Council itself, were
clear — the Al-Assad regime carried out the heinous
4 April attack, killing approximately 100 innocent
Syrian civilians, including many children, and injuring
hundreds more. The report also determined that Da’esh
was responsible for using the chemical weapon sulfur
mustard in attacks on 15 and 16 September 2016 in UmHoush, Syria.

Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): In honour of
Peru’s presidency, Mr. President, let me thank you in
Spanish: Muchas gracias, Señor Presidente. I also
extend my warm thanks to the Deputy to the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Mr. Thomas
Markram, for his briefing.
This year, we are celebrating the hundredth
anniversary of the end of the First World War. The
ensuing ban against the use of chemical weapons
raised the hope of the world for an end to the
horrors of chemical warfare. Sadly, 100 years later,
chemical-weapon attacks have been taking place in
Syria, reportedly at least 85 times. In that context today,
I will make three points: first, Syria’s failure to comply
with the Chemical Weapons Convention; secondly, the
commemoration of the sarin attack at Khan Shaykhun;
and thirdly, accountability.
As to my first point, Syria’s failure to comply with
the Chemical Weapons Convention, this month 21
years ago, the Chemical Weapons Convention entered
into force. It was the first disarmament agreement to
provide for the elimination of an entire category of
weapons of mass destruction under universally applied
international control. It was a great achievement.
Almost five years ago, Syria joined the Chemical
Weapons Convention. Syria promised to destroy
and abandon its chemical weapons programme. Yet,
month after month, we hear that the Syrian regime’s
declaration cannot be considered complete or accurate.
Until that declaration is complete, Syria is simply not
complying with its obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention. We are deeply concerned — and

Sadly, that was not the last time that we received
reports that chemical weapons were used in Syria.
Dozens of instances are currently being investigated
by the OPCW Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic. The use of chemical weapons should never go
unpunished. Impunity erodes the important prohibition
of the use of chemical weapons.
That brings me to my third point: accountability.
All members of the Security Council regularly stress
the need for accountability for perpetrators who use
chemical weapons. Yet the Security Council has not
been able to move forward for months due to the use
of veto by a permanent member of the Council. The
Joint Investigative Mechanism had a strong mandate
to investigate and identify perpetrators independently
from the politics in the Council. But the renewal of the
JIM’s mandate fell victim to exactly those politics. That
does not mean we now need to settle for less — all the
more so because, since the JIM ceased to operate, we
have received reports that the regime has carried out at
least five more chemical-weapons attacks, and maybe
even more. The disappearance of the JIM cannot be the
end of the story.
First, we must act upon the conclusions of the Joint
Investigative Mechanism and on the outcomes of the
OPCW Fact-finding Mission. I reiterate that a referral
of the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court in The Hague by the Security Council is the most
appropriate path to accountability and justice.

18-094435/18

S/PV.8221

The situation in the Middle East

Secondly, we must intensify our efforts to achieve
a mechanism that can continue the meticulous work of
the JIM. Such a mechanism should, first, independently
decide how it will conduct its investigations. I
emphasize that it should do so independently. It
should also investigate and identify perpetrators of
all parties to the armed conflict. Further, it should
operate independently from the Council, including
when it comes to the attribution of guilt. The Kingdom
of the Netherlands believes that the Security Council
should rally around the United States draft text for a
new mechanism.
Finally, we also have to consider all instruments
outside of the Council to advance accountability for
the use of chemical weapons. That effort should build
upon the important work of the JIM and the OPCW
Fact-finding Mission. We are ready to take the lead
in this regard. In this context, we also re-emphasize
our strong support for the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Those Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, and
the Commission of Inquiry. We also support the
International Partnership against Impunity for the Use
of Chemical Weapons, initiated by France.
In conclusion, there is no middle ground in the
Council when it comes to chemical weapons. Ultimately,
we must learn the lessons of history and ensure that,
100 years after the end of the First World War, there
can be no impunity for the use of chemical weapons. To
do otherwise is to effectively condone these appalling
attacks and to undermine the international architecture
that we collectively designed to stop them. In the words
of the Secretary-General, we must begin to repair the
damage to the chemical weapons disarmament and
non-proliferation regime.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands will continue to do
its utmost to achieve accountability for the horrific use
of chemical weapons in Syria. Impunity cannot prevail.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the Deputy
to the High Representative for his briefing.
I would like to start by also saluting Dr. Morad.
I thank him for his work, and I thank Ambassador
Haley for drawing our attention to his presence in this
Chamber today. I also thank all those members of the
United Nations, the International Committee of the Red
6/18

04/04/2018

Cross and others who try so hard to help the people
of Syria.
We have heard very graphic accounts of what exactly
sarin is and how it attacks the central nervous system
and leads to convulsions, paralysis and asphyxiation. I
am sure that none of us will forget the footage we saw
of the agony of the men, women and children who were
poisoned by this nerve gas. As previous speakers have
said, the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian
Arab Republic concluded that sarin was used in
Khan Shaykhun, and the OPCW-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism concluded that the Syrian
regime was responsible for the attack.
Khan Shaykhun was not the first time the regime
used chemical weapons. In 2013, after hundreds that
were killed with sarin in eastern Ghouta, Russia and the
Al-Assad regime promised the world that Syria would
abandon all of its chemical weapons. Resolution 2118
(2013) decided that Syria would destroy its chemical
weapons programme and join the Chemical Weapons
Convention. Last month, the Director-General briefed
the Council on Syria’s progress in doing just that. The
Director-General noted that Syria had destroyed its
declared programme very quickly, but that questions
had arisen following inspections conducted by the
OPCW, and overtime those questions have increased
as inspectors have deployed to Syria more than a
dozen times.
Chemicals were found that should have been
declared, and yet Syria claimed not to know why. After
long, drawn-out discussions, they finally declared the
Syrian Scientific Studies and Research Centre, but there
were still 21 serious issues that remained unaddressed.
That means that after more than four years of work, the
OPCW is still unable to verify that Syria’s declaration
is accurate, and as we have heard many times, gaps,
inconsistencies and discrepancies remain in Syria’s
account of its declaration under the Chemical Weapons
Convention. Those are not trivial points of minor
detail; they are substantive, and the seriousness of the
outstanding concerns has increased over time.
My United States and Dutch colleagues have
eloquently drawn attention to the fact that there can be
no impunity, and we echo their call to that end. Last
November, Russia blocked the renewal of the mandate
of the Joint Investigative Mechanism and that leaves
us, as the Dutch Ambassador said, without a proper
18-09443

04/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

mechanism to determine accountability. I echo what he
said about the way to explore all avenues in order to
try and find a way of establishing accountability and
responsibility for such weapons.
It is not just through actions in Syria, unfortunately,
that Russia’s disdain for the international system
manifests itself. The poisoning in Salisbury of two
people with a military-grade nerve agent endangered
anyone who chanced to be in the vicinity. More than
130 people, including a police officer, were potentially
exposed to the agent. There has been no explanation
offered as to how a Russian nerve agent came to be used
in that manner. On 22 March, a Foreign Ministry official
in Moscow rejected the idea that Russia would accept
the OPCW independent conclusions in examining
material from the Salisbury attack, and today Russia
has called a meeting of the Executive Council of
OPCW in The Hague to pre-empt the findings of the
OPCW investigation.
There should be no more victims of chemical
weapons attacks, whether they take place in the war
zone of Syria or in an English country town. The rulesbased international order and its institutions are too
valuable to be put at risk in that way. It is our collective
duty to protect them and seek accountability for those
who choose to defy them. We fail the people of Syria,
the people of Salisbury and the world if we do not act.
Both my Dutch and American colleagues drew
attention to the 100 years that have elapsed since some
of the worst battles of the First World War. Allow me
to conclude with a quote from a poem from that War, “I
died in hell — (They called it Passchendaele)”. It has a
new name now.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank the Deputy
to the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Mr. Thomas Markram, for his informative briefing.
The position of Kazakhstan on the issue remains
firm and consistent. The use of chemical weapons is
absolutely unacceptable in any circumstances. Strongly
condemning such actions, we firmly support the
collective efforts of the Council to counteract such
flagrant violations, and are determined to prevent them
from happening in the future. We would like to share
the following observations on the report before us
(S/2018/283, annex).
First of all, we are pleased that during the reporting
period there some progress was made towards the
destruction of the remaining two chemical weapons

S/PV. 8221

production facilities. We call on the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), the
Government of Syria and the United Nations Office for
Project Services to accelerate the measures, as long as
current circumstances are favourable.
At the same time, we are concerned about the lack of
progress in clarifying all outstanding issues regarding
the initial declaration of the Syrian Arab Republic.
We urge the Government of Syria and the OPCW to
cooperate more closely and to maximize interaction in
order to resolve all the identified gaps, inconsistencies
and discrepancies. If some assistance is required from
the Council, the parties should request it with practical
proposals on how to intensify such cooperation. At the
same time, they should outline concrete obstacles that
prevent them from achieving the necessary results.
In that regard, the OPCW is supposed to provide
full reports on the work of the Declaration Assessment
Team. Likewise, we expect it to update us on the work of
the Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic,
especially on studying all allegations on the use of
chemical weapons in Syria. We note simultaneously
that the Council has not yet restored its investigative
potential. We hope that the two penholders will make
exhaustive attempts to find common ground so as to be
able to proceed further.
The last disturbing factor for us is the continued
threat of the use of chemical weapons in Syria and the
alarming allegations. We have to prevent at all costs such
destructive terrorist acts against the innocent Syrian
people. Proactive steps are essential, recognizing that
such acts undermine all international efforts to achieve
a comprehensive solution to the military and political
crisis in Syria. The Security Council remains the main
organ responsible for preserving peace and security and
relentlessly searching for a peaceful solution to crises
and conflicts throughout the world. Unilateral military
actions, beyond the legitimate decisions of the Security
Council, are not an option.
It is extremely important and necessary to overcome
all differences among the members of the Council that
prevent the complete elimination of the threat of use of
chemical weapons in Syria. It is equally vital to remove
all impediments to conducting an independent and
impartial investigation to identify those responsible
for chemical crimes. Kazakhstan is committed to
ensuring that the Council works constructively, and
encourages the members to prevent the politicization

18-094437/18

S/PV.8221

The situation in the Middle East

and polarization of the Council. To do so only militates
against a unified response to current challenges
and threats.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Peruvian presidency for holding this important
meeting and Mr. Thomas Markram for his very
insightful briefing. I would also like to welcome Dr.
Mamoun Morad to our meeting.
I shall raise three points today on the use of
chemical weapons in Syria, its importance with respect
to non-proliferation and our collective security, and the
imperative of the fight against impunity.
The chemical weapons attack in Khan Shaykhun
that took place one year ago to the day marked a new and
horrific stage in the plunge into the hell of the Syrian
tragedy. On 4 April 2017, with the use of sarin gas, the
Syrian regime revealed to the world its determination
to crush its opponents and its people by every means
possible, and to that end di not hesitate to use the most
terrifying weapons of destruction.
One year later, the violence continues in
Syria and the Syrian regime has not stopped using
chemical weapons, which almost a century ago the
international community resolved to ban forever and
which the Syrian regime itself had committed not to
use. Its responsibility has been established publicly
and unambiguously by the mechanisms we created
together to determine responsibilities. No attempt to
discredit and consign to oblivion the clear conclusions
reached by the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM) can change that reality. No one can
claim that they did not know.
I would remind those who seek to refute the
responsibility of the Syrian regime that it is not possible
at present to confirm that Syria declared all its stocks
and capacities in 2013. The ongoing use of chemical
weapons in Syria is an indisputable indication that
stockpiles of sarin and chlorine indeed exist.
Two things are clear — either Syria lied as it assumed
its obligations or it carried out a secret programme in
breach of those obligations. Of course, a combination
of those two theories cannot be ruled out. Therefore,
we can only reiterate our call on the Syrian regime to
respond to all of the many unanswered questions. The
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) inspection teams are rigorous and professional
8/18

04/04/2018

in carrying our their mission and have been commended
by all States. We take note of the information provided
with regard to the upcoming destruction of Syria’s last
declared chemical weapons productions facilities and
reiterate our full support to the OPCW.
The use of chemical weapons by anyone in any
circumstances violates the universal conscience
and the most basic norms of international law. Make
no mistake — the use of chemical weapons poses
a potentially lethal threat to the sustainability of the
international chemical non-proliferation regime. That
regime is one of the most developed and successful of all
the international non-proliferation regimes. Allowing it
to fracture without taking action would be tantamount
to endorsing the decline of the entire international
regime for the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, which we built together over several
decades, step by step, and which is the backbone of the
international security architecture and one of the key
achievements of multilateralism.
Allowing those who have contributed to the
re-emergence of such weapons to go unpunished breaks
the taboo surrounding their use and promotes their
proliferation. Regrettably, the use of a military-grade
neurotoxin on British soil just a month ago confirms
that our concerns are warranted. A taboo has been
broken in Syria, Salisbury and elsewhere. It poses a
direct threat to one of the key tenets of our collective
security. It is therefore urgent that we all reaffirm and
consolidate the absolute ban of such substances.
If we wish to return to a complete prohibition of
chemical weapons, we cannot allow those who use them
to go unpunished. If we want to reaffirm and strengthen
the taboo against the use of chemical weapons,
impunity cannot be a moral or political option. The use
of chemical weapons against civilians is a war crime
and even a crime against humanity. Those responsible
must answer for their actions. The issue of determining
responsibility cannot be overlooked.
Evidence has been collected, in particular by the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic, established by the General Assembly and
tasked with facilitating investigations into the most
serious crimes committed in Syria. Such evidence will
be preserved and used in national and international legal
18-09443

04/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

proceedings because, without justice for the victims,
there will be no lasting peace in Syria. Justice must be
a separate dimension in all political solutions, pursuant
to resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex). As I have already stated, although
the countries in the Astana process meet in Turkey,
Geneva is the only forum that can provide a lasting
solution to the conflict.
There is a serious risk of undermining the
non-proliferation region if we allow impunity to
prevail. That is why we will continue to fully engage in
all forums to combat impunity for the use of chemical
weapons. It is also for that reason that in January
France launched the International Partnership against
Impunity for the Use of Chemical Weapons. This open
and pragmatic partnership brings together States that
reject impunity for those involved in chemical attacks
or in the development of chemical programmes. It unites
all States that are concerned that the non-proliferation
regime and strategic stability could be undermined.
It was established to support the actions of all
international investigative mechanisms and forums. It
is a global partnership that applies to all instances of
the use of chemical weapons throughout the world and
by all actors, State and non-State alike. The partnership
is open and all States that abide by its principles are
invited to join.
Now that the taboo against the use of such weapons
has been broken, there is the risk of such weapons falling
into the hands of other actors, in particular non-State
actors. I recall that the JIM concluded that mustard gas
was used twice by Da’esh. States that refused to punish
the perpetrators identified by the JIM or to extend its
mandate also squandered an opportunity to send a clear
message to terrorists. It is up to all States to protect
themselves against terrorist groups and their possible
access to weapons of mass destruction.
The issue surrounding the use of chemical weapons
affects our core values and security. If there is one area
in which the members of the Security Council have the
moral and political responsibility to work together and
take action, it is this. If there is one area in which the
credibility of the Council is at stake and where tactics
and games have no place, it is this.
This year, as we commemorate the hundredth
anniversary of the end of the First World War, in which
the use of gas in combat had devastating effects, and
remember the tragedy of Khan Shaykun, on behalf

S/PV. 8221

of France I make an urgent request that we set aside
our political differences and end the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. We owe it to the civilians who are the
primary victims of such weapons. We also owe it to the
future of the international non-proliferation regime for
chemical weapons, which is one of the keystones of our
collective security.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
meeting and wish you every success in steering the
work of the Security Council this month.
We also thank Mr. Thomas Markram, Deputy to
the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for
his briefing today.
We are meeting to discuss the issue of chemical
weapons in Syria, on which all members of the Council
firmly agree within the context of the Syrian crisis.
Based on this consensus, the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM) was established to hold
accountable the perpetrators of crimes committed with
chemical weapons in Syria. The Mechanism was able to
determine those responsible for several crimes, including
the incident that took place in Khan Shaykhun, whose
first anniversary we mark today. Since then, we in the
State of Kuwait have demanded an independent and
impartial international investigation into the incident.
The JIM determined the perpetrators of that and other
painful incidents. Nonetheless, the Council was unable
to hold any party accountable. Therefore, the justice we
hoped for dissipated as a result of divisions among the
member States, which prevented the extension of the
JIM’s mandate.
The State of Kuwait fully supports the work of
the United Nations and of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) through its
Fact-finding Mission investigating allegations of the
use of chemical weapons in Syria. We commend the
Mission’s performance and professionalism and call
on the Syrian authorities to cooperate with the OPCW
in order to resolve the discrepancies concerning the
details of their chemical programme. The provisions
of resolution 2118 (2013) are conclusive and decisive
regarding the accountability of those responsible for
the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
We cannot accept the current situation, namely, the
continued use of chemical weapons in Syria more than
four years after the adoption of that resolution. This

18-094439/18

S/PV.8221

The situation in the Middle East

means that we have failed the Syrian people, and could
not end their suffering from the use of these weapons
against them in various Syrian areas. On more than one
occasion we have expressed our full backing for any
accountability alternatives and mechanisms that would
enjoy the consensus of all members of the Council
in a manner that would ensure its independence,
neutrality and professionalism, while stressing that
its responsibility is exclusively to determine who is
responsible for the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
The Security Council would then call to account the
perpetrators responsible for committing those crimes,
according to the principle of no impunity provided for
in resolution 2118 (2013).
We believe that those elements exist in the United
States draft resolution being discussed by the members
of the Council. We call on all Member States to build
upon this draft resolution as a good basis for any
negotiations on such a mechanism in the future. Kuwait
also supports the French Partnership Initiative and the
principles set out therein aimed at holding accountable
those responsible for the use of chemical weapons and
ensuring that there is no impunity.
We reiterate our full readiness to participate in
any effort to achieve consensus in the positions of
Security Council Member States so as to ensure that the
perpetrators of such internationally prohibited crimes
are held accountable and that the non-proliferation
regime is preserved. This is based on our principled
and firm commitment condemning any use of chemical
weapons as a gross violation of international law, while
stressing the importance of bringing to international
justice the perpetrators of such crimes, whatever they
may represent.
In conclusion, we welcome the efforts of the
General Assembly and support the work of the impartial
and independent International Mechanism in assisting
the investigation and prosecution of those responsible
for the most serious crimes under international law
committed in Syria since 2011, including crimes related
to the use of chemical weapons. We look forward to the
results of its first report in this regard, which will be
discussed on 17 April in the General Assembly.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank Deputy High
Representative Thomas Markram for his briefing. As
he noted, it has been a year since the chemical attack in
Khan Shaykun claimed the lives of innocent civilians
in Syria. We reiterate our strong condemnation of this
10/18

04/04/2018

inhumane attack. I thought that I should tell the Deputy
High Representative that the way in which he concluded
his statement was very, very appropriate. He is right in
stressing how critical the unity of the Council on this
matter is and that it is the key to everything.
One year after the barbaric attack in Khan
Shaykun, the alleged use of chemical weapons in Syria
continues unabated, hence this matter remains a source
of great concern. We still believe that those responsible
for the use of chemicals as weapons must be held
accountable based on robust evidence. This requires,
as the Secretary-General mentioned in his letter
dated 28 March 2018 (S/2018/283), a unified response
from the Council. We believe that without unity, the
damage to the chemical-weapons disarmament and
non-proliferation regime cannot be repaired.
We find it very encouraging indeed that the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) has continued to make all the arrangements
required to support the Syrian Government in destroying
the two remaining above-ground facilities, including
by agreeing additional amendments to the tripartite
agreement concluded among the OPCW, the United
Nations Office for Project Services and the Syrian
Government. We hope that all these preparations will
lead to the elimination of the two remaining facilities.
Regarding the outstanding issues related to the
initial declaration, we note that the OPCW remains
unable to state that the declaration is accurate and
complete. In this connection, we reiterate the importance
of continued and more fruitful communication between
the OPCW and the Syrian Government, with the
ultimate objective of addressing the remaining gaps
and inconsistencies. We see no reason why this could
not be expedited.
We also note that the Fact-finding Mission has
continued its investigation into allegations of the use
of chemical weapons in Syria, including by deploying
a team in Syria, as mentioned by the Deputy High
Representative. It is imperative that the mission’s
investigation into all allegations continue, including
recent reports of the use of chemicals as weapons.
However, the Council must address the current
institutional gap by creating an independent, impartial
and professional investigative mechanism that could
identify the actors responsible, both State and non-State.
We have no doubt that the issue of an accountability
mechanism should be given extremely high priority.
18-09443

04/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

This, as we have said repeatedly, would require unity on
the part of the Council. Hence we join in the call made
by the Deputy High Representative that the unity of the
Council should be restored on this important matter
so as to deter and stop the use of chemical weapons in
Syria and beyond.
We indeed would recall, as others have already
mentioned, that the Council had successfully summoned
its collective will in the past to achieve unity with a
view to addressing the challenges posed by chemical
weapons. There is no reason why this feat cannot be
repeated.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Peru for having convened this open meeting and
Deputy High Representative Thomas Markram for his
briefing.
Since the chemical-weapons attack incident
in Syria, China has been deeply concerned, as we
strongly condemn any attack against civilians. China’s
position on the issue of chemical weapons has been
consistent: we firmly oppose the use by any country,
organization or individual of chemical weapons, under
any circumstances.
China supports the carrying out of a comprehensive,
objective and impartial investigation into the use of
chemical weapons on Syrian territory so as to achieve a
result that can pass the litmus test of history and truth,
bringing the perpetrators and the parties responsible
for the use of chemical weapons to justice.
China is deeply concerned about the recent
incidents involving the suspected use of toxic chemicals
as weapons. The establishment of a new investigation
into the use of chemical weapons in Syria aimed at
determining the truth, in a bid to prevent the recurrence
of the use of chemical weapons on Syrian territory, is
of vital importance; this is also the consensus of all
parties in the Security Council. We appreciate Russia’s
active efforts to promote the establishment of a new
investigative mechanism and hope that the members
of the Council will be united and continue their
constructive consultations on this issue.
All parties concerned should continue to insist
that the Security Council and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) be the main
channels for dealing with the Syrian chemical-weapon
issue in an effort to seek proper solutions through
consultations. China welcomes the positive progress

S/PV. 8221

made in the OPCW’s efforts to destroy the remaining
two chemical-weapon facilities in Syria and hopes
that the parties concerned will cooperate closely and
complete related work as soon as possible. At the same
time, China hopes that the Syrian Government will duly
continue to maintain its cooperation with the OPCW in
order to resolve all relevant issues regard to its initial
declaration on its chemical-weapons programme.
The Syrian conflict has entered its eighth year
and led to profound suffering for the Syrian people. A
political settlement is the only solution to the Syrian
issue. The international community should increase its
support for United Nations mediation efforts and the
work of Special Envoy De Mistura in order to begin the
next round of Geneva peace talks as soon as possible
and to move forward constructively. China welcomes
the summit meeting held by Russia, Turkey and Iran,
which China hopes will contribute to advancing the
process leading to peace talks in Geneva.
Mr. Zambrana Torrelio (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, we express
our gratitude for the briefing by Deputy to the High
Representative for Disarmament Thomas Markram, and
to the presidency of Peru for convening this meeting.
We underscore the Syrian Government’s
cooperation in initiating the last phase of destroying
the remaining facilities declared by Syria and verified
by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW). In that regard, we highlight the
most recent meeting held in Beirut this past March,
which consisted of representatives of the United
Nations Office for Project Services, the OPCW and
the Syrian Government, the outcome of which made it
possible to agree on new amendments to the tripartite
agreement that would facilitate the destruction of the
those facilities, which would take two to three months.
We call on the Syrian authorities to continue
and expand upon that cooperation by providing the
clarifications requested by the Declaration Assessment
Team in connection with activities carried out by their
Government and the Scientific Studies and Research
Centre. We highlight the fact that the second round of
inspections at the Barzah and Jamrayah facilities, as
well as visits others, this past February has shown that
their activities were consistent with obligations under
the Chemical Weapons Convention.
On the other hand, we reiterate our concern about
recent reports of the alleged use of chemical weapons

18-0944311/18

S/PV.8221

The situation in the Middle East

in Syria. As it has always stated, Bolivia categorically
condemns the use of chemical weapons and the use of
chemical components as weapons, while considering
such use an unjustifiable and criminal act, wherever,
whenever and by whomever it is committed. We
believe that nothing can justify their use regardless
of circumstances and those who use them, as they
constitute a grave violation of international law and a
threat to international peace and security.
In that regard, we reiterate our firm support for
the OPCW and its Fact-finding Mission so that, in
line with their mandates, they can continue their
investigative work and verify the alleged use of
chemical weapons in the most objective, methodical
and technical manner possible. We call on all parties
to lend their full cooperation so that an effective,
transparent and conclusive investigation can be carried
out as soon as possible. We must be aware, however,
that an investigation of the facts alone is not enough. It
is crucial to be able to depend upon a mechanism that
enables perpetrators to be identified so that they can
then be brought to justice before the appropriate entities.
If it is our goal to establish a new transparent
mechanism that enables investigating and identifying
the perpetrators of such atrocities, then we confront
the challenge and shoulder the responsibility of not
politicizing or instrumentalizing the Security Council.
We reiterate the need and the utmost importance of
demonstrating the Security Council’s unified stance
on this issue to the international community, and call
on the parties involved to discuss and exchange views
on the establishment of an independent, impartial
and representative mechanism that will allow for a
complete, reliable and conclusive investigation.
Bolivia categorically rejects the unilateral
imposition of sanctions, as they represent a grave
threat to the international order and run contrary to the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, thereby
jeopardizing the political process and, consequently,
peacebuilding in Syria.
Lastly, we emphasize that the only way to settle
the conflict is through an inclusive political process,
deliberated and led by and for the Syrian people.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me thank
Mr. Markram for his briefing this morning.
As other speakers before me have pointed out,
today marks the one-year anniversary of the sarin
12/18

04/04/2018

attack in Khan Shaykhun, which the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism has attributed
to the Syrian regime. That was a repugnant attac, with
a large number of civilian casualties. Today, the failure
to agree on a new independent and impartial attributive
mechanism for chemical-weapons use in Syria casts a
particularly dark shadow over the Security Council.
Sweden condemns in the strongest terms the
continued and repeated use of chemical weapons
in Syria, which constitutes a serious violation of
international law and a threat to international peace and
security. The use of chemical weapons in armed conflict
is prohibited and is a war crime. The perpetrators of
such crimes must be held accountable. Impunity cannot
be accepted.
With regard to the implementation of resolution
2118 (2013), I reiterate our deep concern that the
OPCW is still unable to confirm whether Syria’s initial
declaration on its chemical-weapons programme is
accurate and complete. A number of serious outstanding
issues remain. As a matter of fact, the Director-General
of the OPCW reported last month that the initial five
outstanding questions currently stand at 22. That
includes the case of the Syrian Scientific Studies and
Research Centre, regarding which several questions
remain unanswered. We once again call upon the
Syrian authorities to fully and proactively cooperate
with the OPCW on all outstanding issues. There
must be full disclosure and submission of all required
documentation without delay.
We share the Secretary-General’s alarm about
persistent reports of the use of chemical weapons in the
conflict in Syria. Those must be followed up by timely
and impartial investigations, and we reiterate our full
support for the OPCW Fact-finding Mission. But the
perpetrators of such attacks must also be identified
and held to account. We deeply regret that the Council
failed to agree on an extension of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism last November (see S/PV.8105). An
attributive mechanism is essential to protecting the
international disarmament and non-proliferation
regime and to ensuring accountability for the repeated
use of chemical weapons in Syria. In that regard, I join
the representatives of France, Ethiopia and Kazakhstan,
among others, in their urgent call for unity. We need
to come together in the Council and shoulder our
responsibility. We reiterate our call for constructive
18-09443

04/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8221

engagement by all members, and we remain ready to
engage in and contribute to such consultations.

Council, offers hope for the actual destruction of
chemical weapons.

Sweden supports all international efforts to combat
the use and proliferation of chemical weapons — by
State and non-State actors alike — anywhere in the
world. We will continue to do our part to end impunity
for the use of chemical weapons. That is why Sweden
joined the International Partnership against Impunity
for the Use of Chemical Weapons — an initiative
taken by France designed to complement and support
our collective work in multilateral forums, as well
as existing multilateral mechanisms. That is why we
will continue to support the Human Rights Council’s
Commission of Inquiry and the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011. And that is why we will continue to pursue efforts
to establish a new independent and impartial attributive
mechanism for chemical-weapons use in Syria, because,
at the end of the day, there can be no sustainable or
long-term peace in Syria without accountability for the
crimes committed. We owe that to the victims of Khan
Shaykhun and elsewhere in Syria.

In that regard, Côte d’Ivoire is pleased to have
signed, in Paris on 23 January, the declaration of
principles issued by the meeting held at the initiative
of France on the topic of combating impunity through
the International Partnership against Impunity for the
Use of Chemical Weapons. While it does not replace
the long-standing instruments for combating the use of
chemical weapons, such an initiative helps to strengthen
the existing mechanism. In that context, my delegation
would like to thank all States that have contributed
to the Trust Fund for Syria Missions, established in
November 2015 to support the OPCW and the Factfinding Mission.

Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): Côte d’Ivoire thanks Mr. Thomas Markram,
Deputy to the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, for his useful briefing on the most recent
developments on the topic under consideration
this morning.
My statement will focus on two points, namely, the
elimination of the Syrian chemical-weapons programme
and the challenges ahead.
The delegation of Côte d’Ivoire notes the destruction
of all Syrian chemical weapons removed from Syrian
territory by States parties to the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), as well as
25 of the 27 chemical-weapons production facilities
declared by the Government of that country. The
cooperation efforts between the Syrian Government,
the OPCW and the United Nations Office for Project
Services, which led to the amendment in Beirut of the
tripartite agreement on the destruction of the remaining
chemical-weapons production facilites, are to be
applauded and encouraged. Such cooperation, which is
also reflected in the preparation and regular submission
of Syria’s monthly reports to the OPCW Executive

It should be noted that, despite the encouraging
progress, major challenges remain. My delegation
therefore urges the Syrian authorities to continue their
cooperation with the OPCW with a view to an adequate
response to outstanding issues, in particular the complete
destruction of the remaining chemical-weapons
production facilities, the declaration of the Syrian
Arab Republic regarding its chemical weapons arsenal,
and the activities of the Syrian Scientific Studies and
Research Centre.
Côte d’Ivoire believes that any use of chemical
weapons is a violation of the Chemical Weapons
Convention and the hard-won international standard
that prohibits those weapons. It therefore encourages the
OPCW, the Fact-finding Mission and the Syrian Arab
Republic to continue their cooperation on eliminating
chemical weapons in Syria.
My delegation reiterates its call for a political
settlement of the Syrian conflict. We call on the Syrian
parties to resume peace talks as part of an inclusive
political dialogue, as provided for by resolution 2254
(2015), which sets out a road map for a political process
to end the crisis in Syria.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire urges the Council to
restore its unity, without which it cannot take positive
action with a view to establishing a consensus-based
mechanism tasked with attributing responsibility for
the use of chemical weapons in Syria, and thereby to
end their use in any conflict once and for all.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): Allow me to thank
Mr. Thomas Markram, Deputy to the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for his

18-0944313/18

S/PV.8221

The situation in the Middle East

briefing and for conveying to us the fifty-fourth
monthly report of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (S/2018/283, annex).
Two weeks ago, we took the opportunity of Mr. Ahmet
Üzümcü, Director-General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), being in
New York to thank him for the dedicated and tireless
efforts of the OPCW to strengthen and to maintain the
chemical non-proliferation and disarmament regime.
Allow me also to stress that Poland highly values the
efforts of the Fact-finding Mission with regard to all
its allegations of the use of chemical weapons in the
Syrian Arab Republic.
We note with the utmost concern that the OPCW
Technical Secretariat remains unable to confirm that
the declaration submitted by Syria could be considered
as accurate and complete in accordance with the
Chemcial Weapons Convention and the decisions of
the OPCW Executive Council. Once again, we join
the Secretary-General in calling on Syria to extend its
fullest cooperation to the Declaration Assessment Team
in order to clarify all existing gaps, inconsistencies
and discrepancies.
Today we observe the first anniversary of the deadly
chemical attack on Khan Shaykun, which left dozens
of victims dead or wounded. As the OPCW-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism concluded in its
report of 26 October 2017 (see S/2017/904, annex), the
information gathered was sufficient to claim that the
Syrian Arab Republic was responsible for the release of
sarin at Khan Shaykhun on 4 April 2017.
However, the individuals and groups responsible
for that and other attacks have not been brought to
justice, and the use of chemical weapons has become
an almost regular practice in the war being waged
in Syria. That is why we must send a clear message
that the use of chemical weapons by anyone will not
be tolerated. It is yet another reason that we need to
ensure that the international community is empowered
to address each and every chemical attack and to hold
the perpetrators accountable. We call on our partners to
engage in a constructive discussion in order to establish
an independent, credible and professional investigative
mechanism to replace the former Joint Investigative
Mechanism. We believe that the draft resolution of the
United States is a good basis for further discussion in
that regard.
14/18

04/04/2018

Putting an end to such impunity is a matter
not only of justice but also of the credibility of the
non-proliferation system and of the security of all of
us. Only a month ago, we witnessed another example of
the unprecedented use of a chemical agent in Salisbury
in the United Kingdom. We hope that the responsibility
for that attempt will be established quickly and that the
perpetrators of that reckless act will be held accountable
as soon as possible.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea
appreciates the convening of this meeting. We would
like to reiterate our gratitude and appreciation to the
United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs,
represented here today by Mr. Thomas Markram,
Deputy to the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs. Unsurprisingly, he has provided us a grim
picture of the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
In 2013, in this very Chamber the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2118 (2013), which
urges the warring parties in Syria to destroy all
chemical-weapons stockpiles in the country. Almost
five years have passed, and the debate around this issue
is still as old as the conflict itself, which has been going
on for eight years.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea, a State party
to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) and, like all the members of the
Security Council, a signatory to the Chemical Weapons
Convention, urges the parties involved to be honest
in declaring their chemical arsenals. We understand
that in the context of prolonged confrontations, the
manufacture and use of chemical weapons end up
serving a tactical objective, a plan of provocations in
which each party’s aim is to blame the others. Thus
the Syrian opposition and the Islamist groups claim
that the Syrian Government is trying to use poisonous
gases to suffocate the last rebel bastions, while the
Government forces claim that their opponents still have
small chemical-weapon workshops that they are using
to prepare chemical attacks in the regions we have
discussed in order to blame the Government.
The Security Council must put an end to this
political game. The use of chemical weapons in Syria
clearly poses a threat to international peace and
security. We must therefore prevent chemical war in
Syria from changing the way we approach conflicts in
future. What should the Security Council’s coordinated
18-09443

04/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

response to the continued use of chemical weapons
in Syria be? The confrontational positions among
Council members with the capacity to influence the
parties to the conflict show that ending the use of
chemical weapons in Syria and the world as a whole
depends on reaching an inclusive political agreement.
Without a clear international consensus, we run the
risk of extending the conflict, with all its direct and
collateral consequences.
We know that the Council no longer has an
investigative mechanism that can hold violators of the
Chemical Weapons Convention in Syria accountable.
Nonetheless, my Government continues to insist on the
urgent need for the most influential organ of the United
Nations to speed up the implementation of a truly
independent, professional and impartial investigative
instrument. That is the only way to reunite the Council
on the issue of chemical weapons in Syria. It is a
challenge that goes far beyond Syria. It is about our
collective responsibility and moral obligation to the
victims of this long conflict.
I would like to conclude by calling on the members
of the Security Council to reflect on Article 26 of the
Charter of the United Nations, which reminds us that
one of the powers of the Security Council is
“to promote the establishment and maintenance
of international peace and security with the least
diversion for armaments of the world’s human and
economic resources”,
and on the words of Secretary-General António
Guterres in Geneva on 24 October 2017, when he said,
“Disarmament can play an important role in ending
existing conflicts and preventing the outbreak of
new strife. Disarmament and arms control processes
provide the breathing space for confidence to be
built [and] stability to be strengthened.... This was
true during the Cold War and it is true now.”
With that, I would like to end by solemnly
reaffirming the official position of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea, which is to condemn and reject
the manufacture, stockpiling, use, distribution and
improvement of chemical weapons and other related
weapons, whose use can cause only desolation in
human lives, and to advocate for their total elimination.
We saw the consequences of that use a year ago in Khan
Shaykhun, and we therefore take this opportunity to
reiterate our unreserved condemnation of that attack.

S/PV. 8221

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): Since I have not personally had the
opportunity to do so yet, I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your presidency of the Security
Council and to wish you every success with it. We also
thank Mr. Markram for his briefing.
In view of the fact that an act of provocation
involving the use of a chemical-warfare agent took
place in Khan Shaykhun, Syria, on 4 April 2017, exactly
one year ago, we believe it will be helpful to analyse
the incident and its consequences, including in terms
of global and regional security, from the vantage point
of today. A year has gone by and yet the circumstances
around the chemical incident in Khan Shaykhun remain
essentially obscure. Needless to say, the quote-unquote
work done by the defunct Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM) cannot be taken
seriously by professionals. The competent Russian
authorities have clearly shown that the Mechanism’s
conclusions were nothing but an arrangement designed
to fit a pre-programmed result — blaming the Syrian
authorities. The Fact-finding Mission of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and
the JIM have demonstrated a rare degree of inertia and
incapacity and have been participants in unscrupulous
acts of fraud. Basically, the JIM’s conclusions were
contrary to the laws of physics, the chemistry of toxins,
aviation, ballistics and explosive materials.
During the investigation, the standards of the
Chemical Weapons Convention were completely
ignored. The experts did not visit the place where the
incident occurred or comply with the chain-of-custody
principle for preserving the physical evidence. They
formulated their hypothesis based on information that
militias from armed groups had eagerly palmed off on
them with the help of outside sponsors and dubious
entities linked to terrorists, such as the White Helmets.
As I said, the results of the former JIM’s investigation
have nothing in common with a serious scientific and
technical analysis.
Because of this, Russia was unable to support the
extension of the mandate of the unchanged Mechanism,
especially since its unfounded, politicized conclusions
damaged the reputation of a genuine international
investigation. Nonetheless, knowing that armed
groups in the region, including some affiliated with
terrorists, have amassed a considerable toxic-chemical
capacity, not only did we not dispute the importance

18-0944315/18

S/PV.8221

The situation in the Middle East

of designating an independent investigative body, we
have proposed a specific alternative to the JIM and
circulated a draft resolution to that effect, currently in
blue, to Security Council members. We have clearly
outlined the main points of our position in the light of
the lamentable experience with the JIM. The SecretaryGeneral would select a professional and impartial team
for the proposed mechanism on a basis of the broadest
possible geographic representation, with the Security
Council’s approval. The basic procedure would involve
visiting the areas where the incidents took place to
take samples and interview witnesses, while strictly
complying with the chain-of-custody principle in
ensuring the preservation of the material evidence.
Based on the critical and objective evidence
collected by such a mechanism, the Security Council
would be able to attribute responsibility for any incident
involving the use of toxic substances. In coordination
with the Committees established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) and to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011)
and 2253 (2015), it would still be important to analyse
any information about chemical production by non-State
actors and their use in practice of toxic substances,
including for purposes of provocation. The authorities
in Damascus have repeatedly reported stagings of
incidents using professional video equipment and
extras provided by the White Helmets. However, that
information has either been deliberately ignored or
considered a low priority.
In order to avoid structural flaws and continued
confrontations regarding the findings of an eventual
investigative body, we suggest that its leadership be
composed of experts representing the five permanent
members of the Security Council, who would make
decisions by consensus. We believe that approach
would offend no one, since it was precisely owing
to disagreements among those countries that the
fundamental problems in assessing the situation
regarding the use of chemical weapons in Syria arose.
Nevertheless, our Western colleagues are insisting
on recreating a mechanism that suits them, with its
inherent defects, and which would rubber-stamp the
decisions they need. At the same time, they are trying
to bring in bodies that in principle have neither the
mandate nor the resources for investigating possible
chemical incidents. Bypassing the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, France and its allies
are forging a narrow group of similarly anti-Damascusminded people, simultaneously undermining the
16/18

04/04/2018

international architecture for the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and the authority and
integrity of the OPCW. All of that is accompanied by
harsh pressure on other States.
We have not forgotten another memorable date.
All things being equal, ideally, it should have been the
day we held today’s meeting. On 7 April 2017, three
days after the incident in Khan Shaykhun, before
the investigation had even begun, the United States
carried out an act of military aggression against Syria,
launching missile strikes at the Al-Shayrat airbase. The
delegations that were on the Security Council at the time
must remember how our American colleagues were
expressing their willingness to find mutually acceptable
solutions for the modalities of the investigation while
the missiles were already flying towards Syria, in a
clear demonstration that some capitals have no need
of an international investigation in a situation where
the goal continues to be getting rid of the legitimate
Syrian Government. International law is getting close
to collapse when suspicions rather than confirmed facts
rule the evidence.
Nor do they want any investigations or mechanisms
now, it seems. A number of countries continue to
make confident claims about Damascus’s use of
chemical weapons, despite the obvious absurdity of
such statements and the absence of evidence and, most
importantly, any military or political reasons for such
actions by the Syrian authorities. Russia condemns
the use of chemical weapons by anyone and supports
the Secretary-General’s calls for unity in countering
this threat — but only the real one, not the imaginary.
While some of them are chasing Damascus’s phantom
chemical weapons, the potential danger of chemical
terrorism in the region continues to grow.
Guided by the common principle that the use
of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere, is
impermissible and should be investigated and punished,
that impunity is unacceptable and that the use of such
weapons constitutes a threat to the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, my Government has
instructed me to ask you, Mr. President, to convene
an open meeting of the Security Council tomorrow
afternoon at 3 p.m., concerning the letter (S/2018/218,
annex) from Prime Minister Theresa May of the
United Kingdom about the Salisbury incident. The
corresponding letter will be sent to you shortly.
18-09443

04/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
We would like to thank Mr. Thomas Markram,
Deputy to the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, for his briefing. Peru notes with alarm the
repeated reports of the use of chemical weapons
against the civilian population in Syria and the
absence of a commitment to accountability. Those
are heinous crimes, committed in open defiance of
the non-proliferation regime and a serious threat to
international peace and security, which the Council
cannot allow.
In our view, the destruction of the last two
declared chemical-weapons production facilities in
Syria is an important step. We welcome the meeting
held in Beirut by representatives of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW),
the United Nations Office for Project Services and
the Syrian Government, which will contribute to that
end. However, we are concerned to see, once again, the
continuing discrepancies in the Syrian Government’s
declaration, more than four years after its accession
to the Chemical Weapons Convention. We must urge
the Syrian authorities to provide all the information
required, without further delay.
We would also like to reiterate our support for the
professional and objective work of the OPCW Factfinding Mission and pay tribute to its staff. We stress
that its work must be complemented by an independent
mechanism that, within the framework of due process,
allows for the attribution of responsibilities in this
case, in line with international law and international
humanitarian law.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I would like to remind all speakers to keep their
statements within the time limits provided for in the
note by the President of Security Council (S/2017/507).
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your country’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
Syria has fulfilled its commitments under the
Chemical Weapons Convention and resolution

S/PV. 8221

2118 (2013). Syria has always cooperated fully and
objectively, as well as in a positive, transparent and
flexible manner, in the fulfilment of its commitments,
despite great challenges and the complicated, difficult
and provocative security situation resulting from the
hostile conduct of some regional and international
parties. The Syrian Government has realized an
unprecedented achievement in the history of the
Organization by eliminating forever the Syrian
chemical-weapons programme in record time. The
elimination was confirmed by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Mission in its report (see S/2014/444) submitted to the
Council in June 2014.
However, unfortunately, instead of commending
the efforts of the Syrian Government, some members of
the Council — and I mean the United States, which has
not destroyed its huge chemical arsenal and makes one
excuse after another to avoid doing so, in addition to the
United Kingdom and France — have mastered the art
of deception and misinformation in order to dominate
the world and return to the time of colonization
and trusteeship.
Those States continue to exploit the Council to
make false and baseless accusations against the Syrian
Government. Furthermore, they are inventing new
meeting formats at the Council, with the aim of achieving
one clear goal, namely, to obstruct any progress by the
Syrian army against the terrorist groups supported by
those same States. They aim to tarnish the image of
the Syrian Government and blackmail it politically. The
best proof of what I say is the theatrics staged by the
White Helmets, the propaganda wing of the Al-Nusra
Front. They claimed that toxic chemicals were used in
eastern Ghouta. Such claims have coincided with the
successful liberation of that area from armed terrorist
groups by the Syrian army and its allies, and were
proved to be false.
In a dangerous precedent being set, we have heard
statements by high-ranking officials of the States I
mentioned, who said that the only way for those groups
to be saved is through the use of chemical weapons in
Syria. It is as though such officials tell terrorist groups
to use chemical weapons against civilians, fabricate
evidence, use fake witnesses and manipulate crime
scenes, as they did previously, and such officials would
provide those groups with media coverage and political
support, and intervene to save them and then accuse the
Syrian Government. That is what those States tell the

18-0944317/18

S/PV.8221

The situation in the Middle East

terrorist groups to do. Such theatrics are staged not only
by the White Helmets; they are also staged here in the
Council as part two of the Khan Shaykhun play directed
by a permanent member of the Security Council.
Some members of the Council are in unprecedented
denial although the majority of the members of this
international organization agree that the conclusions
of the Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM)
against the Syrian Government pertaining to Khan
Shaykhun incident are false and unfounded. That
did not prevent some States from repeating lies and
unfounded accusations against my country. I would
like to remind the Council that the JIM refused to
visit Khan Shaykhun. It decided instead to rely on
statements made by the criminals who perpetrated
this immoral incident in Khan Shaykhun and on fake
witnesses, presented and introduced by terrorists to the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and the Joint Investigative Mechanism. The JIM also
relied on so-called open sources, which proves that
the comical investigation lacked minimum credibility
and transparency.
The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
has repeatedly underscored before the Council and
the Executive Council of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons that it condemns any
use of chemical weapons or any other kind of weapons
of mass destruction, which constitutes a crime against
humanity and is an objectionable and immoral act that
cannot be justified under any circumstances for any
reason and regardless of where it takes place. We again
stress that the Syrian army did not use any chemical
weapons. It no longer possesses such weapons. In fact,
the Syrian army itself and civilians have been the target
of chemical weapons and toxins, including chlorine,
used by armed terrorist groups. Such groups include
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, the Al-Nusra
Front and associated entities. They have used chemical
weapons in other places in Syria in terrorist crimes
they committed in the country and the wider region.
We have sent the Security Council and its specialized
agencies more than 130 letters, with details about the
possession, production and use of toxic chemicals
by armed terrorist groups. Regrettably, the Syrian
Government did not receive a response, not even one

18/18

04/04/2018

word on measures that the Council took against States
that have helped terrorists to gain access to and use
such weapons.
It is also deplorable that the Governments of some
States have claimed to defend peoples and laws, while
their political and colonial history is full of violations
against them. How can the United States, the United
Kingdom and France claim to be committed to justice
when their track record is full of shameful attacks against
people and wreaking annihilation in Palestine, Iraq,
Afghanistan, Libya, Yemen and Africa and, before that,
in Viet Nam, Cambodia, Cuba, Nicaragua, Grenada and
many other States? With regard to the martyred city of
Raqqa, an assessment mission conducted by the United
Nations visited the city a few days ago and found that
it has been completely destroyed by the attacks of the
United States-led coalition against Raqqa and other
parts of Syria. What credibility is it they talk about
before the Council?
I would also like to refer to the so-called French
initiative — the International Partnership against
Impunity for Use of Chemical Weapons. It is an attempt
to sidestep legitimate international mechanisms and to
establish a politicized, parallel mechanism in order
to serve the agendas of States that wish to accuse the
Syrian Government at all costs. The partnership does
not aim to prevent impunity, but rather to protect the
real perpetrators who use chemical weapons.
Finally, the Syrian Government underscores that
it is committed to implementing all the obligations
it assumed when it joined the Chemical Weapons
Convention, and will continue its war against terrorism
regardless of any political or media blackmail and cheap
exploitation of the blood of innocent people in Syria.
In conclusion, I would like to pose a question to
the representative of the Netherlands. Why has the
Netherlands not provided information so far about the
chemical agents and technology found on the plane that
crashed in Amsterdam in 1992? The explosion led to a
giant orange glow, smoke and strange odour. Why has
the Netherlands not provided information thus far on
those chemical agents?
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

18-09443
