V.

As a result of the above resolution. the /ists of Sta tes eligible for membership in the Industrial Development Board wi/1 be as follows:
LIST 0F STATES INDICATED IN SECTI0N 11, Pi\Ri\GRAPH 4 (a),
0F GENERAL ASSEMBLY RES0LUTI0N 2152 (XXI)

A.

Afghanistan
Algeria
Angola
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Benin
Bhutan
Botswana
Burma
Burundi

Cape Verde
Central African Republic

Chad
China
Comoros

Congo
Democratic Kampuchea
Democratic People's Republic
of Korea

Democratic Yemen
Djibouti

Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Ethiopia
Fiji

Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
India
Indonesia

lran
Iraq
Israel
lvory Coast
Jordan

Kenya
Kuwait
Lao People's Democratic

Republic
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
Madagascar

B.

C.

Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mongolia
Morocco
Mozambique
Nepal
Niger
Nigeria
Ornan
Pakistan
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Qatar
Republic of Korea
Rwanda
Sao Tome and Príncipe
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Solomon Islands
Somalía
South Africa
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Swaziland
Syrian Arab Republic
Thailand
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
United Arab Emirates
United Republic of Cameroon
United Republic of Tanzania
Upper Volta
Viet Nam
Yemen
Yugoslavia
Zaire
Zambia
Zimbabwe

LIST 0F STATES INDICATED IN SECTI0N ((, PARAGRAPH 4 (b)

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Cyprus
Denmark
Finland
France
-Germany, Federal Republic of
Greece
Iceland
treland
ltaly
Japan
Liechtenstein

Luxembourg
Malta
Monaco
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern lreland
United States of America

LIST 0F STATES INDICI\TED IN SfCTI0N 11, Pi\Ri\GRAPH 4(c)

Argentina
Bahamas
Barbados
Bolivia

125

Resolutions adopted on the nports of tbe Second Committee

Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica

Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela

Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
D.

LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN SECTI0N 11, PARAGRAPH 4(d)
Poland
Romanía
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic
Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics

Albania
Bulgaria
Byelorussian Soviet Soc,alist
Republic
Czechoslovakia
German Democratic Republic
Hungary

35/66.

Industrial development co-operation
A

THlRD GENERAL CONFERENCE OF THE UNITED
NATIONS INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENTÜRGANIZATION

The General Assemb/y,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
lnternational Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
Recalling a/so the Lima Declaration and Plan of Action on Industrial Development and Co-operation,"
adopted at the Second General Conference of the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization,
which laid down the main measures and principies for
industrial development and co-operation within the
framework of the establishment of the new international economic order,
Taking note of the New Delhi Declaration and Plan of
Action on Industrialization of Developing Countries
and International Co-operation for their Industrial
Development," adopted at the Third General Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization, held at New Delhi from 21 January to
9 February 1980, in which a strategy was spelled out for
the further industrialization of developing countries for
the 1980s and beyond, as well as a plan of action for the
restructuring of world industry within the framework of
the establishment of the new international economic
order.
Emphasizing the role of the redeployment of industrial
capacities in the context of international industrial cooperation, including resources and technology transfers
aimed at establishing and strengthening the productive
capacities of developing countries with a view to stimulating their economies, and taking into account their
potential to develop their national resources in conformity with the over-all national objectives and priorities
and the need to increase correspondingly their share in
world industrial production,
"SeeA/10112,chap. IV.
"ID/CONF.4/22 and Corr. l, chap. VI.

126

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

Conscious of the role of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization as the central co-ordinating
organ within the United Nations system for the promotion of industrial development co-operation and for the
fulfilment of the agreed measures and the attainment of
the agreed targets in both the Lima Declaration and
Plan of Action on Industrial Development and Cooperation and the New Delhi Declaration and Plan of
Action on Industrialization of Developing Countries
and lnternational Co-operation for their Industrial
Development,
Having examined the reports of the Industrial Development Board on its first special session, held from
12 to 16 November 1979," and on its fourteenth session,
held from 12 to 19 May 1980,"'
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution
1980/61 of 24 July 1980 on industrial development cooperation,
Bearing in mind the decisions adopted by the Industrial Development Board at its second special session,
held on 17 October 1980, 77
1. Takes note of the report of the Third General
Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization; 78
2. Endorses the programme priorities adopted by the
Industrial Development Board at its fourteenth session 74
on the follow-up of the decisions and recommendations
of the Third General Conference of the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization;
3. Endorses the decisions made by the Industrial
Development Board at its fourteenth session with regard
to the System of Consultations, 80 notably its decision to
establish on a permanent basis that System, which should
be an instrument through which the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization would serve as
a forum for deve!oped and developing countries in
their contacts and consultations directed towards the
industrialization of developing countries and would also
permit negotiations among interested parties at their request at the same time as, or after, consultations;
4. Urges the international community to consider
concrete measures, where appropriate, for restructuring
world industrial production through positive strategies,
thus establishing a more effective international division
of labour which would, inter afia, facilitate the redeployment of industry, expand and strengthen the industrial capacities of developing countries and promote the
domestic industrial processing of the natural resources
of developing countries;
5. Emphasizes the need to facilitate the restructuring
of world industrial production through, inter afia:
(a) Support for increased industrial production in
developing countries;
(b) Special and differential treatment in favour of
developing countries, where feasible and appropriate, in
the context of a general effort to liberalize world trade,
in particular in their favour;
(e) Trade liberalization in relation to increased
market access;
'' Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fifih Session.
Supp/ement No. 16 (A/35/ 16), vol. l.
"/bid., vol. 11.
77
/bid., vol. III, chap. 11.
"ID/CONF.4/22 and Corr.l.
79
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fifth Session,
Supplement No. /6 (A/35/16), vol. 11. para. 54.
'º !bid., paras. 148-155.

6. Reiterates the decision of the Industrial Development Board at its second special session, 81 and decides
to ensure the provision of adequate resources to enable
the United Nations Industrial Development Organization to implement its mandate, particularly as regards
the follow-up of thc Third General Conference as agreed
upon by the Board at its fourteenth session, taking into
account the budgetary restraints under which the U nited
N alions regular budget has to opera te;
7. Further reiterates, bearing in mind paragraph 75
of the report of the Permanent Committee of the Industrial Development Board on the work of its fourteenth
session/' that proper measures should be taken for ali
agreed priority areas, as agreed to by the Board at its
fourteenth regular session and its second special session,
including the developmenl of human resources and
industrial production, which were not specifically reflected in the proposals of the Secretary-General as contained in the revised work programme of the United
N ations Industrial Development Organization for 1981
and the current programme budget;"
8. Requests the secretariat of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization to take immediate
measures within its competence for the early and full implementation of the Comprehensive New Programme of
Action for the Least Developed Countries, adopted by
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in its resolution 122 (V) of 3 June 1979,x' and the
relevant resolutions and decisions of the General
Assembly, and to submit annual reports to the Industrial Development Board on the progress of industrialization of the least developed countries;
9. Appreciates the steps already taken to ensure the
co-ordination of activities with other United N ations
bodies in the field of industrial development and stresses
the need for continuing ful] co-operation and work to
ensure optimal follow-up to thc decisions, recommendations and results of the Third General Conference of
the United Nations Industrial Development Organization from the programming to the implementation
stage, particularly in such areas as consultation meetings, energy and operational activities, as agreed upon
by the Industrial Development Board at its fourteenth
regular session and at its second special session:
1O. Requests the Industrial Development Board at
its fifteenth session to consider further proposals by the
secretariat of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization for the promotion of industrialization of developing countries and to decide on further
action:
11. Appeals once again to ali Governments that have
not yet done so to sign and ratify, accept or approve the
new Constitution of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization" as early as possible, preferably no later than mid-1981;
12. Urges ali States, in particular the developed
countries, to contribute to the United Nations Industrial Development Fund or to raise their contributions,
taking into account the need for maximum flexibility,
with a view to reaching the agreed desirable funding
level of $50 million annually:
'· /bid., vol.111. para. 15
,, /bid., vol. 111, annex 11.
"See ID/B/C.3/99 and Add.l.
" See Proceedings vf the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, Fifth Session. vol. l. Report and Annexes (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14), part one, sect. A.

,, A/CONF.90/19

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

13. Decides to review, at its thirty-seventh session,
the follow-up of the Third General Conference of the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization.

83rd plenary meeting
5 December 1980
B
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT DECADE FOR A FRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling resolution 51 (XIV) adopted by the industrial Development Board at its fourteenth session on
19 May 1980,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution
1980/46 of 23 July 1980 on the Transport and Communications Decade in Africa,
Noting a/so the decisions adopted by the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity at its second extraordinary session held at
Lagos on 28 and 29 April 1980, '" and by the Council of
Ministers of that organization at its thirty-fifth ordinary
session, held at Freetown from 18 to 28 June 1980, ' 7 to
take appropriate measures to implement the Monrovia
Strategy for the Economic Development of Africa,"
l. Proc/aims the 1980s as the Industrial Development Decade for Africa;
2. Ca/Is upon the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and the Economic Commission for Africa, in close co-operation with the Organization of African Unity, to formulate proposals to
implement the programme for the Industrial Development Decade for Africa and to monitor its progress;
3. Supports the establishment of a co-ordination
unit or group within the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization for the Industrial Development Decade for Africa and requests the SecretaryGeneral to provide appropriate resources to enable that
organization to perform its role in the preparation and
implementation of the activities of the Decade;
4. Requests the Executive Director of the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization and the
Executive Secretary of the Economic Commission for
Africa to initiate appropriate contacts with the organs,
organizations and bodies of the United Nations system
in order to contribute to the success of the Industrial
Development Decade for Africa and to report on the
action taken, through the Industrial Development Board,
at its fifteenth session, and the Economic and Social
Council, at its second regular session of 1981, to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session.
83rd plenary meeting
5 December J980
35/67.

Science and technology for development
A

REPORT OF THE INTERGOVERNMENTAL COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE ANO TECHNOLOGY FOR DEYELOPMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
"" SeeA/S-11/14.
"See A/35/463 and Corr. l, annex l.
"See A/34/552, annex 1, resolution CM/Res.722 (XXXIII)

127

Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
lnternational Economic Order, which gave prominence
to the role of science and technology in promoting the
development of developing countries,
Recalling a/so its resolution 34/218 of 19 December
1979, in which it endorsed the Vienna Programme of
Action on Science and Technology for Development'"
and decided, ínter afia, to establish the lntergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology for Development, the Centre for Science and Technology for
Development, as a new and organizationally distinct
entity within the Secretariat, and the United Nations
Financing System for Science and Technology for Development, including the U nited Nations Interim Fund
for Science and Technology for Development,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/48 of 23 July 1980,
Having heard the statement by the Executive Director
of the Centre for Science and Technology for Development,''0

Reaffirming the paramount need for and importance
of the application of science and technology to development in establishing a new international economic order
and in carrying out the lnternational Development
Strategy for the Third U nited Nations Development
Decade,'' 1
Reaffirming a/so the need to strengthen the role of the
United Nations system in the field of science and technology,
Recognizing the role of the United Nations system in
assisting developing countries to promote their selfreliance in the field of science and technology,
1. Takes note of the report of the I ntergovernmental
Committee on Science and Technology for Development on its first and second sessions,'" and endorses the
resolutions and decisions contained therein;
2. Endorses the broad framework of a study of the
system-wide efficiency of the U nited N ations system in
the field of science and technology for development,''' as
recommended by the Committee in its decision 4 (11) of
4June 1980;""
3. Recommends that ali the organs, organizations
and bodies concerned in the United Nations system
should support fully the Director-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation and the
Centre for Science and Technology for Development in
the formulation of the operational plan for the implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action on
Science and Technology for Development, as contained
in resolution 1 (11) adopted by the Committee on 4 June
1980;" 4
4. Decides that the Centre for Science and Technology for Development should be allocated the
necessary resources lo permit it to carry out its work
programme, as mandated by the General Assembly in
its resolution 34 /218 and by the Committee in its resolution 1 (11) and other relevant resolutions;""
"Report of the United Nations Conference on Science and Techno/ogy for Deve/opment. Vienna. 20-3/ August /979 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.79.1.21 and corrigenda). chap. VII.
'''' Official Records o/ the General Assembly. Thirty-jijih Session.
Second Committee, 7th meeting, paras. 7-13.
,,, See resolution 35; 56 a hove. annex.
"' Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-fi/ih Session.
Supplement No 37 (A 1J5eJ7)
"A/35/184 and Add.l.
.,. See O/ficia/ Record., of the General Assembly. Thirty-fifth Session.
Supp/ement t•io. 37 (A ,, 'J7). part two. annex.
