A /77/PV.73

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

73rd plenary meeting

Wednesday, 31 May 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on agenda
items 152, sub-item (a) of 163 and 164.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Committee have been made
clear in the Committee and are reflected in the relevant
official records. If there is no proposal under rule 66 of
the rules of procedure, I shall therefore take it that the
General Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of
the Committee that are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote or position. I would
like to remind members that in accordance with
decision 34/401, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote or position only once, that is, either
in the Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different from
its vote in the Committee, and that explanations of vote
or position are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the
Committee, I would like to advise representatives that
we will proceed to take decisions in the same manner
as was done in the Committee, unless the Secretariat
is notified otherwise in advance. I therefore hope

that we may proceed to adopt without a vote those
recommendations that were adopted without a vote in
the Committee.
Agenda item 152
Financing of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/77/890)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Committee.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to take to do likewise?
The draft resolution
(resolution 77/290).

was

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agent the item 152.
Agenda item 163
Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
forces in the Middle East
(a) United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/77/891)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Committee. We
will now take decision on the draft resolution, entitled
“Financing on the United Nations Disengagement

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-15281 (E)

*2315281*

adopted

A/77/PV.73

31/05/2023

Observer Force”. The Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution
(resolution 77/291).

was

adopted

The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda
item 163.

The

Agenda item 164

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded

Financing of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/77/892)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Committee.

2/2

draft

resolution

was

adopted

(resolution 77/292).

this stage of its consideration of agent item 164.
The Assembly has thus concluded its consideration
of the reports of the Fifth Committee before it today.
The meeting rose at 10.05 a.m.

23-15281
