A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/87
27 January 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 20
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/53/L.62 and Add.1)]
53/87.

Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and protection of United
Nations personnel

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 46/182 of 19 December 1991 on the strengthening of the coordination of
humanitarian emergency assistance of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolutions 52/167 of 16 December 1997 on the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel and 52/126 of 12 December 1997 on the protection of United Nations personnel, and taking note
of Commission on Human Rights resolution 1998/37 of 17 April 1998,1
Welcoming agreed conclusions 1998/1 adopted by the Economic and Social Council at the
humanitarian affairs segment of its substantive session of 1998,2
Concerned by the increasingly difficult context in which humanitarian assistance takes place in some
areas, in particular the continuous erosion, in many cases, of respect for the principles and rules of
international humanitarian law,

1

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1998, Supplement No. 3 (E/1998/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
2

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/53/3), chap. VII.

99-76399

/...

A/RES/53/87
Page 2
Welcoming the upcoming fiftieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 19493 as an
opportunity to raise awareness for humanitarian issues, in particular the need to promote, respect and
ensure respect for the principles and rules of international humanitarian law,
Deeply concerned by the growing number of complex humanitarian emergencies, in particular armed
conflicts and post-conflict situations, in the last few years, which have dramatically increased the loss of
human lives, suffering of victims, flows of refugees and internally displaced persons, as well as material
destruction, which disrupt the development efforts of countries affected, in particular those of developing
countries,
Taking note of the statements by the President of the Security Council of 19 June 19974 and
29 September 1998,5 the report of the Secretary-General on protection for humanitarian assistance to
refugees and others in conflict situations,6 and the views expressed during the open debate in the Security
Council on 29 September 1998 on protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in conflict
situations,7
Welcoming the inclusion of attacks intentionally directed against personnel involved in a humanitarian
assistance or peacekeeping mission in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations as a war crime
in the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, adopted on 17 July 19988 by the Diplomatic
Conference of Plenipotentiaries on the Establishment of an International Criminal Court, held at Rome
from 15 June to 17 July 1998, and noting the role that the Court could play in bringing to justice those
responsible for serious violations of international humanitarian law,
Commending the courage and commitment of those who take part in humanitarian operations, often
at great personal risk,
Strongly deploring the rising toll of casualties among humanitarian personnel and United Nations
personnel in complex humanitarian emergencies, in particular armed conflicts and post-conflict situations,
and strongly condemning the acts of physical violence and harassment to which those participating in
humanitarian operations are too frequently exposed,
Aware that humanitarian operations are generally implemented through close cooperation among
Governments and the United Nations, its agencies and other international organizations, and Governments
and non-governmental organizations,

3

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.

4

S/PRST/1997/34; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1997.

5

S/PRST/1998/30; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1998.

6

Official Records of the Security Council, Fifty-third Year, Supplement for July, August and September
1998, document S/1998/883.
7

See S/PV.3932. For the final text, see Official Records of the Security Council, Fifty-third Year, 3932nd
meeting.
8

A/CONF.183/9.
/...

A/RES/53/87
Page 3

Guided by the relevant provisions on protection contained in the Convention on the Privileges and
Immunities of the United Nations,9 the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the Specialized
Agencies10 and the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel,11
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Respect for the privileges and
immunities of officials of the United Nations and the specialized agencies and related organizations: safety
and security of humanitarian personnel and protection of United Nations personnel”;12
2. Urges all States to take the necessary measures to ensure the full and effective implementation
of the relevant principles and rules of international humanitarian law, including those related to the safety
and security of humanitarian personnel and United Nations personnel;
3. Also urges all States to take the necessary measures to ensure the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel and United Nations personnel, to respect and ensure respect for the inviolability
of United Nations premises, which are essential to the continuation and successful implementation of
United Nations operations, and to ensure the speedy release of United Nations and other personnel
carrying out activities in fulfilment of the mandate of a United Nations operation who have been arrested
or detained in violation of their immunity, in accordance with the relevant conventions referred to in the
present resolution and applicable international humanitarian law;
4. Encourages all States to become parties to and to respect fully the provisions of the relevant
international instruments, including the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel;11
5. Calls upon all States to provide adequate and prompt information concerning the arrest or
detention of humanitarian personnel and United Nations personnel, to allow independent medical teams
to investigate the health of those detained and to afford them the necessary medical assistance;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary measures to ensure full respect for the
human rights, privileges and immunities of United Nations and other personnel carrying out activities in
fulfilment of the mandate of a United Nations operation, to consider ways and means to strengthen the
protection of United Nations and other personnel carrying out activities in fulfilment of the mandate of
a United Nations operation, notably by seeking the inclusion, in negotiations of headquarters and other
mission agreements concerning United Nations and associated personnel, of the applicable conditions
contained in the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations,9 the Convention on
the Privileges and Immunities of the Specialized Agencies10 and the Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary measures, falling within his
responsibilities, to ensure that security matters are an integrated part of the planning for an operation and

9

Resolution 22 A (I).

10

Resolution 179 (II).

11

Resolution 49/59, annex.

12

A/53/501.
/...

A/RES/53/87
Page 4

that such precautions extend to all United Nations and other personnel carrying out activities in fulfilment
of the mandate of a United Nations operation;
8. Further requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary measures to ensure that United
Nations and other personnel carrying out activities in fulfilment of the mandate of a United Nations
operation are properly informed and suitably trained so as to enhance their security and effectiveness in
accomplishing their functions;
9. Calls upon all States to consider signing and ratifying the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court;8
10. Strongly condemns any act or failure to act which obstructs or prevents humanitarian personnel
and United Nations personnel from discharging their humanitarian functions, or which entails their being
subjected to threats, the use of force or physical attack frequently resulting in injury or death;
11. Calls upon all Governments and parties in complex humanitarian emergencies, in particular
armed conflicts and post-conflict situations, in countries where humanitarian personnel are operating, in
conformity with the relevant provisions of international law and national laws, to cooperate fully with the
United Nations and other humanitarian agencies and organizations and to ensure the safe and unhindered
access of humanitarian personnel in order to allow them to perform efficiently their task of assisting the
affected civilian population, including refugees and internally displaced persons;
12. Reaffirms the necessity for humanitarian personnel and United Nations personnel to be properly
informed, inter alia, by their sponsoring organizations of the scope of their activities and the standards
that they are required to meet, including those contained in relevant domestic and international law, and
suitably trained so as to enhance their security and effectiveness in accomplishing their functions;
13. Also reaffirms the necessity for all humanitarian personnel to respect the national laws of the
countries in which they are operating;
14. Urges all States to ensure that any threat or act of violence committed against humanitarian
personnel on their territory is fully investigated and to take all appropriate measures, in accordance with
international law and national legislation, to ensure that the perpetrators of such acts are prosecuted;
15. Welcomes the establishment by the Secretary-General of the Trust Fund for Security of personnel
of the United Nations system in the field and encourages all States to contribute to the Trust Fund;
16. Notes the discussions on the respect for and security of humanitarian personnel at the first
periodical meeting on international humanitarian law, held at Geneva in January 1998, and of the report
of the President of that meeting;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to present a report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth
session on the safety and security situation of humanitarian personnel and protection of United Nations
personnel and measures to be taken to improve it, taking into account the views of Governments, the InterAgency Standing Committee, other relevant humanitarian actors and the United Nations Security
Coordinator.
81st plenary meeting
7 December 1998
