A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/17
28 November 1995

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 32
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/50/L.22)]
50/17.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of the Islamic Conference

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 37/4 of 22 October 1982, 38/4 of
28 October 1983, 39/7 of 8 November 1984, 40/4 of 25 October 1985, 41/3 of 16
October 1986, 42/4 of 15 October 1987, 43/2 of 17 October 1988, 44/8 of 18
October 1989, 45/9 of 25 October 1990, 46/13 of 28 October 1991, 47/18 of 23
November 1992, 48/24 of 24 November 1993 and 49/15 of 15 November 1994,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of 17 October 1995
on cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, 1/
Taking into account the desire of both organizations to cooperate more
closely in the political, economic, social, humanitarian, cultural and
technical fields and in their common search for solutions to global problems,
such as questions relating to international peace and security, disarmament,
self-determination, decolonization, fundamental human rights and economic and
technical development,
Recalling also the Articles of the Charter of the United Nations that
encourage the activities through regional cooperation for the promotion of the
purposes and principles of the United Nations,

1/

95-25718

A/50/573.

/...

A/RES/50/17
Page 2

Noting the strengthening of cooperation between the specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system and the Organization of
the Islamic Conference and its specialized institutions,
Noting also the encouraging progress made in the nine priority areas of
cooperation, as well as in the identification of other areas of cooperation,
Convinced that the strengthening of cooperation between the United
Nations and other organizations of the United Nations system and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference contributes to the promotion of the
purposes and principles of the United Nations,
Taking into account the report of the Secretary-General entitled "An
Agenda for Peace", 2/ in particular section VII, concerning cooperation with
regional arrangements and organizations, and the "Supplement to An Agenda for
Peace", 3/
Noting with appreciation the determination of both organizations to
strengthen further the existing cooperation by developing specific proposals
in the designated priority areas of cooperation, as well as in the political
field,
Welcoming the results of the coordination meeting of focal points of the
organizations and agencies of the United Nations system and the Organization
of the Islamic Conference and its specialized institutions, held at Geneva
from 19 to 21 June 1995,
Welcoming also the meeting held at United Nations Headquarters on
1 August 1994 between the Secretary-General and heads of the regional and
other organizations, including the Secretary-General of the Organization of
the Islamic Conference,
1.
Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the SecretaryGeneral; 1/
2.
Takes note of the conclusions and recommendations adopted by the
coordination meeting of focal points of the organizations and agencies of the
United Nations system and the Organization of the Islamic Conference and its
specialized institutions;
3.
Notes with satisfaction the active participation of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference in the work of the United Nations
towards the realization of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations;
4.
Requests the United Nations and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference to continue cooperation in their common search for solutions to
global problems, such as questions relating to international peace and
security, disarmament, self-determination, decolonization, fundamental human
rights, social and economic development and technical cooperation;

2/

A/47/277-S/24111.

3/

A/50/60-S/1995/1.

/...

A/RES/50/17
Page 3

5.
Welcomes the proposals of the coordination meeting of focal points
of the United Nations and the Organization of the Islamic Conference to
strengthen cooperation between the two organizations in a number of different
areas and to review the ways and means for enhancing the actual mechanisms of
such cooperation;
6.
Welcomes also the efforts of the secretariats of the two
organizations to strengthen cooperation between them in the political field
and to undertake consultations with a view to defining the mechanisms of such
cooperation;
7.
Welcomes further the periodic high-level meetings between the
Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Secretary-General of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, as well as between senior secretariat
officials of the two organizations;
8.
Encourages the specialized agencies and other organizations of the
United Nations system to continue to expand their cooperation with the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, particularly by negotiating
cooperation agreements, and invites them to multiply the contacts and meetings
of the focal points for cooperation in priority areas of interest to the
United Nations and the Organization of the Islamic Conference;
9.
Urges the organizations of the United Nations system, especially
the lead agencies, to provide increased technical and other forms of
assistance to the Organization of the Islamic Conference and its specialized
institutions in order to enhance cooperation;
10.
Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
continued efforts to strengthen cooperation and coordination between the
United Nations and other organizations of the United Nations system and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and its specialized institutions to
serve the mutual interests of the two organizations in the political,
economic, social and cultural fields;
11.
Also expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
initiative to convene a meeting of heads of regional organizations on
1 August 1994, and looks forward to similar meetings in the future;
12.
Recommends that, in order to enhance cooperation and for the
purpose of review and appraisal of progress, a general meeting between
representatives of the secretariats of the United Nations system and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and its specialized institutions should
take place in 1996, and every two years thereafter;
13.
Also recommends that coordination meetings of focal points of the
organizations and agencies of the United Nations system and the Organization
of the Islamic Conference and its specialized institutions should henceforth
be held concurrently with the general meeting;
14.
Expresses its appreciation for the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral in the promotion of cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, and expresses the hope that he will
continue to strengthen the mechanisms of coordination between the two
organizations;

/...

A/RES/50/17
Page 4

15.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly
at its fifty-first session on the state of cooperation between the United
Nations and the Organization of the Islamic Conference;
16.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-first
session the item entitled "Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference".
67th plenary meeting
20 November 1995
