THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

tll

MEETING:

NEW

31 MARCH

1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2428)

.,,,,......,,*.,..*..,..,.....~**..*

Adoption of the agenda ,.,.,...*,,..,..,*,I....

. . ..I.....

1
*,.*.*...**..

1

Letter dated 16 March 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Chad to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15643) . . .

1

WPV.2428

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol W...) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2428th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 31 March 1983, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Sir JOHN

THOMSON
(United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. SogIo (Benin), Mr.
Al-A@ (Democratic Yemen), Mr. Ibrahim (Ethiopia), Mr.
Boule (Gabon), Mr. Coumbassa (Guinea), Mr. RajaieKhorassani (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Oumarou
(Niger), Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic) and Mrs.
Mairie (United Republic of Cameroorz) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

Provisional agenda (WAgendaI2428)
1. Adoption

of the agenda

3. The PRESIDENT:
The members of the Council
have before them document S/15649, which contains the
text of a letter dated 21 March from the representative of
Chad addressed to the President of the Council.

2. Letter dated 16 March 1983 from the Permanent
Representative
of Chad to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15643).

4. Mr.

NGUAYILA

(interpretation

The meeting was called to order at 11.25 am.

MBELA

KALANDA

(Zaire)

from French): In my delegation’s view, the

case presented by Chad for the Council’s consideration
does not seem to be fundamentally different from a traditional border dispute.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

5. Just as it is acknowledged that, in this type of conflict, de facto occupation, under whatever pretext, by a
powerful neighbour of the contested area is illegal in
itself, since it is based on a policy of force, contrary to the
Charter of the United Nations and established international law, it is also acknowledged that such occupation
is dangerous, as the reaction of the victim to such an
escalation is to be feared.

Letter dated 16 March 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Chad to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (5115643)
I, The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken at the 2419th meeting, I invite the representatives of
Chad and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to take places at the
Council table; I invite the representatives of Egypt, the
Ivory Coast, Senegal and the Sudan, to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

6. Thus, the dispute under consideration boils down, in
my delegation’s view, to two aspects which members of
the Council should bear in mind: the legal and the
political.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Barma (Chad) and
Mr. Treiki (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya ) took places at the
Council table; Mr. Khalil (Egypt), Mr. Essy (Ivory Coast),
Mr. Sarre (Senegal) and Mr. Abdalla (Sudan) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

7. Regarding the legal aspect, my delegation believes,
along with a number of others which have preceded it in
this debate, that the crux of the Chadian case relates to a
problem concerning plotting the border between Chad
and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. Both on the ground
and in the texts which have been cited, the parties have
contested each other’s rights over a segment of territory
commonly known as the Aouzou Strip, as described by
the delegation of Chad in its statement before the Council [2419th meeting], Therefore, without going into the
details of the matter, which is now well known to all, my
delegation wonders whether, for this kind of dispute,
which is so clear-cut, the Council really ought to transform itself into a court of law and indulge in an exercise

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Benin, Democratic Yemen, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Guinea, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Niger, the
Syrian krab Republic and the United Republic of Cameroon in which they request to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
1

.-

.~

as that Chadian: all this is mere subterfuge, aimed at
diverting our attention in this chamber from the essence
of Chad’s complaint.

of interpreting
texts-some
of them, furthermore,
denounced and others declared non-existent-or whether,
on the contrary, it would not do better to call for the
application of Article 96 of the Charter and refer the
dispute to the International
Court of Justice for an
opinion.

14. Must the Council embark upon a procedure aimed
at recognizing the legitimacy or the illegitimacy of the
ruling authority in N’Djamena without at the same time
interfering in the internal affairs of Chad? Just as another
speaker said a few days ago, we in Zaire are not concerned with the colour or odour of Governments. What
we are interested in is not what happens among the
people of Chad within their national frontiers. What we
are interested in is quite simple: it is the right to peace,
the aspiration of Chad, this young nation in the heart of
Africa, which has long been torn apart by a pitiless fratricidal war, It is high time for the international community to help Chad rebuild itself in peace, for the
well-being of its people, who have suffered so much.

8. The delegation of Zaire believes that both the parties
and the Council’s credibility would gain from the Council’s acting in accordance with that option, that is, placing the matter before the Court, as suggested, moreover,
by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Co-operation of
Chad in his statement, in order to help re-establish the
rights inherited from the colonial rtgimes.
9. The inviolability of colonial frontiers is not a figment
of the imagination; it is a principle of law and one which
is dear to the African nations. Not only does that principle exist-and
resolution AHG/Res.l6
(I), adopted at
Cairo on 21 July 1964 at the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), is proof of that-but
it retains its full force
thanks to another principle just as dear: that of peaceful
coexistence between States, great and smali, of differing
political, economic and social systems.

15. That is why we reached our second conclusion, to
request the Council, as the primary body of the United
Nations charged with the maintenance of international
peace and security, to decide, first, that the Libyan occupation troops should immediately withdraw from the
Aouzou Strip and from any other locality within Chadian territory, and secondly, that a neutral force should
be sent to the Aouzou Strip in order to preserve peace
and security in that region pending a substantive settlement of the dispute between the two countries.

10. Faithful to the ideals of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Republic of Zaire has made the principle of
peaceful coexistence a framework within which its relations of friendship and co-operation with its neighbours
develop harmoniously, on the basis of mutual respect,
non-interference in the internal affairs of others and the
peaceful settlement of disputes. That is why we consider
that it is in the best interests of the parties concerned for
them to behave in such a way that the force of these
principles, which are the very foundation of relations
among States, will be preserved for ever.

16. I could not conclude my remarks without welcoming to New York Mr, Idriss Miskine, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Co-operation of the sister Repubfic
of Chad, a country with which my country, Zaire, has
very close ties of sincere and fruitful friendship and cooperation.
17. Mr. MASHINGAIDZE
(Zimbabwe): Sir, I wish,
on behalf of the delegation of the Republic of Zimbabwe,
to congratulate you most warmly on your assumption of
the presidency for this very eventful month of March. We
also wish to congratulate, through you, Mr, Troyanovsky, of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, who,
as your predecessor, conducted the work of the Council
with distinction during the month of February.

11. Settlement at both the bilateral and the regional
levels having failed, there is now no alternative but to
have recourse to judicial settlement, and for this the
International
Court of Justice would appear to be the
most appropriate body. That is our first conclusion.
12. Regarding the political aspect of the question, the
Council will recall that, in its complaint, Chad referred to
the actual occupation of the Aouzou Strip by Libyan
troops for the past several months. Since that is so, my
delegation believes that this is a case of an unfriendly ace
and a pointless provocation, because it obviously violates
the Charter of the United Nations, as well as estabfished
international law, and departs from traditional morality,
which is, after all, the bedrock of international relations.

18. The present meeting of the Council has been occasioned by the request of the Government of Chad, which
wants t%heCou&il to consider what has been referred to
as “the extremely serious situation prevailing in Chad as
a result of the occupation of a part of Chad territory by
Libya and of repeated acts of aggression by that country
against the people of Chad”.

13. Nothing in contemporary international law allows
anyone, great or small, to take the law into his own
hands, except, of course, in self-defence, either individual
or collective, as provided in the Charter. That is not the
case here. The presence of Libyan troops on Chadian
territory is unjustified in all respects. As we see it, ehis is
unquestionably
a threat to peace and security in the
region. It is pointless to tell us that the ruling authority in
N’Djamena is illegal or that this Chadian is not as good

19. It is a matter both for regret and great concern that
a dispute should exist between the two countries. We are
concerned because, as was clear from the statements
made by representatives of the two countries before the
Council on 22 March [2419th meeting], the peoples of
Libya and Chad are linked by history and geography.
They therefore have a common destiny and nothing can
change this reality, We are also concerned because both
countries belong to the OATJ and the Movement of Non2

AIigned Countries, two third-world organizations so
dear to the peoples of Africa and the third world. These
difficulties in the relations between the two OAU
members come at a time when the OAU and the NonAligned Movement need the unity and co-operation of
all their members in order to be able to resist and frustrate current efforts by the enemies of unity and solidarity among third-world countries to destroy the two
organizations.

Each of the parties has, on behalf of its Government,
claimed the vast territory commonly known as the Aouzou Strip.
27. It is also undeniable that this dispute, which has for
the past 10 years poisoned relations between Chad and
Libya, could at any time cause serious incidents and provoke a conflict because of the presence in the zone and in
the neighbouring area of the armed forces of the two
countries. An aggravation of the present situation wquld
be a threat to the stability of the region.

20. We must say, however, that as we listened to both
parties to the dispute, we were greatly encouraged by
their commitment and dedication to the principles of the
OAU, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the
Charter of the United Nations.

28. It is onIy natural, then, that one of the parties to the
dispute should come before the”Counci1, which, under
the Charter of the United Nations, has primary responsibility for international peace and security. This initiative
was all the more legitimate because, in recent years,
neither direct negotiations between Chad and Libya nor
the good offices of the competent regional organization,
the OAU, have led to any progress towards a settlement.

21. Finally, our delegation has carefully considered the
statements of the two parties to the dispute and has been
greatly impressed and struck by the complexity of the
issues involved. We are, however, very much encouraged
by the desire of the parties to seek a peaceful solution to
the dispute and by their willingness to avail themselves of
the regional mechanisms for the peaceful settlement of
disputes.

29. Essentially, the problem is the determination of the
border between Chad and Libya and to which country
the Aouzou Strip belongs. As the former administering
Power, France is bound to make its position on this
question known. Speaking strictly from a legal point of
view, it must note the soundness of the theses presented
to us by the representative of Chad.

22. Mr. LING Qing (China) (interpret&ion from Chinese): We listened carefully to the statements made by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Co-operation of Chad
and the representative of Libya [ibid.].

30. What can the Council do in connection with this
dispute? We are convinced that, in the present circumstances, it can play a constructive role by appealing to the
two parties through the President, who would speak on
behalf of all of us. On the basis of that appeal, the OAU
could resume its mediation efforts with a view to a final
settlement.

23. The Chinese delegation has always maintained that
differences and disputes among third-world countries
should and can be settled peacefully and rationally
through friendly consultations or negotiations, free from
outside interference and in conformity with the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, especially the principres of mutual respect for independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity, non-interference in each other’s
internal affairs and mutual non-aggression. Both Chad
and Libya belong to the third world and face the common task of developing their national economy, safeguarding sovereignty and consolidating independence.
Their fundamental interests are identical. It is our hope
that they will settle their differences and disputes through
peaceful negotiations.

31. But this is essentially a legal dispute. It is clear that
there will be no lasting peace between the two countries
until this dispute is settled. That is why France earnestly
hopes that the two parties will agree to submit their
border dispute to the International Court of Justice.
32. Allow me in conclusion to express the hope that
strife-torn Chad will finally live in peace within the
borders that France bequeathed to it on its independence
in 1960.

24. Over a period of time, the OAU has worked
actively to mediate between Chad and Libya in the interest of maintaining solidarity among the African countries. We appreciate the efforts made by the OAU and
sincerely hope it will continue to make contributions
towards this end.

33. Mr. SCHELTEMA
(Netherlands): The Council has
been seized of a complaint from Chad contained in documents S/15643 and S/15644. The representative of Chad
asserts, inter alia, that “the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya is
perpetuating its occupation of the north of Chad” and is
“intensifying its actions with the aim of imposing on
Chad a new government beholden to it” [see S/15644].
In reply, the representative of Libya maintains that “the
Aouzou Strip is an integral part of Libyan territory”
[see S/1564.5]. He also points out that Mr. Goukouni
Weddey heads the legitimate Government of Chad.
Statements made by the two representatives during the
debate on 22 March [2419th meeting] reflect the points
made in the above-mentioned documents.

25, Mr. LOUET (France) (interpretationfiom French):
My delegation has very carefully studied the statements
made by the duly accredited and recognized representatives of the two parties, Mr, Idriss Miskine, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Co-operation of the Republic of
Chad, Mr. Ali Treiki, the representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya [ibid]
26. Those statements have indisputably confirmed the
existence of a border dispute between the two countries.
3

34. From what has been said and written, my delegation draws the conclusion that the dispute between Chad
and Libya centres essentially around two questions,
namely, a border dispute between two sovereign States,
and the legitimacy of one or the other of two contesting
governments. Although events during the last years have
demonstrated that the two aspects are interwoven, we
think that the Council cannot but draw a distinction
between them, The Council, acting under Chapter VI of
the Charter of the United Nations, can call on States
Members to settle their disputes by peaceful means. The
choice of government is, however, the sole prerogative of
the people of the country.

cies. It should be left to the Governments of Chad and
Libya, of course, to decide on the means best suited to
the attainment of this objective.
40. However, considering the legal nature of the problem that has been presented to the Council, my delegation’s preference would be that any procedures or
methods the Council may deem it appropriate to recommend aimed at reaching a peaceful settlement include a
recommendation
that Chad and Libya agree to submit
their territorial dispute to the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice, as provided for in the Charter,
This has been suggested by other delegations, and I hereby join them on this point. But irrespective of the means
or the mechanisms to be adopted by the parties to the
conflict, the Council’s first priority must be to prevent
the situation from worsening and from developing into a
threat to the stability of the entire region. My Government therefore appeals strongly to both parties to refrain
from any action that may aggravate the situation and to
show strict respect for each other’s territorial integrity
and political independence, in observance of the principles of the Charter, pending the peaceful settlement of
their dispute.

35. After years of civil strife and suffering, Chad once
again looks forward to directing its efforts towards internal consolidation and economic development under the
leadership of President Habre. For Chad to overcome its
problems, we think it essential that all foreign intervention in that country cease and that economic assistance
be provided by countries in a position to do so.
36. I wish now for a moment to turn to the subjectmatter of the Chadian complaint-the
occupation by the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya of a territory known as the
Aouzou Strip. We have studied with care the document,
dated 21 March, submitted by the Government of Chad
and entitled “Memorandum
concerning the occupation
of Tibesti by Libya” [S/1.5649].

41. In so doing, we are prompted by our wish to see
peace prevail in an area that needs all its avaiIable resources for the arduous task of overcoming the challenges with
which it is confronted.
42. Mr. GAUCI (Malta): The question currently before
the Council once again, for the second time in less than
two weeks, unfortunately confronts us with another issue
that is very near to Malta’s doorstep. In fact, it involves a
close neighbour in Africa, a continent whose past influ-.
ence on Malta’s national heritage and whose future
importance for our international relations make it of primary importance to us.

37. My first comment would be that, according to our
information also, the French-Italian treaty of 1935 [ibid.,
annex VIII, by which the Aouzou Strip was ceded to
Italy, is devoid of legal force because an exchange of the
instruments of ratification never took place. On the other
hand, we understand that the parties are linked by the
1955 treaty between Libya and France [ibid., annex Xj.
This treaty became operative on 26 December 1956. It
addresses itself specifically to the territorial dispute with
regard to the Aouzou Strip. That is how we understand
the legal position.
38. Subsequently, the dispute was discussed by the
parties both in bilateral negotiations and within the framework of the OAU, which seemed the most appropriate
forum to settle this question. The Libyan side throughout
maintained its point of view that the disputed area is
Libyan territory, thereby relying on commitments made
by previous Chadian Governments.

43. It was against this background that we listened
most attentively to the detailed statements made both by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Co-operation of
Chad and by the representative of Libya [2419th meefz’ng], Other countries directly or indirectly involved or
with a contribution to make have already made statements and shed further light on the matter at issue. Much
of the attention has concentrated on the origin of and
prevailing situation in the area known as the AOUZOU
Strip.

39. Since the matter has been brought to the attention
of the Security Council and since both parties have therefore agreed to co-operate with the Council in the search
for a solution, the Governments of Chad and Libya have
thereby agreed to settle their dispute by peaceful means.
The Charter and the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations’ stipulate that it is the duty of all
Sta.tes to seek early and just solutions to international
disputes, including problems concerning frontiers of
States, through negotiations or other peaceful means of
their choice, such as mediation or resort to regional agen-

44. My country would, in the first place, like briefly to
emphasize how concerned and preoccupied we are at the
persistence of a controversy between Chad and Libya.
We have two main reasons: first, because of geographic
proximity and the nature of the friendly relations that
exist between Malta, on the one hand, and the two countries involved, on the other; and secondly, because of the
heavy but unavoidable responsibility that we have to
take an objective position in the Council in the face of’ a
strongly held difference of opinion between two friendly
countries, both of which are members of the Group of
African States and the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.
4

the concept that it is the regional States themselves which
bear the first and primary responsibility for safeguarding
the peace and security of their own region.

45. It is in the light of those considerations and that
responsiblity that we wish briefly to put forward our
objectively honest views, in the modest hope that this
might influence future events in a positive direction.

52. Today we would like to reiterate this fundamental
concept. We are convinced that this precept is invaluable
for the African continent as it seeks to overcome the
difficulties inherited from the colonial era and to secure
the dignity, progress and freedom which every single
nations seeks and strives for.

46, The facts and the events which have been placed
before the Council strengthen our intuitive feeling that
the best way for the Council to assist both countries and
to promote, without unreasonable delay, an amicable
solution to any differences is, as a first step, to encourage
and give new momentum to the dialogue that has already
started at the regional level.

53. For its own modest part, Malta has given its full
support to the political, economic and social development of the peoples of Africa in the past and will continue to do so in future. At this point in time, and on this
particular issue, we would like earnestly to appeal to
both parties to take the invaluable hand of assistance
which the OAU has already extended. The opportunity
which the OAU is offering to resolve, in a spirit of friendship and reconciliation, the differences that exist should
be grasped immediately and without hesitation. It is,
after all, as both Chad and Libya have themselves
pointed out, in their common interest to do so, since the
people of the two countries have every reason to cooperate and to prosper in peace and good-neighbourly
relations.

47, We have been reminded by both countries concerned, as well as by representatives of other African
countries, that this issue is still open for discussion before
the OAU. We have also been made to understand that
the Chad-Libya dispute is one of the items on the agenda
of the forthcoming Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the OAU, to be held shortly-next June,
in fact-at Addis Ababa. Obviously, much thought and
effort have already been expended on this issue by the
organization primarily concerned,
48. That therefore confirms our understanding that
efforts are still being made to resolve the issue in the
regional context, It is thus all the more appropriate that,
at least until these efforts are concluded, the Council
should at this stage refrain from taking a definite stand
on the issue, Instead, in accordance with Article 33, paragraphs 1 and 2, of the Charter of the United Nations, it
should encourage the countries concerned, as well as the
OAU and other interested regional bodies, to seek a
mutual and amicable solution in the shortest possible
time.

54, As for those other African countries which are indirectly involved, we appeal to them to give generously all
their friendly assistance in order to solve this and other
issues for the prosperity of their region in particular.
Extraneous considerations should not be allowed to
impede progress.
55. We firmly support the right of any country at any
time to bring its concerns before the Council. Once these
are made known and both sides heard, a pronouncement
by the Council would serve as an impetus to progress,
After studying the declarations made by both sides, my
delegation feels that there is much common ground on
which to build a preliminary consensus. As a concerned
but disinterested party, in common allegiance with other
countries to the principles of non-alignment, and as a
contribution to the work of the Council, we have worked
privately and persistently to put forward on paper what
we feel to be a constructive prescription for progress. We
hope that, once agreed on and pronounced, its substantive
objectives will be assidiously pursued by the parties concerned so that very soon the Council will be informed, as
it has been in some other instances, that its wise counsel
has produced the desire results, from which none would
benefit more than the friendly countries of Chad and
Libya.

49. We can readily understand the chafing of any country at undue delay in the resolution of a problem on
which it feels it has a convincing position, and we therefore feel that a declaration by the President of the Council
should be designed to give impetus, momentum and
encouragement both to the countries concerned, in the
first place, and to the regional organization concerned, in
the second place, in order that an amicable solution may
be found without undue delay.
50, In this regard, while not diminishing in any way the
role and the final responsibility which reside in the Council to bring rapprochement in potentially dangerous situations between contending countries, my own country
cannot but emphasize the great responsibility which, in a
smaller regional context, other neighbours of Chad and
Libya and, in a larger regional context, all the member
countries of the OAU have to contribute their imaginative efforts to bringing this long-drawn-out issue to an
early, successful and amicable solution under any one of
the many options provided for in accordance with Article 33 of the Charter of the United Nations.

56. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Benin. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
57. Mr, SOGLO (Benin) (interpretation from French):
On behalf of my delegation, I should first of all like to
extend our congratulations to you, Sir, on your accession
to the presidency for the month of March. We are particularly pleased to see you presiding over the Council,

51. In our prior statements before the Council, whenever we were discussing other unfortunate conflicts, my
country has consistently stressed, without any ambiguity,
5

since you represent a great country, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, with which the
People’s Republic of Benin enjoys the most cordial relations. With your eminent qualities as a seasoned diplomat, your great experience and your wisdom, you have
been able to conduct the work of the Council during this
month to the satisfaction of all.

Council’s right to pass judgement on a question that
affects the peaceful settlement of a dispute between
States. However, it should be done in the spirit of the
Charter of the United Nations, which stipulates, in Artitie 33, that:
“1. The parties to any dispute, the continuance of
which is likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security, shall, first of all,“-and
I
should like to stress the words “first of all”-“seek
a
solution by negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement, resort to regional
agencies or arrangements, or other peaceful means of
their own choice.

58. I take this opportunity to express to Mr. Troyanovsky, the representative of the Soviet Union, our
whole-hearted appreciation for the noteworthy way in
which he presided over the Council last month.
59. A dispute between two African countries, both
members of a regional organization, the OAU, a border
dispute, the origins of which go back to the murky colonial past, has been brought before the Council, whose
main purpose is to find effective solutions to problems
and situations which endanger international peace and
security.

“2. The Security Council shall, when it deems
necessary, call upon the parties to settle their dispute
by such means.”
64. Before the matter was brought before the Council,
had all possible means of negotiation been exhausted?
True, before the Council was called upon for arbitration,
the good offices of a third party, namely, the OAU, were
indeed sought. But, before referring the issue to the
Council did one wait for the conclusions of the Ad Hoc
Committee that was set up by the OAU?2 What body, if
not the OAU, is in the best position to know about the
question of Chad? Is there a body more appropriate than
the OAU, a regional organization to which both Libya
and Chad belong, in which to discuss, mull over and, in a
purely African way, seek an African solution to a dispute
between two African brothers?

60. Since Chad acceded to national sovereignty, it has
never known civil peace. A number of factions-no
fewer than 11 officially identified-are
disputing for
power, Many decades of fratricidal struggle have accentuated these rivalries and devastated the country. The
ostensible calm which hovers over-or, rather, should I
say weighs upon-N’Djamena
does not extend beyond
the capital of Chad. The fact that one of these factions is
now in power has not ushered in the peace for which the
Chadians have been aspiring for 20 years now. It has,
indeed, not brought reconciliation between the sons of
this country nor settled what is the most urgent matter in
the eyes of the international
community, namely, the
elimination of famine, deprivation, poverty and the suffering of a people who threw off the shackles of colonialism only to fall into the hideous nightmare of a civil war
fomented by international
imperialism.

65. As far as I know, the OAU has not been relieved of,
nor has it set aside, the issue of Chad, which has always
occupied a prominent place on its agenda. The frontier
dispute between Chad and Libya is not something that
sprang up just yesterday: it goes back to the murky
colonial past, Those who, in 1885, in Berlin, divided up
Africa did not split it up into exact portions. They
squabbled like children around a cake and bequeathed us
problems which they were unable to settle among themselves. The France-British Convention of 14 June 1898,
the Additional
Declaration of 21 March, 1899, the
France-Italian Agreements of 1 November 1902 and the
Treaty of Friendship and Good-Neighbourliness between
the French Republic and the United Kingdom of Libya
of 10 August 1955, as well as the Laval-Mussolini treaty
(Treaty of Rome) of 7 January 1935 [S/15649, annexe+sI,
12, III X and VI. respectively], while not all necessarily
leonine or unequal treaties, at least demonstrate the difficulties involved in reaching agreement on the precise contours of a frontier.

61. In these circumstance, my delegation cannot
remain indifferent. We intend, with our characteristic
impartiality
and objectivity, to make the following comments. The first question which arises is precisely
whether this is the right time or place for the dispute
between Chad and Libya to be discussed.
62. Obviously it is not the most appropriate time.
Urgent tasks await us. What the people of Chad are
waiting for from its Ieaders is, first of all, a solution of its
most elementary needs, and, secondly, the definition and
implementation
of a genuinely national policy which can
win over all factions, all strata of the population, whether
they be in the north, the centre or the south, a policy of
national reconciliation,
which is the only one able to
promote the economic, social and cultural development
to which they aspire. Nothing great can be done in an
atmosphere of disunity and, afortiori, when the intention
is to wage a national struggle and to mobilize all energies
and when the determination of each and every one is the
best possible weapon.

66. Border disputes in Africa and other parts of the
world are abundant, and it is heartening indeed that they
have not all been brought before the Council and that
other means recognized and recommended by the Charter of the United Nations have been used, namely, conciliation,
negotiation,
good offices, arbitration
and
mediation. Therefore, if this is neither the time nor the
place to bring up a problem the settlement of which
depends, first and foremost, on agreement between the

63. The correct place to deal with this matter is not
here, it would appear. It is not my intention to deny the
6

72.

two parties, how are we then to understand and construe
the act of Chad?

Ready for revolution.

The struggle continues.

73. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Democratic Yemen. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.

67. We believe the Council has been seized of this problem in an attempt by the present leaders in N’Djamena to
legitimize their authority and as a result of the manoeuvres of international imperialism.

74. Mr, AL-ALFI
(Democratic Yemen) (interpretationfrom Arabic): Mr. President, at the outset I should
like to express our appreciation for the manner in which
you are conducting the work of the Council during
the month of March.

68. First and foremost, there has been an effort to disguise the real nature of the problem of Chad as it really
stands today, both domestically and in the diplomatic
context. The power at present enthroned in N’Djamena
sorely needs legitimacy, It has been challenged and even
fought domestically by the leaders of the Transitional
Government of National Unity, who themselves proclaimed the legitimacy that was conferred upon them by
the OAU through the Lagos Accord [S/14378, annex IJ;
it has not been recognized diplomatically
by a large
number of States which charge it with having infringed
the agreements to which its leaders had subscribed. It is
not my intention to discuss here the legality or legitimacy
of the power at present ruling in N’Djamena. The heads
of African States, eager as they are to preserve peace and
concord, at a given time in history gave Chad a government, the Transitional Government of National Unity,
and it will be for them to decide what has become of it in
the present circumstances, If that is not done, it will be
difficult for the People’s Republic of Benin to follow in
the path of those who, on the basis of defucto power,
have recognized the present r6gime in N’Djamena and
sought to drag others along with them when, for the
most part, and paradoxically, they are the self-same ones
who
recognize the leaders who were placed in Phnom
Penh, the Pol Pot clique, who were ousted from power
for having committed the most monstrous crimes of
history,

75. Last month, the Council was convened to consider
United States provocations against the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya. Numerous delegations, including my own,
participated in that debate [241&h meetiflg]. The majority of the delegations which spoke then were unanimous
in their strong condemnation of United States provocation against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. They affirmed
their solidarity with and support for the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya in confronting the terrorist, aggressive policy
pursued by United States imperialism against the people
of the Jamahiriya, who have opted for an independent
approach to socio-economic development and resistance
to United States imperialism in the Arab region.
76. It is regrettable that the Council is meeting today to
debate a groundless complaint against the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, which has been accused of committing
aggression, when a month ago the international community represented in the Council acknowledged that Libya
was the victim of aggression and threat.
77. The linkage of these two occasions affirms that the
United States Administration,
having failed by all means
of force, terrorism and pressure to intimidate the Libyan
people and make it abandon its principle of resisting
United States imperialism and the United States policy of
aggression in the Arab region, and having unmasked its
schemes to impose its hegemony on the peoples of the
region and plunder their riches and wealth, has resorted
to maligning the Jamahiriya
and its leadership by
prompting its lackeys in the region to make groundless
charges that it promotes in the United States mass media
in a deliberate attempt to divert the attention of the international community from the main source of tension,
instability and destabiIization in the entire world, that is,
the imperialist forces, headed by United States imperialism, which jeopardize the security and stability of all
peoples yearning for liberty and independence, as well as
the liberated States, including the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, struggling to consolidate their independence.

69. Secondly, this debate is far too convenient not to be
involved in this campaign of hostility that international
imperialism, hanging on the coat-tails of progressive and
revolutionary countries, is waging against Libya and its
revolution. As a popular saying goes, “when you want to
drown your dog, you say it has rabies”. Translated into
diplomatic language, this means that, in the eyes of the
international community, it is easier to raise one’s voice
against an outlaw than against an honest person.
70. The People’s Republic of Benin refuses to be
involved in this campaign. It does not intend to acquiesce
in it. We deplore it and condemn it.
71. Africans have already given the world numerous
examples of the way in which they resolve their quarrels.
This -often includes high feelings! verbal excesses and
sometimes, unfortunately, even military confrontations;
but in the end wisdom and dialogue triumph. It is this
dialogue which the People’s Republic of Benin invites
Chad and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to undertake.
They will be given an opportunity to do this next June at
Addis Ababa at the session of the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the OAU, which will bring
together this great African family.

78. The other day we listened very carefully to the statement of the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya on the issue before the Council [2419th meethg]. We
have also studied the letter from the representative of
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the President of the Council, dated 17 March [S/15645j.
79. We draw the following conclusions. First, the issue
under discussion is a case of interference in the internal
7

affairs of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, especially because
the Aouzou Strip, as affirmed by the representative of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, is an integral part of Libyan
territory. Secondly, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has
categorically rejected allegations that it is occupying any
part of Chadian territory and has stated that it has no
ambitions whatsoever regarding the territory of other
States. Thirdly, the Jamahiriya has striven to maintain
the fraternal and good-neighbourly relations which link
the Libyan and Chadian peoples, and it has consistently
sought to preserve the unity, security and stability of the
people of Chad and has endeavoured to put an end to the
tragedy which has been afflicting that people since the
early 1960s. Fourthly, the problem of Chad is among the
issues which are being dealt with by the OAU, to which
end that organization has established an ad hoc committee,2 on the level of heads of State. Fifthly, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya has stated its readiness to discuss bilateral relations between the two countries within the framework of the Good Offices Committee between Libya and
Chad established by the OAU at the fourteenth session
of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government, held
at Libreville in July 1977.

but exalting role of maintaining
world.

peace and security in the

84. We wish to take this opportunity also to present
our compliments and to express all our appreciation to
your predecessor, Mr. Troyanovsky, the representative
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, for the distinguished and honourable way in which he conducted the
Council’s discussions in February.
85. Mr. President, I should like finally to express to you
personally and, through you, to the members of the
Council, my country’s gratitude for the honour you have
done it by inviting its representative to participate in the
debate in the Council on the dispute between two fraternal countries of the Muslim world, Chad and Libya, both
of them members of the OAU.
86. My delegation has listened with the greatest interest
to the statements of the two parties, Chad and Libya
[2419th meeting], as well as to those of the representatives
who have spoken before us. The Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Co-operation of Chad, Mr. Idriss Miskine, in
his statement of 22 March, set out before members of the
Council incontestable historical facts which have such an
obvious legal foundation that it would be difficult to
attempt to ignore the great light shed on the border dispute between his country and Libya,

80. Democratic Yemen, reaffirming its solidarity with
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in confronting United
States military provocation, calls upon the international
community to stand by the Jamahiriya as it confronts all
the imperialist designs aimed at undermining its independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity and at interfering in its internal affairs. Democratic Yemen, further,
condemns all United States attempts, either direct or
through its lackeys in the region, to commit acts of
aggression against Libyan territory. At the same time,
Democratic Yemen reaffirms its confidence in the ability
of the fraternal people of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to
stand up to imperialist provocations of the United States
designed to compromise Libya’s freedom, independence
and sovereignty.

87. Like most of those who have spoken before it, the
delegation of the Revolutionary People’s Republic of
Guinea believes that a border dispute between two States
is not to be confused with the question of the legitimacy
of the representatives of either of those States. It is for
the people and the people alone, as supreme arbiter of all
legality, to judge the legitimacy of its representatives. The
question of Chad remains one of the priority concerns of
the OAU. This is borne out by the many resolutions
adopted unanimously at both regular and special sessions and by the establishment of an ad hoc committee
with the responsibility of achieving a peaceful settlement
of the dispute between Chad and Libya, thus testifying to
Africa’s determination to promote a policy of goodneighbourliness among its States.

81. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Guinea. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
82. Mr. COUMBASSA
(Guinea) (interpretarion from
French): Sir, my very first words will be to congratulate
you warmly, on behalf of my country, the Revolutionary
People’s Republic of Guinea, on your assumption of the
presidency of this important organ and on the remarkable way in which you have conducted the Council’s
debates on problems whose importance will elude no
one.

88. President Ahmed SCkou Tourt?, one of the founding fathers of the OAU, during an interview in August
1982, in reply to a question by a reporter concerning the
role the OAU should play in Chad, stated:
“The OAU has an important role to play in Chad.
Our brother, Hissein Habrt, finally won a victory. He
immediately agreed that, under the aegis of the OAU,
a political reconciliation should take place. Thus,
brother Hissein Habrt! is acting within the OAU
framework, because his initiative aimed at national
reconciliation is in keeping with the Lagos Accord
[S/14378, annex r]. The OAU must lend all its support
to brother Hissein Habrt, and thus to the people of
Chad, who will be the beneficiaries of a political
reconciliation
between the two sides, because the
problem of Chad has never been a military problem. It
is a political problem. Therefore, if it is settled politi-

83. Your country, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, maintains relations of fruitful
and friendly co-operation with my country. 1 am convinced that your talent as an experienced diplomat and
your great experience in international affairs, combined
with your profound devotion to just causes, will serve as
an invaluable guarantee in the search for a peaceful solution to the disturbing problem which has been placed
before the Council. That is why we are so happy to see
you at the head of this organ, to which falls the awesome
8

tally the peace and security needed for the well-being
of the people of Chad will become a reality; that
would be to the credit of the OAU and of all Africa.”

95. This is something that deserves and justifies all the
praise unanimously lavished upon you and that illustrates the durability of the good values and traditions of
which your great country, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, has been the cradle
throughout its prestigious history. My delegation would
like to associate itself with that praise and say also how
grateful we are that you have given us permission to take
part in this discussion on the question concerning Libya
and Chad which is before the Council today.

89. Thus, we believe that the question under discussion
is not that of the representativity or non-representativity
of a State, but rather that of respect for the inviolability
of the borders inherited from the colonial era. In the case
before the Council, it must be recalled that at the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the OAU, held
at Cairo in July 1964, with the participation of what was
then the United Kingdom of Libya and Chad, resolution
AHG/Res.l6
(I) was adopted [S/15649, annex X4,
which stated, in paragraph 2, that: “all member States
pledge themselves to respect the borders existing on their
achievement of national independence”.

96. I should like to congratulate Mr, Oleg Troyanovsky, the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, for the admirable way in which he presided
over the Council in February.
97. As you may surmise, Sir, Niger is not taking part in
this debate to play at being a judge or to stir up animosities: Libya and Chad are two fraternal countries, both
equally dear to us and with which we share such constant
fundamentals as geographical proximity and the fact of
belonging to the same particularly harsh continental area
which has resulted in a mingling of our peoples that can
be seen in many facets of our life. We are lighting with
them on the same front and for the same aims, within the
OAU, the Organization of the Islamic Conference and
the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, groupings
whose charters, as the Council is aware, advocate peace,
lateral co-operation and the collective struggle for the
freedom, dignity and rehabilitation of our peoples.

90, The letters that have been addressed to you, Sir,
both by Chad and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya through
their respective representatives, undeniably indicate that
there exists, under Article 33 of the Charter of the United
Nations, a dispute which, if it continues, will threaten
peace in Africa and international security. For that reason, we call upon our Chadian and Libyan brothers to
help the OAU exercise its good offices. We also call on
the Council to exercise its full authority, in keeping with
Article 52 of the Charter, to restore peace between two
fraternal countries, Chad and Libya.
91. I shall conclude by reaffirming the position of my
country as set forth by President Ahmed SCkou Tome,
when he stated, on 25 February 1982:

98. This indicates the concern with which we have followed and continue to follow the tumultuous development of relations between these two countries; how much
we deplore the insecurity and the politico-military
tension that at present afflicts their hard-working peoples;
and how much we thus regret that today they have had to
cross swords verbally in this chamber where, in the past,
we have seen them fight side by side to defend the principles governing coexistence among nations,

“The position of the Revolutionary People’s Republic of Guinea is that we must consider exclusively the
interest of the people of Chad and serve the cause of
that people to help them speedily regain peace, which
is the basic condition for the preservation of the life of
its citizens and for the safeguarding of its material
goods.”

99. Therefore, in this dilemma, which is rather reminiscent of Corneille, what drop of truth can we distil?
Between Chad, which forcefully affirms, and Libya,
which unaffectedly denies, how much latitude does the
Council have?

92. We thus make an urgent appeal to the international
community,
and in particular to Africa, to monitor the
development of the situation in Chad and to adopt a
responsible attitude, with a view to fulfilling the legitimate hopes of the people of Chad-through
the effectiveness of the specific action to be undertaken for their
benefit-for
scrupulous respect for that country’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.

100. I may hazard a reply later to these delicate questions. But let us first, without any pleasure, observe that
it appears rather too often that, in spite of the pertinent
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and in
spite of the many agreements, treaties and conventions,
frontiers and the fact of being neighbours are still today
both the best and the worst of things. When they work,
everything works and States can calmly attend to their
vital business. But when they go wrong, then there is a
serious fear for the peace and security of all. Unfortunately, there is a long list in the Council’s annals that can
bear out these disturbing assertions, And, Sir, have you
not just closed a very long and wearisome debate on a
burning problem in Latin America, where similarities are
not lacking, but which, all things considered, again boils
down to an unfortunate question of frontiers? This

93. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Niger. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
94, Mr. OUMAROU
(Niger) (interpretation
from
French): Mr. President, we should like sincerely to congratulate you on what you have accomplished during this
month which you have undoubtedly found a little long,
in view of the amount of effort, talent, far-sightedness
and concentration which you have had to display in
order to conduct the lengthy and delicate consultations
that you have presided over almost every day.
9

means that it is high time in this case, for the prestige
of the relevant texts and for the authority of this institution, for the Council to give serious thought to setting up
preventive measures the better to ensure the tranquillity
of our States.

and destructive war, and Libya, a country whose conditions are no less difficult but which nature has endowed
with considerable resources, undoubtedly have other
things to exchange than death-dealing devices, other
forms of neighbourliness than exhausting, repeated political discord and the escalation of dangerous, uncontrollable tensions on their frontier. We would encourage them
to embark upon efforts quickly to gain peace, put an end
to bitterness and bring about a more fruitful coexistence
conducive to dttente and tranquillity in our region. We
are grateful that they have expressed their will to resort
to dialogue, which bears witness to their concern, and we
exhort them to do so unconditionally and without delay.

101. ‘l’his being so, it is easy to see how swift agreement
could possibly be reached on a new series of provisions,
including the principle of the inviolability of the territorial integrity of States, to be reaffirmed and strengthened
by a complementary formulation that would, for example, solemnly state that such integrity was irrevocably
and solety based on the frontiers laid down by agreements, treaties or conventions, unless those frontiers had
been defined and passed down, during accession to independence, by the previous administering Power.

106. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Gabon. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

102. Such a provision, or at least a variant of it,
appears in the Charter of the Organization of African
Unity, where, unfortunately, it is gathering dust since
there is no adequate arbitration to underpin it. On the
other hand, it could be fully operative in the United
Nations, provided that the Council did its job and
requested that, as a working basis, the Organization
should once and for all finally get down to something it
sorely needs-a
meticulous
surveying and patient
authentication of State frontiers, as defined in the pertinent juridical texts, in order to produce a map of the
world, a sort of illustrated chart, that would be a universal reference document that was indisputable and unchallengeable. For its prestige and for its authority, the
United Nations needs more than maps found in atlases
and in universities, This is no doubt a gigantic and delicate task, but it is perfectly feasible and in keeping with
the calling of the United Nations: the maintenance of
world harmony and the protection of peace,

1‘07. Mr. BOULE (Gabon) (interpretationfrom~~ench):
At the outset, Sir, allow me to extend to you the congratulations of the delegation of Gabon on your assumption
of the presidency for the month of March. We are familiar with your talents as a skilful and experienced diplomat. For that reason we are sure that under your
enlightened leadership our debate will be one of real substance and will, we hope, be crowned with success,
108. I would like to take this opportunity to extend the
congratulations of my delegation to your predecessor,
Mr. Troyanovsky, the representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, for the dignified and effective
manner in which he conducted the proceedings of the
Council during the month of February.
109, Finally, I should like to thank all the members of
the Council for allowing the delegation of Gabon to take
part in the debate on the border dispute between Chad
and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.

103. As to the actual point at issue, we call upon the
parties involved to observe moderation, and, at the same
time, we encourage them strictly to respect the rules of
good-neighbourliness
and to observe certain precepts of
peace. These are: faithful respect for frontiers inherited
from colonization;
non-resort to the threat or use of
force in order unilaterally to settle a dispute; nonintervention in each other’s internal affairs; cessation of
politico-military
tension in the disputed area; and
embarking in good faith on talks and negotiations in
order to remove obstacles and misunderstandings
by
resorting to arbitration, offered as a matter of goodwill
by regional organizations, and to the good offices of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations,

110. As certain delegations have already mentioned in
the course of the debate, this is not the first time that
Gabon has considered this delicate matter. My country
has always wanted to promote a climate of peace and
concord in Africa in general, and in central Africa in particular, for that is where our country is situated.

104. Perhaps because we are a small country and perhaps because; by temperament, we have neither military
ambition nor expansionist urges, we believe that the
countries of the world would find it easy to get along
with one another if each were content with its own internationally recognized territorial patrimony and were to
develop it for the well-being of all, in the spirit of mutual
assistance and co-operation.

111. For that reason, on the initiative of the President
of Gabon, Mr. Omar Bongo, then the Acting Chairman
of the OAU, an ad hoc committee was created2 to seek
ways and means of resolving the dispute that is the subject of this debate. That committee was made up of Algeria, Gabon, Mozambique, Nigeria, Senegal and the
United Republic of Cameroon. At its meetings held at
Libreville from 10 to 12 August 1977, the committee
adopted a recommendation, the operative paragraph of
which recalled paragraph 1 of OAU resolution
AHG/Res. 16(I), adopted at Cairo on 21 July 1964 [ibid.].
Paragraph 2 of that resolution states that: “all member
States pledge themselves to respect the borders existing
on their achievement of national independence”.

105. Chad, a poor country with very rugged conditions,
a country that has just emerged from a long fratricidal

112. The Charter of the Organization of African Unity,
to which both parties belong, stresses the inviolability of
10

the borders inherited from the colonial period. Furthermore, in the consideration of border disputes between
African countries, it is customary to refer to the Powers
that administered the territories during the colonial
period-in
this case, France and Italy.

and resources in a more constructive cause, that of development. And in order to do that, they have need of that
condition that is indispensable to harmonious development, namely, peace.
120. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the United Republic of Cameroon, I invite
her to take a place at the Council table and to make her
statement.

113. There exists a rather wide range of international
agreements on the subject of Libya and Chad that were
concluded during the colonial period. Many of the delegations here present have in their statements mentioned,
inter alia, the France-British
Convention of 14 June
1898; the France-Italian
Agreements of 1 November
1902 and the Treaty of Friendship and GoodNeighbourliness
between the French Republic and the
United Kingdom of Libya of 10 August 1955 [S/15649,
annexes I, III and X, respectively].

121. Mrs. MAIRIE
(United Republic of Cameroon)
(interpretation from French): May I first convey to you,
Sir, my warm congratulations on your accession to the
presidency for the month of March and for the very talented, subtle and dynamic manner in which you have
guided the extremely delicate deliberations in which the
Council is now engaged. Thanks to your wealth of experience and your profound knowledge of international
affairs, the Council will, I am certain, be able to arrive at
effective solutions that will meet the expectations of the
international community.

114. But the treaty that is of interest here is the Treaty
of Rome on the settlement of the interests of Italy and
France in Africa, better known as the Laval-Mussolini
treaty [ibid., annex V14. That treaty, which was signed on
7 January 1935, was to give Italy the territory we are now
discussing. Now, while that treaty was signed-and this
is readily recognized by Chad-it was never the subject
of an exchange of instruments of ratification between
France and Italy, which means that it has no legal status.
Moreover, as far as my delegation knows, neither France
nor Italy has ever recognized it.

122. I should also like to congratulate Mr. Oleg Troyanovsky, the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, for the qualities he displayed last month
when presiding over the Council.
123, Finally, may I express my gratitude to all the
Council members for having done me the honour of
inviting me to speak for the first time in this prestigious
international body during a debate that is of considerable
interest to my Government since it pits against each
other two fraternal countries with which Cameroon has
the best possible relations of friendship and cooperation.

115. Libya’s occupation of the Aouzou Strip not only
flagrantly violates the principles of the Charter of the
Organization of African Unity, which proclaims the inviolability of the borders bequeathed by the colonial
administration,
but also calls into question the conventions signed by the former administering Powers. This
occupation is, finally, a violation of the Charter of the
United Nations, which calls for the settlement of disputes
among Member States by peaceful means.

124. We are taking part in this debate not to stir up any
sterile controversy but out of a genuine desire to encourage both parties sincerely to seek a peaceful solution to
their dispute in accordance with the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and of the Charter of the
Organisation of African Unity, principles to which both
parties have subscribed in the context of our great family
of non-aligned nations.

116. Gabon objects to any flouting of these principles
and supports Chad’s just cause, Chad requires nothing
more than respect for its borders and its territory.
117. My delegation is very concerned about the situation in the Aouzou Strip. We fear that its continuation
will only cause further border disputes of a similar nature
elsewhere in Africa, and in its wisdom the OAU has tried
to prevent that. Africa, which has had its fill of conflicts,
hardly needs any further strife.
118. In addition, it must be realized that even minor
local disputes today have a tendency to acquire international dimensions, Hence, we may consider that this
situation, though at present only local, poses an inherent
threat to international peace and security.

125. Above all, however, it must be made clear that, as
we see it, the problem now before the Council was very
clearly described by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Co-operation of Chad, Mr, Idriss Miskine, in his statement on 22 March [2419th meeting]. What Chad wishes
to do is to recover a part of its territory that has been
occupied by military force. The problem thus has no
connection whatever with the legitimacy of the Government at present in power in N’Djamena. The choice of
the Chadian Government is the exclusive province of the
people of Chad.

119. My delegation therefore appeals to Libya to take a
reasonable stand and to withdraw its troops from the
Aouzou Strip, thereby enabling Chad once again to
extend its sovereignty over its entire territory. The Chadian people who have suffered the hardships of a fratricida1 war, now need to mobilize their remaining energies

126. Cameroon, which recognizes only States, enjoys
the best possible relations of co-operation and friendship
with the Government of President Hissein Habrd, which
is making praiseworthy efforts to restore the national
unity and peace Chad so grievousIy needs. Indeed, since
we have to a large extent shared the sufferings of the
11

fraternal people of Chad, we Cameroonians can bear
witness to the cruel tragedy that has nearly compromised
Chad’s very existence as a State.
127. We are convinced that the international community, which has been standing impotently by as a witness
to this indescribable tragedy, will now be able to appreciate the need to make an effective contribution to restoring peace in this part of Africa and enabling the heroic
people of Chad finally to devote all their resources to
development and to controlling their future free from
any external interference.
128. This means that we must do everything we can to
induce the Governments of Chad and Libya to come
back to the negotiating table, as they have attempted to
do on a number of occasions in the past.
129. Such a negotiation should, as we see it, be facilitated by the existence of principles that have been laid
down by the OAU, particularly the principle of the inviolability of the frontiers inherited from the colonial
period, in accordance with resolution AHGjRes.16
(I),
adopted at Cairo on 21 July 1964 [S/15649, annexXII],
in paragraph 2 of which “all Member States pledge themselves to respect the borders existing on their achievement of national independence,”

legal texts, conventions and treaties, signed either
between the former colonial Powers or between independent Libya and France, which was at that time the
administering Power of Chad. I would mention only the
Treaty of Friendship and Good-Neighbourliness
between
the French Republic and the United Kingdom of Libya of
10 August 1955 [ibid., annex XJ,
131, My Government is a firm supporter of the principle of the settlement of disputes by dialogue and negotiation. We know that the two fraternal countries
concerned in this debate, both of which are members of
the OAU and the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
are equally attached to that principle, They are also
aware of the need to safeguard peace in our region hy
practising scrupulous respect for the sovereignty of
neighbouring States, as well as for their territorial integrity. We therefore have every confidence that the Council
will help them to re-establish relations of goodneighbourliness and fruitful mutual co-operation that
will be to the advantage of both their peopIes and of
peace and unity in Africa.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

NOTES

130. The application of that principle in this particular
case should, in turn, be facilitated by the abundance of

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

I General Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
2 See A/32/310, annex II, decision AHG/Dec.108 (XIV).

00300

GO205-October

1990-2,Oa
