United Nations

A/RES/57/259

General Assembly

Distr.: General
27 February 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 87 (d)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/57/532/Add.4)]

57/259. Implementation of the United Nations Convention to
Combat Desertification in those Countries Experiencing
Serious Drought and/or Desertification, particularly in
Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 56/196 of 21 December 2001 and other resolutions
relating to the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in those
Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, particularly in
Africa, 1
Expressing its deep appreciation to the Government of Italy for the
organization of the first session of the Committee for the Review of the
Implementation of the Convention in Rome, at the headquarters of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, from 11 to 22 November 2002,
Taking into account the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable
Development 2 and the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development (“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”), 3
Noting with interest the partnership initiatives voluntarily undertaken by some
Governments, international organizations and major groups and announced at the
Summit,
Welcoming the outcomes of the Second Assembly of the Global Environment
Facility, held in Beijing from 16 to 18 October 2002, particularly the decision on
making land degradation, primarily desertification and deforestation, a new focal
area of the Facility,
Recognizing the strong commitment of the international community,
demonstrated at the World Summit on Sustainable Development and the Second
Assembly of the Global Environment Facility, to make the Facility available as a
_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1954, No. 33480.
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum),
chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
3
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
2

02 55642

A/RES/57/259

financial mechanism of the Convention, pursuant to article 21 of the Convention,
and in this regard encourages the Conference of the Parties to the Convention, as the
supreme body of the Convention, to take the appropriate decision to that effect at its
next ordinary session in 2003,
Expressing its deep appreciation for the generous offer of the Government of
Cuba to host the sixth ordinary session of the Conference of the Parties, to be held
at Havana from 25 August to 5 September 2003,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 4

2.
Welcomes the decision taken by the Second Assembly of the Global
Environment Facility that the Facility shall be available to serve as a financial
mechanism of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in those
Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, particularly in
Africa, 1 pursuant to article 21 of the Convention, if the Conference of the Parties to
the Convention should so decide, and in this regard notes with satisfaction that the
Assembly of the Global Environment Facility has requested the Council of the
Facility to consider any such decision of the Conference of the Parties with a view
to making the necessary arrangements;
Invites the Conference of the Parties at its sixth session, in response to
3.
the call of the World Summit on Sustainable Development and the decision of the
Second Assembly of the Global Environment Facility, to consider making the
Facility a financial mechanism of the Convention as a means of promoting the
availability of financial mechanisms, pursuant to article 21 of the Convention, while
recognizing the complementary roles of the Facility and the Global Mechanism in
providing and mobilizing resources for the elaboration and implementation of action
programmes;
4.
Encourages the Conference of the Parties and the Council and Assembly
of the Global Environment Facility to continue to collaborate closely and effectively
to facilitate the financing of the successful implementation of the Convention by
supporting financial mechanisms such as the Facility, so as to fully achieve the
objectives of the Convention;
5.
Invites the Council of the Global Environment Facility at its May 2003
meeting to finalize and adopt the operational programme for land degradation,
particularly desertification and deforestation;
6.
Emphasizes that, in the light of the ongoing assessment of the
implementation of the Convention, the affected developing countries that are parties
to the Convention need the full and effective support of the Global Environment
Facility, within its mandate, and other partners for capacity-building and other
activities which assist them in meeting their obligations under the Convention;
7.
Welcomes the successful and substantial third replenishment of the
Global Environment Facility Trust Fund which will provide additional resources
necessary to enable the Facility to continue to be responsive to the needs and
concerns of its recipient countries;
8.
Calls upon all countries and other entities in a position to do so to make
additional contributions to the Global Environment Facility;
_______________
4

2

A/57/177.

A/RES/57/259

9.
Notes with appreciation the increased number of developing countries
that are parties to the Convention and that have adopted their national, subregional
and regional action programmes, and urges the affected parties that have not yet
done so to accelerate the process of elaboration and adoption of their action
programmes, with a view to finalizing them as soon as possible;
10. Invites affected developing countries to place the implementation of their
action programmes to combat desertification high among their priorities in their
dialogue with their development partners;
11. Notes with satisfaction the steps being taken by affected developing
countries that are parties to the Convention, with the assistance of international
organizations and bilateral development partners, to implement the Convention and
the efforts being made to promote the participation of all actors of civil society in
the elaboration and implementation of national action programmes to combat
desertification, and in that regard encourages countries to cooperate at the
subregional and regional levels, as appropriate;
12. Welcomes the strengthened cooperation between the secretariat of the
Convention and the Global Mechanism, and encourages further efforts in that regard
for the effective implementation of the Convention;
13. Calls upon the international community to continue to contribute to the
implementation of action programmes through, inter alia, the conclusion of
partnership agreements as well as the bilateral and multilateral cooperation
programmes that are available to implement the Convention, including contributions
from non-governmental organizations and the private sector, and to support the
efforts of the developing countries to implement the Convention;
14. Invites all parties to pay promptly and in full the contributions required
for the core budget of the Convention for the biennium 2002–2003, and urges all
parties that have not yet paid their contributions for the year 1999 and/or the
biennium 2000–2001 to do so as soon as possible in order to ensure continuity in the
cash flow required to finance the ongoing work of the Conference of the Parties, the
secretariat and the Global Mechanism;
15. Notes the ongoing work of the liaison group of the secretariats and
officers of the relevant subsidiary bodies of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, 5 the Convention to Combat Desertification and the
Convention on Biological Diversity, 6 and encourages continuing cooperation to
promote complementarities among the three secretariats while respecting their
independent legal status;
16. Invites the United Nations Development Programme to implement
decision 2000/23 of 29 September 2000 of its Executive Board, 7 pertaining to the
cooperation between the secretariat of the Convention and the United Nations
Development Programme, in order to mainstream activities to combat desertification
at the national, subregional and regional levels;
17. Calls upon Governments, and invites multilateral financial institutions,
regional development banks, regional economic integration organizations and all
_______________
5

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
Ibid., vol. 1760, No. 30619.
7
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2000, Supplement No. 15 (E/2000/35), part
four.
6

3

A/RES/57/259

other interested organizations, as well as non-governmental organizations and the
private sector, to contribute generously to the General Fund, the Supplementary
Fund and the Special Fund, in accordance with the relevant paragraphs of the
financial rules of the Conference of the Parties, 8 and welcomes the financial support
already provided by some countries;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
fifty-eighth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
19. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-eighth session
the sub-item entitled “Implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification in those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, particularly in Africa”.
78th plenary meeting
20 December 2002

_______________
8

4

ICCD/COP (1)/11/Add.1 and Corr.1, decision 2/COP.1, annex, paras. 7–11.
