THIRTY-SECO.ND

YEAR

st

MEETING: 7 APRIL 1977

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2001)

,..... .... .,.. .., . .... .. .. ....

Page

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Complaint by Benin:
Report of the Security Council Special Mission to the People’s Republic of
Benin established under resolution 404 (1977) (S/ 12294 and Add. 1) . . . . . .

1

S/PV.2001

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
Supplements

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1944, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2001~

MEETING

Held in New York on Thursday,
President: Mr. Sim6n Albert0 CONSALVI

(Venezuela).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2001)
1. Adoption

of the agenda

2. Complaint by Benin:
Report of the Security Council Special Mission to the
People’s Republic of Benin established under resolution
404 (1977) (S/12294 and Add.1)
2% meeting was called to order at Il.10 a.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda wasadopted.

Complaint by Benin
Report of the Security Council Special Mission to the
People’s Republic of Benin established under resolution
404 (1977) (S/12294 and Add,l)*
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): In
accordance with the decisionstaken by the Council at its
2000th meeting, I invite the representativesof Botswana,
Gabon, Guinea, Morocco, Niger and Saudi Arabia to take
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber,
At the invitation of the F’resident, Mr. M. Modisi
(Botswana), Mr. L. N’Dong (Gabon), Mr. M. 5’. Camara
(Guinea), Mr. A. Bengelloun (Morocco), Mr. J. Poisson
(Niger) and Mr. J, M Baroody (Saudi Arabia) took the
placesreservedfor them at the sideof the Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation frOn1 $Janish): In
addition, I should like to inform membersof the Council
that letters have been received from the representativesof
Algeria, the Ivory Coast, Senegaland Togo in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussionof the
* Subsequently

Thirty-second

issued

BSOfficial Recordsof the SecurityCOUnCil,

Year, Special Supplement NO. 3 W12294lR~v.l).

7 April

1977, at 10.30 a.m.

question on _the agenda. Consequently, I propose, in
accordancewith the usualpractice andwith the consentof
the Council, to invite thoserepresentativesto participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, under the
provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.
3. In view of the limited number of placesavailableat the
Council table, I invite the representativesmentioned above
to take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber, on the undertstanding that they will be
invited to take a place at the Council table whenever they
wish to addressthe Council.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. l? K. Bouayad&ha (Algeria), Mr. S. Ak6 (Ivory Coast), Mr. M. Fall
(Senegal) and Mr. A. A. Kodjovi (Togo) took the places
reservedfor them at the sideof the Council chamber.
4. MI. TROYANOVSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian): Mr. President, I
should like, on behalf of the Soviet delegation and on my
own behalf, to congratulate you most cordially and
sincerely on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. The relationsof friendship and mutually
advantageous co-operation which have been established
between our two countries and consolidated by the
memorable visit to our country by the President of
Venezuela, Mr. PGrez, last year, give us ground for hoping
that, in the Council too, our delegationswill be guided in
their relations by the spirit of co-operation and mutual
understanding.
5. I should like to take this opportunity also to express
our gratitude to your predecessoras President, the representative of the United States, AmbassadorYoung, on his
extremely skilful guidanceof the work of the Council last
month. We shall be very pleasedto see Mr. Young once
againin the presidentialchair in 15 months’ time.
6. Finally, before turning to the substanceof the question
on the agenda, I should like to express my sincere
condolencesto the delegationof the People’s Republic of
the Congo in connexion with the death at the hands of
hired killers of the President of the Republic, Marien
Ngouabi. In the Soviet Union, President Ngouabi was
known as an outstanding tighter against imperialism,
colonialism and racism and as a man he had made a
considerable contribution to the progressof the People’s
Republic of the Congotowardsnational and socialdevelopment and to the strengtheningof friendly relationsbetween
the People’s Republic of the Congo and the Soviet Union.

Serious concern over the events which occurred at Cotonou
and their dangerous consequences was expressed by the
Group of Arab States [S/12284/. The participants in the
session of the Council of Ministers of the Organization of
African Unity, which was held at Lome at the end of
February, also severely condemned the aggression against
the People’s Republic of Benin, In a message of solidarity
addressed by the Council of Ministers to the President of,
Benin, it was stated that that imperialist intrusion with the
use of foreign mercenaries constituted a challenge to free
Africa and the whole of progressive mankind.

7. The Soviet delegation has studied attentively the report
of the Council Special Mission which went to Benin
pursuant to resolution 404 (1977) to investigate the events
which occurred at Cotonou on 16 January this year. This
thorough and detailed document contains a great deal of
factual material and evidence which sheds additional light
on the nature of the events of January in Benin. As emerges
from the report, the Special Mission heard testimony from
many persons belonging to different nationalities, inspected
relevant sites and studied ail the evidence submitted to it. It
‘also heard statements from certain members of the diplomatic corps and discussed the matter with the Benin
authorities. Iri our view, the considerable amount of work
done by the Mission and the conscientious and diligent
manner in which it discharged the task entrusted to it are
worthy of commendation by the Council.

12. The armed attack on Benin was just one more link in
the chain of criminal acts of the international imperialists
and neo-colonialists on African soil in their attempts to
eliminate Governments which do not suil them, and this
was made abundantly clear by the report of the Special
Mission.

8. In our view, the report of the Special Mission leaves no
doubt about the main point, namely that, on 16 January
this year, the People’s Republic of Benin became the victim
of an armed attack by a band of mercenaries recruited,
trained and armed outside that country. The main purpose
of that attack was the overthrow of the Government of
Benin. Since the attackers infringed the territorial integrity,
independence and sovereignty of the State of Benin, it is
quite obvious that the acts committed against that State
constitute a clear-cut case of armed aggression.

13. We listened with great interest yesterday [2OOOt/j
meeting] to the convincing speech made by the representative of Benin, Ambassador Boya. That statement did a
great deal to supplement the report of the Mission.
14. The Soviet Union is profoundly indignant at the
armed aggression against the People’s Republic of Benin: an
attempt to deal a blow to that progressive r&ime which has
carried out economic, political and social reforms in the
interests of the people of Benin. The Soviet people has a
great deal of sympathy and understanding for the efforts
made by Benin over the last four years under the leadership
of the party of the people’s revolution. Those efforts are
proof of the firm determination of Benin to carry through
its fight against al1 forms of exploitation and to build a
genuinely democratic society. Of course, the creative work
of the people of Benin will only yield results if that country
is reliably protected from outside interference and against
any attempts at intervention in its internal affairs and
violation of its territorial integrity. Indeed, this goes for all
countries of the African continent.

9. We also concur in another important conclusion drawn
in the Mission’s report. As the Mission pointed out, to judge
by the way in which that operation was planned and
executed, such acts could also be carried out with similar
purposes against other countries, and this constitutes the
very serious danger that is inherent in the situation which
arose in Benin.
10. The attack of 16 January was successfully repulsed by
the armed forces of Benin, with the support of the entire
Beninese people. However, the threat of aggressive intervention in the normal process of the development of
independent countries of Africa-and, indeed, not only of
the African continent-still
exists, and will continue to exist
as long as there persists in the world the shameful
phenomenon of mercenary activity, and as long as certain
imperialist circles are unwilling to refrain from attempts to
halt, by force of arms, the advance of African countries
towards genuine independence, freedom and social progress.

1.5. To that end, the international community must, in
particular, severely condemn the use of mercenaries for the
suppression of national liberation movements and the
restoration of colonial and neo-colonial domination. An
end must be put to the use of mercenaries-a phenomenon
which has been quite rightly described in the letter I have
already mentioned, sent by the African countries, as “this
scourge of the twentieth century” and which is one of the
weapons used in the struggle against the forces of national
and social liberation.

11. It is no accident, therefore, that the just demands of
the People’s Republic of Benin, in its attempts to protect
its sovereignty and independence from such criminal
infringement, have met with the unreserved support of
broad sectors of world public opinion. I would remind YOU
that, in the letter dated 8 February this year from the
Chairman of the GTOUP of African States at the United
Nations to the President of the Security Council
[S/12285/, it was pointed out that:

16. The peoples of the world, including those of the
liberated countries, have often had occasion to understand
and appreciate the fraternal nature of the relations of the
Soviet Union and the other socialist countries with the
African States. This wasfurther confirmed by the results of
the recent visit of the Chairman of the Presidium of the
Supreme Soviet of the USSR, Mr. Podgorny, to four
African countries. The documents signed in the course of
that visit are compelling testimony to the fact that the
Soviet Union still remains the natural ally of young States
in their arduous path towards genuine national md social
liberation. In the joint Soviet-Tanzanian statement pub-

“This aggression by mercenaries in the pay of international imperialism is regarded by the African Group as
a very serious act of aggression against all the African
States.”
2

lished on 27 March this year, the parties welcomed the
historic successwbn by the peoples of Africa in the struggle
for their freedom and independence, and the growing role
which the sovereign States of Africa are playing in
internationaI affairs. At the same time, they pointed out
that on the African continent there still remained vestiges
of colonialism and racism which represented a serious
threat to international peace and security. The existence of
such a threat was once again confirmed by recent events in
Benin, the report on which is being considered today by the
Council.

situation when it was illustrated in Frederick Forsytll’s
book, DONSof WQ~.1 Now it is here before us.
23. We in Africa have seen this sort ofthing before, in the
1960s. We have now experienced it for the second time, in
this decade. In each caseit wascommitted with impunity
as
far as legal action was concerned against the culprits Once
they had left the country and scene of the crime. I submit
that States Members of this Organization cannot afford this
state of affairs.
24. Botswana knows the pain that countries suffer as n
result Of malicious foreign elements committing crimes SUCll
as we have heard of today. We have recently brougIlt to the
Council’s attention the criminal acts against my country
by
the illegal rtigime in Southern Rhodesia. Earlier, we brought
to
the attention of the Council the involvement
of
mercenaries from other countries now clubbing together
with the rebel rdgime in Rhodesia. This year alone, we TKLV~
had to deal with five mercenaries from that troubled
country who were on the side of the rebel r&ime.
My
Government is appreciative of the support that it received
from the Council on those two occasions.

17. On the basis of our consistent position of principle on
African matters, the Soviet (Jnion will support a decision
on the part of the Council designed to put an end to this
threat and to call a halt to aggressive interference against
the People’s Republic of Benin and other African States, a
decision which would condemn those who bore responsibility for the attack which was carried out and which
would also eliminate the shameful practice of hiring
mercenaries. Such a decision of the Council, in our view,
would be a worthy outcome of the discussion of the
complaint of Benin, which was the victim of armed
aggression, would promote the creation of conditions that
would lead to the elimination of the threat to peace and
security on the African continent and would be a contribution to the process of the final liberation of the
African countries.

25. However, it is unrealistic for individual countries,
especially those of us that are still developing, to combat
mercenarism alone. It is even more expensive wllen
the
countries from which those mercenaries emanate exllibit,
nt
best, only lip-service concern about the menace we are
talking about. One regrets to state that such an attitude will
not assist in discouraging adventurers who are obviously
misguided, for we in the developing countries at W~IO~II
those crimes are directed, as indicated by recent history,
will suffer even more should the current ambivalence
prevail.

18. The PRESIDENT (interpretutio~z p’om Spanish): I
thank the representative of the Soviet Union for his cordial
personal references. I sincerely believe that the visit of
President P&ez to the Soviet Union and the agreements
reached during that time will open up a phase of fruitful
co.operation betwe’en our two countries.

26. The time has now come for us to address ourselves
fully, in a co-operative and humane spirit, to the problem
of mercenaries and the implications thereof. It is our
contention that the problem we face is an evil for all of US
as nation States. Those who appear to condone it llave to
understand that they are playing with fire. It is common
knowledge that mercenary forces owe allegiance to no one.

19. The next speaker is the representative of Botswana,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
20. Mr. MODISI (Botswana): Like those before me, I
should like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
assumption of your office and to express my admiration for
the diligence with which you have arranged the meetings
and handled the delicate issues now before us.

27. A comprehensive approach must now be adopted with
the aim of stopping the mercenary menace. In that regard,
it would be necessary to aim also at the root of the process
of mercenarism. We must, as countries, make it more
difficult for recruiting agents to operate within our borders.
More explicit and more meaningful legal frameworks ~nust
be established internationally, permitting punitive action by
a State that has reason to believe that individuals and/or
groups are engaged in mercenary activities. A iegal framcwork would be possible with a more affirmative political
will on the part of all of us who are resolved, SO far as it is
humanely possible, to stop mercenarism. There is need for a
unanimous resolution on this issue.

21. I have read with concern the report on the question
now before us. The Special Mission has done an excellent
job in the presentation of the report, which is lucid and
clear and makes an assessment of grave implications. It is
evident from all accounts that Benin has suffered a wanton
act of aggression perpetrated by foreign elements. More
disturbing is the assessment that the band of invaders
seemed to have no other purpose in mind than to create
havoc, cause misery and sow fear among the people of
Benin. It was a senselessact of destabilization which should
not be allowed to establish a haunting precedent.

28. I should like to applaud the valiant people of Benin
on that fateful day of 16 January, successfully
repelled the foreign marauders who had invaded their

22. My delegation is disturbed also by the implications of
the mercenary invasion of Benin. Any group of adventurers
could hatch a scheme to overthrow a Government that it
did not like anywhere in the worId, and would do it for the
love of money only. It was bad enough to imagine this

who,

1 NewYork, VikingPress,
Inc., 1974.

3

country. The demand by the people and Government of
Benin for retribution is, to my delegation, justified. We urge
the Council to support them in their efforts to repair the
damage inflicted on their country.

35. It goes without saying that this return to the law of
the jungle in international relations could only take place
with the support of Powers with a nostalgia for gun-boat
diplomacy. Indeed, the mercenaries, the residue of the
defeated colonial armies, would have disappeared a long
time ago had not foreign Powers hostile to Africa salvaged
them for use in the pursuit of their sordid interests. The
international community and particularly the permanent
members of the Security Council are in duty bound to
consider adequate measures for halting this scourge.

29. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
porn Spanislz): I
should like to inform the Council that I have received a
letter from the representative of Mauritania in which he
requests to be invited to participate in our debate without
the right to vote. I therefore propose, in accordance with
the usual practice and with the consent of the Security
Council, to invite that representative to participate in the
debate without the right to vote, in conformity with the
provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

36. My country, since its accession to independence, has
had relations of friendship and co-operation with Benin,
both bilaterally and in multilateral organizations such as the
Organization of African Unity, the African, Malagasy and
Mauritian Common Organization and the West African
Economic Community. Those relations have always been
based on respect for each other’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity and on non-interference in the internal affairs of
other States. Accordingly my delegation wishes to affirm
here its solidarity with the Government and people of
Benin whenever they are attacked from abroad from
whatever source.

30. In view of the limited number of places available at
the Council table, I invite the representative of Mauritania
to take the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber on the understanding that he will be invited to
take a seat at the Council table whenever he wishes to
address the Council.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. Kane (Mauritania) took the place reserved for him at the side of the
Council chamber.

37. My delegation regrets that this painful circumstance
has been seized upon by certain irresponsible individuals so
as to establish in world public opinion and display before it
the minor disputes which sometimes divide African countries.

3 1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish): The
next speaker is the representative of Senegal. I invite him to
be seated at the Council table and to make his statement.

38. In the report of the Mission established by the Council
under resolution 404 (1977), reference is made to a
statement by a certain Ba Alpha Oumarou, member of a
commando which invaded Benin on 16 January, a Guinean
born at Dakar in 1948. In this regard, there are certain
items of information I must give you.

32. Mr. FALL (Senegal) (interpretation
from French):
Mr. President, first of all I should like to associate myself
with preceding speakers in welcoming you, on behalf of my
delegation. I am happy to see you presiding over the
proceedings of the Council during this month, the more so
since your country, Venezuela, and my own have always
maintained and still maintain excellent relations. I am sure
that your understanding,
your tact and your long and
abundant experience will enable you to discharge your
delicate and onerous duties with the utmost competence.

39. At present, more than 500,000 Guineans, approximately 15 percent of the population of Guinea, live in
Senegal. Some of those persons settled there before the
country’s accession to independence while others arrived
later, So there is nothing strange in the fact that persons in
either of these two categories should have had children
born in Senegal. This seems to be the case with parents of
the person called Eli Alpha Oumarou. Those Guineans, like
the nationals of all other countries of Africa, are authorized
to live in Senegal and enjoy the hospitality of our country.
They are neither prisoners nor under surveillance. However,
it is strictly forbidden for them to undertake any political
or other activity which might be detrimental to another
African State or indeed to any State of the international
community. I would add that, on the basis of the inquiry
carried out by the authorities of my country, the Senegalese immigration police were unable to identify 136 Alpha
Oumarou.

33. The events which occurred on 16 January 1977 at
Cotonou illustrate once again the sad fact that Africa has
become the chosen land of the international mercenary.
Once again, an African State has had its sovereignty and
territorial integrity violated by a band of marauders in the
service of Powers hostile to Africa.
34. The aggression of which the Republic of Benin has
been the victim is part of a long chain of other acts of
aggression committed by mercenaries against independent
African States. Adventurers,
men beyond the pale of the
Iaw, scorning every rule of universally recognized and
accepted international law, strike against sovereign States
Members of the United Nations. They have attempted to
overthrow legitimate Governments by force, to kindle local
conflicts and to aggravate civil wars. Likewise, they have
caused tremendous
material damage to the victims and
enormous losses of human life. After Zaire there were the
Sudan, Nigeria, Angola, Uganda and Zimbabwe, to mention
only the best known cases which are beyond dispute. Now
it is the turn of the Republic of Benin to be the victim of
this international brigandage.

40. Having made that point clear, I wish to declare
solemnly on behalf of my Government that Senegal is not
implicated, either directly or indirectly, in the activities of
Ba Alpha Oumarou or his accomplices in the affair the
Council is considering. In matters such as these there is
always a great danger that those who fish in troubled waters
will try to sow confusion in peoples’ minds. PIUS,
immediately after the events of 16 January, the Guinean
4

newspaper HorOp accused “neighbouring African States”
of having been the inventors and instigatorsof the plot and
even published photographs of several white mercenaries
who were allegedly arrestedat the time of the aggression
of
which Benin wasthe victim.
41. In the statement made yesterday afternoon in the
Council by the representative of the Republic of Guinea,
the following wasstated:
“The white mercenaries captured in Benin . . ,, as
indicated in the documents of the mercenary Gilbert
Bourgeaud, were to Africanize their murderousactivities
by using emotionally sick blacks of the BB Alpha
Oumarou kind.” [L?OOOthmeeting,paru. 172.1
42.

The representative of Guinea thus showedus that he
done his homework carefully. But at the sametime he
gave us to understand that the report submitted by the
COUd
hhiOn
WslS of no importance in his opinion and
that he had not even turned its pages, although the
discussionof that report is an item on today’s agenda.Now
everyone knows that one doesnot have to study this report
in detail to realize that the essentialelementsit containsare
to be found in the statementsof the only prisonerwho was
captured after the withdrawal of the mercenariesand that
that prisoner is an African and, what is more, a citizen of
Guinea.
11~

43. As members will have noticed, I askedto be allowed
to speakat the very beginningof the Council’sdeliberations
on the complaint by Benin so as to give the support of my
country and my Government to that friendly African State.
But I also wished to avail myself of the opportunity to
indicate the feelings of my delegation in regard to the
slanderous accusationsof the Conakry authorities. That is
why I deemed it preferable to leave it to the Mission
appointed by the Council to confound the authors of those
slanderousassertions.That hasnow been done.
44. Those who are obsessedwith plots in Conakry
hastened to exploit this affair for their own endsSO as to
find, at little expense, new explanations for their own
internal difficulties. As usual, they have used the hollow
vaunting rhetoric familiar to everyone in order to disguise
the economic ruin into which they have plunged the
country. Once again they have sought to pit one African
State against another in the hope that thereby they would
find a good opportunity to justify to their people the
disastrous consequencesof their political shortcomings,
their crimes and their manifest incapacity to govern. Their
hysterical high-soundingverbiage would have causedonly a
feeling of amusedpity, had the consequencesnot been so
harmful to African unity, for, by seeking openly and
systematically to divide Africa, they facilitate the task of
the enemies of our continent and this invite them to
intervene in our internal affairs. Thus they actually become
the allies of those they pretend to be fighting. We may even
wonder whether they are aware of the dimensionsof the
problem, just aswe may wonder what their ulterior motives
are when they unceasingly rekindle dissensionwhenever
Africa needs to be united to face foreign aggression.Unless
. they have a hidden motive, such behaviour is to say the

least irresponsible,infantile and datigerouslyharmful to the
interests of the peoplesand Governmentsof Africa. I think
it would be particularly aberrant for Africa to have to pay
the Price for the shortcomings of a Government which is
incapable of meeting and solving the most elementary
problemsconfronting its people,
4.5. The practice of the art of insult and calumny canin no
way suffice to create happiness for a people. On the
contrary, it is quite obviously detrimental to our hopesfor
a better life, and the tangible result has been paralysis,
distrust and even hostility. The theory that for 20 yearsa
continuing conspiracy has been under preparation by the
imperialists with the complicity of the so-called“neighbouring States” is a mystification that deceivesno one.
Furthermore, how can one understandwhy the imperialists
should obstinately move against the Government of a
country that is always most sympathetic concerningtheir
interests, as is the case here, despite all their false
professionsof revolutionary sincerity.
46. This statement has been made without my having
studied the document distributed to the Security Council
yesterday by the delegation of Benin. When I know the
contents of that document and should it be necessaryfor
me to comment on them, I shall take the liberty of again
requesting the Council’s permissionto present my delegation’s views on the subject.
47. The PRESIDENT (interpretation j)om Spanish): I
thank the representative of Senegalfor his cordial references to the excellent relations between our two
countries and for the kind Iwordshe addressed
to me.
48. 1 should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from the representativeof Madagascarin
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote. Consequently, I
propose, in accordancewith the usualpracticeand with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representativeto
participate in the discussion,without the right to vote,
under the provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and rule
37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
49. In view of the limited number of placesavailableat
the Council table, I invite the representativeof Madagascar
to take the place reservedfor him at the sideof the Council
chamber, on the understanding that he will be invited to
take a place at the Council table wheneverhe wishesto
addressthe Council.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. B.. RabetajTka
(Madagascar)took the place reservedfor him at the sideof
the CotrnciEchamber.
50. Mr. LEPRETTE (France) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, I should first like to dischargethe
pleasant duty of congratulating you on your assumptionof
the presidency of the Council for the month of April. The
excellent relations of friendship between France and
Venezuela give me grounds for deriving pleasure from
seeingyou guiding proceedings which I am sure till be
difficult and delicate. Pleasebe assuredo$ my delegation’s

and severalGovernments in my country, and yet therehas
been one constant: the policy of co-operation between
France and Benin. In the same period, there havebee,,
successive
Governments,and perhapseven various regimes
in the State of Benin. The people of Benin have exercise;
the choicesthat they have the right to exercise.Francehas
always accepted those choices, quite simply because
it
refusesto intervene in the internal affairs of States.Despite
tllese changesthat have occurred in the past, both in France
and in Benin, and despiteall the vicissitudes,co-operation
has continued. The representative of Benin wasgeed
enough to say that this policy had been welcomedby the
peopleand Government of his COUntIY.

support. We all admire the way in which you conduct our
proceedings.
51. We have the same admiration for Ambassador Young,
your predecessor, whom we whould also like to thank for
the wisdom, breadth of vision and devotion he displayed
from 1 to 31 March,
52. As we pointed out on 8 February last [lY87th
meeting], the French delegation would like once again to
associate itself with all those delegations which have in the
course of this debate-as, indeed, in the course of our
previous meeting on this item-condemned the operation of
which the People’s Republic of Benin was the victim. I
should like to remind members that my delegation approved the dispatch by the Council of a mission of inquiry
into the events which gave rise to our initial meeting on this
question. We have acquainted ourselves with the report
drawn up by the Mission and also the documents annexed
to it. We should like to convey to Ambassador Illueca,
Ambassador Kikhia and Mr. Mulye our appreciation of the
dedication with which they discharged their task.

59. That being the situation, I do not seewhat France
would have had to gain by encouragingsuch a shocking
operation, an operation which, had there not beenpeople
killed and wounded and had not damageof all kindsbeen
caused,could be describedasinfantile. There remainsthe
question of “French imperialism”, this imperialismwhich
“has armed and launched and will continue to armand
launch attacks againstour country, by dispatchingits secret
servicesand its parallel and subversive networks” [ibid.,
pra. 661.

53. We would have liked this report to have been the
subject of calm and impartial examination by the Council.
Having listened attentively yesterday to the representative
of Benin (2000th meeting], however, I regret to have to
say that the style he proposes for this debate seems to be a
different one. In the circumstances, I find myself obliged to
make the following points at this stage.

GO. I leave it to others to decide what this entity actually
is and what advantage-in the light of what I havejust said
about France’sinterestsand policy-the imperialisminquestion could have hoped to derive, materially or morally,
from an operation which wasapparently very expensive,an
operation mounted againsta country whoserepresentatives
themselvessay that they are waging a difficult strugglefor
their developmentalone.

54. First I should like firmly and solemnly to repeat my
Government’s commitment to respect for the independence
of States and to non-intervention in their internal affairs.
As I have said, this principle brooks no exception. The
actions of adventurers against independent African States
must be condemned unequivocally. They threaten those
States with an insecurity detrimental to their economic
_ development.

61. To conclude my remarks on this point, I would
remind the Council that no French service took eithera
close or a remote part in, or was in any way associated
with, the raid of 16 January against Cotonou. In those
circumstances, we do not understand why the Benin
authorities should have decided to make such serious
accusationsand bold allegationsin the report they sawfit
to circulate yesterday,2 basing themselvesexclusivelyon
documentswhich are allegedto have beenabandonedat the
airport and on the testimony of a single witness.I note
that, in the conclusionsof their own report, the members
of the Missionmake clear that their terms of referenceand
the time they had available for the performance of their
task did not enable them to pursue their investigationmY
further or to verify the statements of the prisoner.The
report adds that the same observation applies to the
evidencesubmitted in the documentation.

55. But I have another reason, just as fundamental, for
speaking. My delegation was indeed surprised-I might even
say stupefied-when
we heard certain passages of the
statement of the representative of Benin. He suggested that
the whole of the operation originated in France, that it was
mounted in France and carried out by Frenchmen. Furthermore, while recalling the ties of friendship and co-operation
between the people of France and Benin, he made a
connexion between the leaders of the commando group and
the French authorities by claiming that the leader of the
commandogroup wasa French officer, an officer in active
serviceansweringto the nameof Gilbert Bourgeaud.
56. My delegation cannot accept such an allegation.
Indeed, I can assurethe Council that the investigations
undertaken have revealedthat no officer answeringto that
description exists in the French Army, either on active
service,in the reservesor servingunder foreign status.

62. That brings me to my third point, concerningindi
viduals participating in the operation who are allegedte be
French nationals. Some nameshave been mentioned.Ia
passingI would note that these persons too have map
queradedunder pseudonyms.For instance, I have founda
Mr. Carter and a Mr, Young. I have noted that Mr. Gilbert
Bourgeaudis alsoa Mr. Maurin.

57. Moreover, one may well ask why France would have
become involved, either closely or remotely, in an undertaking of this kind.
58. I would remind the Council that, since Benin’s
accessionto independence,there have beenthree Presidents
6

63. Yesterday I heard the representative of Benin askthe
French authorities to institute the necessarylegal pr@
2 Subsequently circulated as document S/12319/Add.l-

ceedings against their nationals, to the extent that those
nationals were involved. I can say here that investigations
have been undertaken by the French Governr-nent, on its
own initiative and in accordance with its own legislation.
64. I said to my colleague from Benin during the first part
of this debate that his Government would no doubt deem it
useful to place directly before the French Government the
complaints that Benin might have in this matter. I note,
three months after the events, that no representations have
been made to the French authorities. I cannot believe that
the representative of Benin, who has repeatedly stated his
concern to see this entire matter dealt with sincerely and in
good faith, would wish to reserve this point, which is so
essential, just for the sake of dramatic effect. Indeed,
relations between Benin and France, as I have already said,
have never been interrupted and we can only express
surprise that the Government of Benin, if it had complaints,
did not use the normal channels of bilateral diplomacy to
present them.
65. I would add that the French Republic is a hospitable
country, a land of liberty. Those among you who have lived
in or visited my country must be aware of that. The
movement of persons, the purchase of airline tickets, the
opening of bank accounts are subject to no limitations and
require no special authorization, if the normal rules for
those kinds of operations are respected. There can be no
question of our placing a policeman behind each Frenchman or behind each of our guests. The authorities in my
country are very vigilant about preventing abuses of the
hospitality or the freedom so generously offered by my
country. But it is not always in the power of the French
Government, unde; our system, to prevent some hotheaded adventurers from doing certain things on their own
initiative.
66. We have listened with attention to what has been said
about the use of mercenaries. A greater awareness of the
problems arising from that kind of activity should emerge
from this debate. We would be only too ready to associate
outselves with those who would condemn such undertakings and, in this regard, I do not think I need remind the
Council that we share the bitterness and indignation
expressedby the representative of Benin.
67. But, I repeat, we cannot tolerate that, on the basis of
these facts, which we condemn, and through a train of
arguments we cannot understand, unfounded accusations
should be made against any country.
68. The PRESIDENT (interpretation fvom
Spanish): I
thank the representative of France for his kind words about
the relations between his country and mine and about me
personally.
69. The next speaker is the representative of Morocco. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
70. Mr. BENGELLOUN
(Morocco) (interpretation
from
I should like first of all to express the sincere
gratitude of my delegation at being authorized to participate in the present debate. I wish also, Sir, to stress how

French):

happy my delegation is that this ‘debate is taking place
under your presidency. You represent a nation with which
the Kingdom of Morocco has friendly and cordial relations.
Your well-known humanistic qualities guarantee that these
discussions will be held in an atmosphere of serenity and
objectivity, in the interest of the international community.
71. Furthermore, I should like to pay a tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Young, who guided the Council’s
work during the past month with acknowledged competence and with a profound and sincere desire to
contribute to the solution of African problems in the
interest of the peoples of our great continent.
72. Turning to the question on the agenda, I wish
immediately to protest most vehemently and express my
profound indignation at the decision of the delegation of
Benin to circulate a slanderous report prepared by its
Government for the manifest purpose of casting an ignoble
and intolerable suspicion on heads of State who are known
for their wisdom, moderation and respect for the principles
that govern the international community.
73. What the delegation of Benin has done is all the more
reprehensible because by the terms of a consensus,reached
no later than yesterday morning, it was decided that the
members of the African Group taking part in these debates
would avoid any attacks against African countries. This
manoeuvre is discourteous vis-&vis the Security Council. On
the one hand, Benin requests that a mission of inquiry be
sent and, on the other, it ,draws up its own report and
decides to distribute it, as though Benin no longer had any
confidence in the conclusions of the members of the said
Mission.
74. 1 energetically reject all those fallacious and slanderous
accusations, all those speculations that proceed from a
morbid imagination and which undeniably represent an
intolerable aggression against the most sacred institutions of
my country.
75. I wish to make a solemn appeal to the members of the
Council to remove that reprehensible document from their
debates because it is false and partisan and should not have
any attention paid to it.
76. The delegation of Morocco is convinced that right and
justice will always triumph in the end, just as we are sure
that the members of the international community in their
wisdom and foresight cannot be deceived by such scandalous manoeuvres.
77. In defending its most sacred values, the Moroccan
people is not guided by any feeling of hostility towards
anyone. We have never intervened and never shall intervene
in the internal affairs of any country.
78. I wish now to recall that Morocco, as an African and
an Arab country, since its accession to independence, has
ceaselessly striven for African unity and Arab-African
co-operation. This has been a constant goal of our foreign
policy, a deeply-felt need of the Moroccan people and the
first principle of our Constitution.

\

this adventurer who-going from the sublime to the
ridiculous-asked the Mission “to use its influence with the
Beninese authorities so that the authorities will be lenient
towards [him] “. Really it does seem to me that the Mission
should not have taken into account the slanderous statements of this individual, still less included what he said in
an official document of the Organization.

79. We are aware that the unity of African peoples and
their harmonious development can be achieved only by
putting an end once and for all to all acts of subversion and
intervention from whatever source.
80. We have never ceased to bear witness to our active
solidarity with all brother countries victims of subversive
acts directed against their sovereignty and independence.
We cannot forget that our country is at present the victim
of .such acts of subversion directed from outside with the
aim of jeopardizing our territorial integrity, and we know
that, as in the past, we will find the necessary support and
assistance in the international community.

87. Furthermore, the delegation of Morocco notes that
the number of mercenaries arrested after the departure of
the attackers has curiously diminished. The representative
of Benin stated at the Council’s meeting on 7 February:
“Their pirate aircraft had to take-off very rapidly, leaving
behind quite a number of mercenaries, who were heavily
drugged and out of their minds” [1986th meeting,

81. It is therefore natural for us firmly to condemn any
aggression against any country wherever that country may
be. In so doing, we reaffirm our dedication to the
fundamental principles of the Charter and, in particular, to
the right of each people to choose its own political,
economic and social regime, without foreign intervention.

para. 191.

Why, then, did the Mission not ask to hear all those
mercenaries who, since the attack on 16 January, had had
sufficient time to sober up and calm down?

82. Thus, we deem it more necessary than ever to take
every measure to protect the stability of our African
continent and thus enable our countries to devote themselves to the exalting task of economic development for the
benefit of our respective peoples.

88. Likewise, I believe it is inconceivable, particularly
when sovereign States are involved, to admit as evidence
simple printed leaflets or alleged documents abandoned as
if by chance at the Cotonou airport by those mercenaries,
as though that were their only concern at the time. The
procedure is too facile, too simplistic. In that way, anybody
can forge or succeed in obtaining identity documents and
then draw conclusions from them in order to harm the
dignity and reputation of a country.

83. We are alarmed by the increase on our continent in
mercenary operations to which another brother and
friendly country in Africa has just fallen victim. We should
like, on this occasion, again to express our complete
solidarity with the friendly Republic of Zaire. Those
operations which arm groups of people and direct them
against other countries to sow anarchy and spread destruction and suffering must cease.

89. We agree that there are certain factors that in no way
serve to clarify the mystery. All those inconsistencies
hardly deserve even to be mentioned, were it not that
unfortunately it is on the basis of those fallacies that
sovereign States Members of our Organization have been
odiously defamed.

84. The Council, by its resolution 404 (1977), decided to
send a special mission to the People’s Republic of Benin in
order to ascertain the facts. That Mission, which consisted
of the representatives of India, Libya and Panama, under
the chairmanship of Ambassador Illueca, went to Benin and
submitted its report on 8 March 1977.

90. My delegation does not wish to enter into a sterile
debate, but it is my duty to make things clear in order to
prevent the confusion which the enemies of African unity
are trying to spread.

85. My delegation pays tribute to the praiseworthy efforts
of the members of the Mission to carry out an extremely
difficult task in so short a time. But we sincerely regret that
the report includes accusations against sovereign States
Members of our Organization unsupported by any proof.

91. It is with real satisfaction that my delegation takes
note of the final sentences of the report, which, in our
opinion, should have been the only conclusion:
“However, the Special Mission wishes to state that the
terms of its mandate, as well as the time available at its
disposal for its implementation,
did not permit it to
investigate further and verify the testimony of the
prisoner pertaining to these matters. The same is true of
the suggestive evidence contained in the documentation.”

8G. Obviously, in an off&I United Nations document one
cannot take into account the testimony of an individual, of
a single individual, who is suspect in more ways than one, as
is proved by the biography contained in the report. Who is
this individual who bears several names, who under extraordinary circumstances was found on a beach, it appears,
waiting for somebody to come and pick him up? Who is
this person, who sounds just like someone in an adventure
story
and who says that he innocently participated in a vast
operation of mercenaries the details of which he knew
nothing? No doubt this was a person who was manipulated
and who recited a lesson learnt by heart; or perhaps he is
even an agent pravocateur very well aware of the role he is
. to play. One cannot in good faith accord any credence to

(S/12294, para. 145.1

Here we can only pay tribute to the honesty of the
members of the Mission for that evaluation, which removes
every misunderstanding and every ambiguity.
92. The Government of His Majesty the King wishes to
reaffirm its solemn protest against all the fabricated
testimony and documents which implicate the Kingdom of
8

Morocco and which it considers to be flagrant attacks on
the dignity of the people of Morocco.

100. 1 should like to tell Ambassador Andrew Young,
representative of the United States, your predecessor, how
pleased we were at the way in which he presided over the
work of the Council during the month of March. His efforts
throughout the month to reconcile the views of the
members of the Council on the question of South Africa,
his initiatives and the suggestions that he made to facilitate
a harmonious conclusion of the work of the Council
demonstrate the outstanding statesmanlike qualities of a
man who understands the problems of Africa, as well as the
will of the new United States Government to contribute
sincerely and effectively to the peaceful and gradual search
for a solution to the situation in southern Africa.

93. The Government of His Majesty the King solemnly
declares that it cannot be implicated either directly or
indirectly in the tragic events of which the people of Benin
were the victims on 16 January 1977. It respectfully draws
the attention of the Council to the gravity of the
manoeuvres directed against sovereign States and Members
of our Organization and to the need to prevent our
Organization from being used for ulterior motives by
conspirators and detractors who are opposed to African
unity.

101. We have departed today from our normal line of
conduct and have asked to speak in the Council-we have
done so, let me assure members, with some regret, but with
a high sense of duty which derives from the present
circumstances-to reply to the statement of the representative of the People’s Republic of Benin [ZOOOth meeting/,
to the allegations contained in the Beninese national report
on the aggression of 16 January 1977, which has been
distributed to members of the Council, and in particular to
the statement of the representative of the Republic of
Guinea [ibid].
The phraseology, the insinuations, the
allusions and the epithets used by our colleagues from
Benin and Guinea and those to be found in the report
hardly leave us any choice.

94. The Government of His Majesty the King wishes to
repeat its condemnation of the use of mercenaries and
states that it will collaborate, as it has in the past, in all
undertakings by our Organization to establish an international mechanism to prevent mercenary operations and
to protect more effectively the sovereignty and integrity of
small countries.
95. In the statement made on the occasion of the
commemoration of the throne on 3 March this year, His
Majesty King Hassan II, after recalling the role played by
Morocco as host to the first African summit meeting in
1961 and as President of the Organization of African Unity
in 1972, reaffirmed the continuity of Moroccan policy on
that subject. His Majesty stated, inter a&z:

102. It was with indignation that the Ivory Coast learned,
on the morning of 16 January 1977, of the events which
had occurred at Cotonou, the economic capital of the
People’s Republic of Benin, and which caused so much
suffering to the fraternal people of Benin. The Ivory Coast
condenms all forms of violence and recourse to force, both
in international relations and in internal conflicts or in
relations between communities, and we could therefore not
fail to condemn most strongly that act of force committed
by a commando of mercenaries. Their evil actions, so
detrimental to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the young States of Africa, can never be sufficiently
condemned. No African State, no African people, no
African leader can remain indifferent to such acts which
pose a constant threat to the independence, security and
peace so indispensable to the development of these States.

“At any rate, our country will continue to work to
strengthen the ties of friendship and co-operation with
the other fraternal States of Africa which justly value the
benefits that can be derived from loyal co-operation and
sincere friendship.”
96. I hope that I have contributed to the Council’s
enlightenment with regard to the facts of the situation in
the interests of the proper functioning of our Organization,
so that it may attain its objectives for the well-being of the
international community.
97. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
thank the representative of Morocco for the kind words he
addressed to my country and to me.

103. The gravity of the action perpetrated against the
People’s Republic of Benin and the danger constituted by
the mercenary system have made it necessary to shed all
possible light on the events of 16 January 1977, SO as to
discover who is to blame and in order to take appropriate
measures to avoid repetition of such events, not only
against Benin but against any other State, African or not.
We are pleased, therefore, that the Security Council, in its
wisdom, by its resolution 404 (1977), acceded to Benin’s
request and decided to send to that country a special
mission composed of three of its members, India, Panama
and Libya, with the task of investigating those events and
reporting on them.

98. The next speaker is the representative of the Ivory
Coast. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
99. Mr. AKE (Ivory Coast) (interpretation

from French):

Mr. President,‘it is my pleasure first of all to extend to YOU
and, through you, to all the members of the Council, mY
expressions of gratitude for permitting me to take Part
without the right to vote in the present discussion. I should
like also to congratulate you most cordially on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council. Your distinguished personal, human and moral merits, Your rich
political experience and your sense of justice and equity are
a guarantee that you will conduct with competence and
efficiency the proceedings of this important body which, in
recent weeks, has been dealing particularly with African
problems.

104. At a time when the Security Council is meeting to
consider the report contained in document S/l2294 and
Add.1, we wish, first and fOreIIIOSt,
to eXPreSS
Our
9

109. Need I recall in this regard that, in the course of the
meeting of Heads of State and Government of the African,
Malagasy and Mauritian Common Organization, held on g
and 10 February 1977 at Kigali, capital of the Republic of
Rwanda, the Foreign Minister of Benin, Captain Alladaye,
discussed this matter with His Excellency Mr. F&x
Houphou&-Boigny, President of the Republic of the Ivory
Coast? The Beninese Minister stated at that time that
neither the Ivory Coast nor Senegal was implicated in t]lis
affair. Captain Alladaye, keenly aware of the nature of the
relations which the Ivory Coast has always had with Benin,
and of the principles which had always
guided its policy in
relations with other African States, knew very well that the
Ivory Coast would hardly take part in any kind of action
designed to prejudice the sovereignty, independence or
territorial integrity of the People’s Republic of Benin or
any other African State.

congratulations to the authors of the report on the way in
which they discharged their duties, duties which, after all,
were difficult because of the circumstances surrounding this
matter and the contradictory information
which had
created and fed doubts in certain minds.
105. It emerges from the conclusions of the report,
particularly those in paragraphs 141-145, that the People’s
Republic of Benin was the victim of an armed attack by a
commando group of mercenaries coming from abroad
which landed at Cotonou airport on the morning of
16 January 1977 for the purpose of overthrowing the
present Government of Benin and that, hence, Benin was
the victim of aggression. Most of the aggressors, who were
not nationals of Benin but white mercenaries, are alleged to
have been recruited in Europe and Africa and to have
arrived in Morocco from Paris, Dakar and Abidjan. They are
further alleged to have received training at a base near
Marrakesh, in Morocco, and been transported to Cotonou
through Gabon.

110. How great, then, wasour surprise at learning that the
Benin authorities, two months after the events of
16 January 1977, were implicating the Ivory Coast in this
sinister adventure.

106. Incidentally, we note that, according to this report,
in their flight, the invaders left behind one of their own
men, a certain BB Alpha Oumarou, a national of the
Republic of Guinea, belonging to the Peulh ethnic group, a
Moslem born in Senegal, who was taken prisoner by the
Beninese forces. We also note that they had left behind a
case containing, according to our colleague from Benin,
“very important and particularly telling documents”
[1986th meeting, para. 191 which have been published in
the addendum to the report.

111. But what is in fact going on here?
112. We note from the national report prepared by the
Government of Benin, adopted, we would point out, on
12 March 1977 by a joint special session of the Central
Committee of the Party of the People’s Revolution of
Benin, of the National Council of the Revolution, and of
the Revolutionary Military Government-thus
by the
highest authorities of Benin-that the Beninese authorities
blame the Ivory Coast for having “authorized and assisted
the stay on Ivory Coast territory of stateless persons of
Beninese origin, most of whom had been sentenced to
death following the failure of plots which they had hatched
against the Beninese people and their revolution” and that
the Ivory Coast had permitted them freely to organize
“political meetings at Abidjan . . . for the purpose of
hatching criminal plots the outcome of which was the
treacherous attack on the People’s Republic of Benin on
Sunday, 16 January 1977”. According to the same authorities, “the Second Combat Company of the mercenary
army, known as the Foreign Intervention G&up, which was
supposed to attack the People’s Republic of Benin from
Togo]ese territory on Sunday, 16 January 1977, withdrew
to the Ivory Coast a few days after the failure of $e
airborne operation”. They note that, towards noon of that
same day, “the presidential Fokker aircraft . . . of the
Republic of the Ivory Coast violated Beninese air space”.

107. Finally, the Special Mission states
“that the terms of its mandate, as well as the time
available at. its disposal for its implementation,
did not
permit it to investigate further and verify the testimony
of the prisoner pertaining to these matters. The same is
true of the suggestive evidence contained in the documentation.“/S/12294,
para. 145.1
108. Whatever we may think of the report and of the
information it contains, whatever doubts some may still
harbour when reading this report, and particularly with
regard to the testimony of the lone prisoner, one thing at
least is absolutely clear: at no time did either the Beninese
authorities or the Guinean prisoner implicate the Republic
of the Ivory Coast in the preparation, organization or
execution of this operation against the People’s Republic of
Benin. Indeed, at no point in his long statement did Mr. Bti
Alpha Oumarou indicate that the Government or the
authorities of the Ivory Coast had participated in any way
in that action. Bri Alpha Oumarou, whose memory is so
prodigious, would have had no grounds for remaining silent
about the Ivory Coast if. indeed he had had information
about the participation of my country in the operation of
16 January 1977 against the People’s Republic of Benin.
Furthermore, in their conversations with the Benin authorities, the members of the Mission were not informed that
the Ivory Coast was implicated in any manner whatsoever.
If they had been, we can see no reason why they would
have voluntarily refrained from mentioning it in their
conclusions.

113. The Ivory Coast had nothing to do, either directly or
indirectly, with the events at Cotonou on 16 January 197’7,
and we reject out of hand all the grotesque and false
accusations levelled at us by the Beninese authorities in
their national report. We are particularly incensed at this
because the essential concern of the Ivory Coast, which has
always maintained relations of amity and co-operation with
‘the Republic of Benin, has always been to work towards
peace within and outside the country, to live at peace with
its neighbours and not to meddle in the internal affairs of
other States, to ensure the harmonious development of the
country and to promote the well-being of all its people in
dignity and fraternity,
10

114. These charges are particularly ridiculous because the
Beninese authorities are well aware that several of their
compatriots have been living in the Ivory Coast for many
years-Beninese of every station, including those from the
upper classes, who freely left their own country or fled it
for personal reasons in order to find work or, at least, peace
and security in the Ivory Coast. It is highly un]ike]y that
those skilled persons, who had to immigrate to our country
and to many other African countries where they could use
their skills and their knowledge and ensure a better future
for themselves and their families than that offered by their
country of origin, should have sought, from the territory of
the Ivory Coast, to overthrow the Government of their
country by means which we firmly condemn.

selves to be manoeuvred in such a way because, by so
doing, they not only gravely compromise the friendly
relations that have always existed between Benin and the
Ivory Coast but also run the risk of damaging their
reputation and dignity. If certain countries think so little of
their dignity, we, the citizens of the Ivory Coast, on the
other hand, very much cherish ours and shall not allow
anyone to injure it with a tissue of calumnies. We can only
pity the authors of those calumnies and express the regret
that Benin, on the new path that it has traced for itself,
should have reached this point and adopted towards us an
attitude which, to say the least, is unfriendly and unwarranted.
118. Perhaps the time has come for us to share with
members of the Council certain facts pertaining to the
Ivory Coast that many of our detractors too often and too
easily forget.

115. It is an aberration to suppose or to believe that the
Government of the Ivory Coast could, in any way whatsoever, have lent any assistance to the invaders of Benin or
could have permitted them to organize their sinister action
on our soil or that they would have retreated to our
territory after the failure of their operation. We say this
first because we think that any internal changes that may
occur in a country should take place democratically and
peacefully, without violence or bloodshed. We say it also
because we in the Ivory Coast believe that every people has
the sovereign right to institutions of its choice and to opt
for the political, economic and social system that best suits
it in order to ensure its happiness and satisfy its national
needs. That people is the sole judge of its options, the sole
master of its destiny. Whether we like those options or not,
we are in duty bound to respect and accept them as such,
to co-operate and to deal with the r&&me in question.
Therefore, it is the right of no one., still less that of foreign
Powers, to meddle in the Internal affairs of such a country
or to provide aid and assistance to certain of that country’s
nationals who, for reasons of their own that it is not our
business to know or judge, wish to attempt a coup against
their country of origin or its institutions.

119. The Ivory Coast, which has more than 7 million
inhabitants, plays host to 1.2 million non-Ivory-Coast
Africans who come to our country to seek a larger measure
of work, peace and security. Those Africans fee1at home in
the Ivory Coast and are welcomed and treated as brothers.
This hospitality is extended to them on one condition,
namely, that they respect the law of hospitality in our
country and do nothing that may prejudice the relations of
good neighbourliness that we maintain and intend to
continue maintaining with our neighbours and other
African countries.
120. Our friends in Benin are perfectly well awarethat the
Ivory Coast has laid down as a principle of its conduct that
it will never meddle in the affairs of other countries. Suffice
it to cite in proof of this the friendly and fraternal
co-operation existing between the members of the Conseil
de l’entente, which includes Benin, Upper Volta, Niger,
Togo and the Ivory Coast. The Conseil de l’entente, it is
worth recalling, is one of the oldest and most solidly based
inter-African organizations and is founded on understanding and confidence among independent and sovereign
States. The solidarity binding its members is reflected in
specific and verifiable actions and there is no kind of
intervention in the internal affairs of any of the member
States.

116. For our part, we should like to assert here, before the
members of the Security Council, that the Republic of the
Ivory Coast and its leaders will never encourage subversion
against any African country. They will never permit or
tolerate that their African brothers who, for various
reasons, have come to live there, should abuse their
generous hospitality by making any attempt whatsoever
against their country of origin. This is clear and subject to
no exception whatever. Consequently, those Citizens of
Benin could not count on the assistance of the Ivory Coast
in carrying out an operation against their country. The
vigilance of our authorities, of our security services and of
our party activists makes it possible for US to assert that this
kind of subversive activity has not and will not exist in the
Ivory Coast.

121. The Conseil de l’entente just met at Ouagadougou,
capital of the Republic of Upper Volta, on 30 and 31
March, under the chairmanship of His Excellency General
Gnassingbe Eyadema, its current chairman, and the meeting
was attended by the heads of State of the Ivory Coast and
Niger and by His Excellency Mr. Lamizana; President of
Upper Volta, the host country. The President of the
People’s Republic of Benin did not take part in that
meeting. Invited by the international pressto communicate
his views about this meeting, the President of the Republic
of the Ivory Coast stated:

117. We would not be surprised-how should we be,
accustomed as we are to such things, and particularly after
the statement made yesterday by the representative of
Guinea-if the ConakrY authorities were spreading such
charges against the ivory Coast. But the Government and
leaders of Benin have no right to try to gain credence for
such grave charges, which are particularly gratuitous since
they are based on no foundation and run counter to our
philosophy. They have absolutely no right to allow them-

“The Entente is an organization of which we can be
proud. It is the oldest and most stable regional grouping
in Africa. It is based upon reason and active and effective
solidarity. This organization has no supranational structures to encumber it, and thus independence, freedom of
11

action and respect for the identity of each State have
been preserved.

Charter of the United Nations and that of the Organizatioa
of African Unity.

“This organization has known success and this will
continue-modest
success because of the modesty of our
resources. Solidarity is our weapon. I could even say
without exaggeration that it is our absolute weapon. With
this weapon, our successes are, of course, modest but
they are encouraging and, in any case, the organization
will never know any bitter victories.”

127. We wish to assert that there is not a word of truth ia
all charges levelled against the Ivory Coast, a country with
which Benin has no quarrel of any kind whatsoever. We call
on the Benin authorities to refrain from following h the
footsteps of the President of Guinea. The Ivory Coast
considers Benin among its friends and intends to dultivate
that friendship both bilaterally and within the framework
of the interregional and African regional organizations to
which they both belong. This is in the enlightened interest
of both the Ivory Coast and the People’s Republic of Benin,
However, if, in spite of our goodwill and our co-operation,
Benin were to adopt towards us the same attitude as Guinea
and count us among its enemies, we would not be the ones
to regret this the most or suffer from it the most.

The President continued:
“We deplore the absence of one of our colleagues but
we think we shall shortly be meeting, all five of us, to
continue our advance towards progress in freedom and
brotherhood.”
122. In spite of the internal upheavals which some of its
members have been going through, the Conseil de I’entente
has remained firm and its basis has remained solid. None of
its members has been accused, as far as we know, of
meddling in the affairs of its partners, and we do not see
why or for what purpose we should change our attitude
today. How would it profit us, we wonder.

128. The Ivory Coast, I repeat, is deeply committed to
peace and therefore will never promote any action of any
kind that could jeopardize peace in the neighbouring
countries in Africa or elsewhere. We shall never encourage
subversion against an African country, whatever its political, econcrmic or social system. Guinea, however, has
striven for many days, months and years to implicate us in
so-called plots hatched against it or against other African
countries and imagines mercenary troops massed on our
borders ready to attack it.

123. Our co-operation with our partners, which has been
so disinterested, has been distinguished by active and
effective solidarity, as President HouphouM-Boigny emphasized, and not by a solidarity of hollow and empty
words. That co-operation has always been free from any
political considerations, because such considerations detract
from the value we attach to that solidarity.

129. The statement of our Guinean colleague yesterday,
which did not fail to follow this rule, helped us particularly
to understand better what underlies all these machinations
aimed at implicating the Ivory Coast in the events which
occurred on 16 January 1977 at Cotonou, machinations
which have one single goal, that of discrediting the Ivory
Coast and certain African countries, poisoning our relations
with Benin and ultimately compromising the sincere efforts
being made by all African leaders to build gradually and
harmoniously the African unity which we all so ardently
hope for.

124. The Ivory Coast is, of course, a country of limited
resources but it whole-heartedly invests all its faith and
ardour in making the most of the scanty resources it has
been provided with by nature. We do not want, as President
Houphou&Boigny
himself said, in an image full of wisdom,
realism and Christian charity, “to be an oasis of prosperity
in a desert of poverty”. If our policy is one of genuine
solidarity, if we are concerned for the harmonious and
peaceful development of other countries, it is because we
hope that that oasis of relative prosperity which our
country constitutes and which is a matter of jealousy for
some people may be extended to the whole African
continent.

130. Of course, the Guinean President, who lives in an
atmosphere haunted by conspiracies, cannot bear not to see
the hand of the Ivory Coast in this matter of Benin. Was he
not the first, immediately after the aggression was committed, to level with disconcerting but hardly unexpected
lightness the flagrant and gross charge to the effect that the
Ivory Coast and Senegal had participated in the aggression
and to claim to anyone willing to listen that he had
information proving such participation?

125. I do not want to be misunderstood. We are not
saying that, owing to our relations of friendship and
co-operation, if Benin has proof of our complicity in the
attack against it on 16 January 1977, which we condemn, it
cannot say so. We regret the manner and we reject the
charges themselves, because they are devoid of all foundation and based upon no evidence.

13 1. What proof? Is this the information he is supposed
to have received from a so-called Ivory Coast “patriot”
whom he mentioned in one of his recent statements and to
whom the representative of Guinea referred in his stat@
ment yesterday? For the purpose of reply, it will suffice
for us to cite this sentence taken from the communique of
the Political Bureau of the Democratic Party of the Ivory
Coast, published following the charges made by Benin: “If
S6kou Tour6 knew how our people felt about him, he
would look elsewhere for his information” [see S/i2320 of
8 AptiZ 19771. We challenge this method of producing
evidence, and we challenge those who produced it to

126. We have other concerns and other things to do in the
Ivory Coast. We have neither time nor money to waste on
sordid undertakings which, by their very nature, detract
from our dignity and our reputation as a responsible,
hard-working, hospitable and fraternal crr:lntry, a country
which wants peace at home and peace in other countries in
Africa and elsewhere, a country which abides by the
principles which constitute the very foundation of the
12

demonstrate its authenticity;
easy for them.

otherwise, it would be too

132. If President S6kou Tour6 were really concerned
about the interests of Benin and if he really did possess,as
he claims, evidence of that aggression against Benin, he
could at least have warned the Benin authorities so that
they could have made the necessary arrangements to repel
the invaders and confiscate their aircraft. But he maintained
a reprehensible Silence which cost Benin dear. And, to top
it all, the only invader who was taken prisoner turned out
by chance to be a “Guinean” from the Kepublic of Guinea.
What an annoying coincidence! The prisoner is not from
the Ivory Coast nor from Senegal, nor from Togo, nor from
Morocco, nor from Gabon, but from Guinea. Obviously, no
Benin cadre, still less one from the Ivory Coast or Senegal,
would risk his life in such an adventure. Why would he do
SO, anyway? What idol would he be worshipping? So we
are left with this quaint B5 Alpha Oumarou, the circumstances surrounding whose arrest should really make us
smile: he was the only one to let himself be captured in the
adventure. All this is not very serious.

development, the only means of ensuring the prosperity of
Ivory Coast citizens, which is the final and ultimate goal of
its national and international policy. We should like, in this
resPeCt,
to remind the Council of what the President of the
Republic of the Ivory Coast, M. Felix Houphougt-Boigny,
stated in June 1976 following fresh chargesby Guinea:
“With regard to the Ivory Coast, we are inspired bY one
sole concern: the economic and social development of
our country and, to that end, the whole population,
civilian and military, is mobilized. We do not have
sufficient manpower for our national construction, for
which we have been working unremittingly since our
independence, so how could we be so careless or so
foolish as to divert any of our manpower to purposes
other than development? I appeal to all Ambassadors
accredited to the Ivory Coast,“-some of the members of
the Council are represented in my country; I shall not
mention them-“a free country in which they can move
about either by day or by night without requiring prior
permission, to go and ascertain whether or not the
allegations of Mr. SBkou Tour6 are well founded, I call on
the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity
to send missions as soon as possible to check the degree
of accuracy of the charges made by Guinea against the
Ivory Coast, and I challenge Mr. SBkou Tour6 to prove
the presence of ‘mercenaries’ ready to attack Guinea
along our common frontier or in training at some place in
our national territory. I even ask him to send to the Ivory
Coast side of our common frontier members of his army
and police force to check into the existence of so-called
‘mercenaries’ in the Ivory Coast.”

133. Guinea has so accustomed us to these complicated
plots and these fantastic accusations that we no longer
attach any importance to them. Bursting with sick jealousy
of the Ivory Coast, President S&kou Tour6 finds no other
way of explaining to his people his lamentable failures and
the bankruptcy of his economic and social policies than by
blaming his neighbours, in this case the Ivory Coast and
Senegal. The charges levelled only yesterday by the
representative of Guinea, that mercenaries were supposed
to be massing along the Guinean frontier ready to attack
Guinea, belong to the same fantasy. They are really just
hallucinations.

137. After the statement made yesterday by my colleague
from Guinea’, this statement by the President of the
Republic of the Ivory Coast takes on particular importance.
I should also like to take this opportunity once again to
request the United Nations, the Organization of African
Unity and all those who so wish to respond to the
invitation of the President of the Ivory Coast,‘~hkh
still
stands, to go and investigate on the spot the accuracy of
these accusations so as to put an end to them and once and
for all expose the truth concerning the plot which SO
fascinates the ConakrY leaders and which is infecting the
Beninese revolutionaries.

134. It is true that the Guinean leader cannot conceive of
a plot or an aggression-which we would, incidentally,
condemn-against an African country without the participation of the Ivory Coast and Senegal, as though those
two countries had no other concerns and nothing to do but
to hatch plots and to meddle in the internal affairs of other
African States. President SBkou Tourd is so convinced of
this that, if such an event were to occur in central or east
Africa or elsewhere, he would see the hand of the Ivory
Coast even there. This is a pathological case that really
requires the serious attention of the medical profession.

138. We reserve the right to speak again to clarify our
position even further if by any chance some think we have
not been sufficiently clear.

135. We shall take the opportunity provided by this
debate, which we really did not want but which has been
forced upon us, to assert in the Council with all due
solemnity that the Ivory Coast flatly rejects the false
allegations levelled against it with the sole purpose of
sowing confusion in people’s minds, fomenting hatred,
pitting Africans against each other and, in this particular
case, pitting the people of Benin and Guinea against the
people of the Ivory Coast. Before the Council we assert that
in the Ivory Coast there is no recruiting office, no centre
for the training of mercenaries, still less any mercenaries
massed on our frontiers ready to invade Guinea.

139. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next speaker is the representative of Algeria. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make a statement.
140. Mr. BOUAYAD-AGHA
(Algeria) (interpretation
from French): Mr. President, allow me to join preceding
speakers in congratulating you on your accession this
month to the presidence of the Council. The Algerian
delegation
is very happy that it should be precisely the
representative of Venezuela, a country of the third world,
who has assumed the heavy and important responsibility of
guiding
the work of the Council at this time. I should also
like to express my delegation’s gratitude to members of the

136. The Government of the Ivory Coast will never waste
a single minute of its precious time or use a single
inhabitant for purposes other than economic and social
13

Council for allowing us to participate
the Council debate on this question.

144. The members of the Security Council will understand
that our apprehension and that of all African countries is
quite justified, since this is not a purely theoretical, but a
real threat to our independence and sovereignty. The
planning of the plot, as revealed by the documents
collected by the Special Mission, clearly demonstrates that
a scheme was drawn up that could easily be applied to each
of our countries. We have every reason for concern at the
training of what would now appear to be a body of
professionals in subversion, prepared to place themselves at
the service of any Government not too much bothered by
considerations of international morality and prepared to
pay large sums to get rid of political enemies without
assuming direct responsibility for the act. As we know,
mercenaries have been used from time immemorial and
they will remain forever at the service, not of fortune and
wealth, but of cowardice and immorality in relations among
nations.

at this late hour in

141. Today the Council has to discuss the report of the
Special Mission it decided to send to Benin, and to reach a
decision on the complaint submitted by the People’s
Republic ot Benin.
142. First of all, my delegation feels duty bound to
express its great appreciation to the members Of the Mission
for the work they have done and for the honesty, prudence
and undeniable conscientiousness they demonstrated in
carrying out their task. The report they have submitted to
the Council is testimony to their concern for objectivity
and impartiality, as well as to their complete knowIedge of
the political and human aspects of the problem placed
before them. They certainly deserve our admiration and our
thanks for the valuable contribution they have thus made
to the Council’s work in a matter in which aggression-now
clearly established-was commited against the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of a member of the Council. AS a
matter of fact, one of the first conclusions of the report of
the Mission makes it undeniably clear that there was an act
of aggression against the People’s Republic of Benin by
other Governments. In that connexion, I should like to
remind the Council of the following conclusions in paragraphs 141 and 142 of the report:

145. The aggression against the People’s Republic of Benin
was perpetrated by mercenaries, for the most part white,
That emerges clearly from the following conclusion in
paragraph 143 of the report of the Special Mission:
“It is also clear that a majority of the attacking force,
not nationals of Benin, were participating in this action
for pecuniary motives and were, therefore mercenaries.”
146. We have already said that the use of mercenaries in
relations among States poses a great danger to all the
members of the international community. It is obvious that
this is a real danger only for countries like ours, that is, the
countries of the third world, of whose vulnerability we are
all aware. Each of our countries, indeed, feels directly
threatened by action such as that of ,which Benin has just
been the victim. We have no illusions. If the aggression had
succeeded, it would immediately have been interpreted asa
settling of domestic accounts in Benin; the carefully
worked out technique for this type of intervention had
even provided the names of the new leaders and the solemn
statements by which they were to proclaim their accession
to power. Aggression by proxy, through mercenaries, is an
internal matter if it succeeds. If it fails, as, fortunately, it
did in Benin, it becomes somewhat more embarrading to
those who instigated it.

“On the basis of the testimony received and evidence
examined by it, the Special Mission is in a position to
conclude that the People’s Republic of Benin was thus
subjected to an armed attack by the armed force which
arrived at Cotonou airport on the morning of 16 January
1977. The primary objective of the invading force was the
overthrow of the present Government of Benin.
“Inasmuch as the territorial integrity, independence and
sovereignty of the State of Benin was violated by this
invading force which came from outside the territory of
that country, there can be no doubt that the State of
Benin was subjected to aggression.”
143. In the first place, that justifies the complaint that
Benin legitimately addressed to the Security Council and
puts an end to the scepticism-very self-serving, not to say
suspicious-that
some quarters have maintained regarding
the very bases of the complaint. But it shows, too, that the
present debate is of the utmost importance in terms of the
responsibilities that the Charter confers on the Council. The
most serious threat to the principles of the Charter, the one
that most directly endangers international
peace, is
certainly foreign interference, direct or indirect, in the.
affairs of other countries. The international community
would be taking the path of its destruction if it were to
tolerate such acts of aggression, the seriousness of which
cannot be measured in terms of the size of the country
victim of the aggression. Those who think that aggression
against a small country like Benin, one other small country
in Africa, is after all a geographically limited and politically
harmless matter are greatly mistaken. They are mistaken if
they. do not see that such acts establish extremely dangerous
habits in international
relations and that, while
today a small African country is involved, tomorrow they
will inevitably be affected.

147. The Security Council must definitely deal with this
practice by certain Governments of having recourse to
mercenaries for political aims in other countries. The use of
mercenaries, as we have already said, is not a new
phenomenon on the international scene. The organization,
recruitment and hiring of mercenaries are no longer secrets;
everyone knows about this, and the whole system could not
be maintained without the complicity, or at least the
complacency, of certain Governments. It must be clearly
understood by everyone that, as far as we are concerned,
those Governments are directly responsible for all the acts
of these mercenaries. It goes without saying that there will
be a constant danger to international peace so long as these
anonymous elements, at the service of the highest bidderthese mercenaries-are interposed in relations between
States.
148. We recognize that, although it is established that
flagrant aggression was committed against the People’s
14

proceedings to be recorded in verbatim records, drawn up
only in English and made available, to them regularly on
the day following each meeting.

Republic of Benin, it is difficult and delicate to determine
who was really responsible for this aggression. In its report,
the Special Mission has set forth facts, testimony, documents. We understand and agree with the reasons for the
prudence it showed in drawing its conclusions, for, in the
final analysis, it is for the Security Council itself to make
the decision. Nevertheless, we would venture to express our
astonishment at the reaction of the Western press to the
events that took place on 16 January last in Benin. That
press is generally very vigilant when anything affecting
nationals of Western countries happens in our countries,
particularly if their security is endangered. Well, that is
precisely the kind of thing that happened at Cotonou, and
the nationals of various Western countries were affected:
some of them had to be evacuated for reasons of health.

“in accordance with the request contained in paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 404 (1977) the
Secretary-General provided the Special Rlission with the
necessary secretariat assistance.”
Everything that the Special Mission did is recorded in the
files of the Secretariat and available to the representatives
of Member States.
153. In addition to the fact that those documents are
available to all representatives, I should like, as Chairman of
the Special Mission, to state that my colleagues from India
and Libya and I are available to answer any questions which
representatives may wish to ask on any point which, in
their opinion, might require further elucidation, Representatives may rest assured that our replies will be friendly,
forthright and direct and no one need therefore entertain
any doubt about the impartiality and objectivity of the
members of the Mission.

149. Our surprise is all the greater in regard to the
countries implicated, directly or indirectly, in the report of
the Special Mission. Far be it from us to draw immediately
the conclusion that logically follows from the findings of
this report. But we would venture to express at least our
surprise at the reaction of some of these countries which,
instead of contributing to making the situation clear, limit
themselves in their attempts to defend themselves-clumsy
attempts, at that-to proclaiming that they are the victims
of the ill will of certain other countries.

154. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): I wish to place on
record that, when I made my statement yesterday, I had
not yet read the national report of Benin on the agenda
item now under consideration. 1 have since read the report
which was handed to my delegation during our meeting
yesterday.

1.50. The aggressionagainst the People’s Republic of Benin
is an extremely serious act. Some elements of that
aggression have been clearly established by the Special
Mission, Some others must undoubtedly be made more
clear. The Security Council, like the rest of the international community, cannot be content with merely the
indignant denials of the Governments implicated in this
matter. The least it can expect of those Governments-the
least that all of us can expect’of them-is that they should
voluntarily contribute to making clear what is still confused
in the information furnished by the Mission. Any reticence
on the part of those Governments can only be taken for a
confession-embarrassed but scarcely disguised-of complicity in an act of aggression against another country.

155. 1 must say that I wastaken by surprise by the private
distribution by Benin of that report to members of the
Council and I regret that action taken by the delegation of
Benin without prior consultation with its African colleagues
on the Council, That distribution’seems to me to be against
the spirit of a recommendation by the African Group which
states:
“It is highly advisable to avoid attacks against African
States, bearing in mind that those aspects of the problem
involving African countries are in the hands of the
Organization of African Unity.”

151. In any case, the responsibilities of the Council are
clearly defined in this case, more than in any other.
Considerations affecting each of the members of the
Council obviously have their importance in the decisions
the Council will take, but, in the final analysis, the
resolutions the Council will adopt at the end of this debate
will be judged in terms of the requirements of international
understanding and peace.

156. Benin is a sovereign, independent State; Benin is a
responsible member of the Security Council. It is therefore
not for me to comment on the wisdom of its action, which
it exercises in its best interests as is its right; but I hate to
see members of the Organization of African Unity publicly
divided in the Council.
157. The Council is meeting to consider the report of the
Special Mission-nothing
else. I do not believe that the
Council is in any way concerned with inter-African relations.
158. 1 appeal to my African colleagues at the United
Nations to stop washing their dirty linen in the Council and
to consider taking their problems to the Organization of
African Unity. Enough damage has already been done; this
is not in the best interests of Africa.

152. Mr.

ILLUECA
(Panama) (interpretation
from
Spanish): In the course of the debate this morning, some
speakers referred to parts of the report of the Security
Council Special Mission and passed judgements that might
give
rise to different interpretations.
With a view t0
contributing to an objective debate and in my capacity as
Chairman of the Special Mission, I cordially invite the
participants to reread the following text of paragraphs 16
snd 17 of the report:
“The Special Mission also decided that English would
be its working language and that, consequently, all its
proceedings would be conducted in English. The members
felt that it was necessary, in order to be able to
implement their mandate effectively, for their daily

159. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
have been informed that the representative of Guinea
wishes to exercise the right of reply. Because of the lateness
of the hour he will be allowed to do so at our next meeting.
The meetingrose at 1.30 p.m.
15

HOW

TO

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
or write
to: United

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
d8positsires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
auprbs de votre libraire
?I : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Gen&ve.
ICAIC

IIOJIYUMTb

COMO

CONSEGUIR

NBAAHMR

OPFAHH

PUBLICACIONES

3AlCZlli

DE

LAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
cstin
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas. Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

2.00

(or equivalent

OWbEAEIHEHHhIX

NACIONES

and distributors
Nations,
Sales

et les agences
ou adressee-vous

HAIIHH

UNIDAS

en venta en librerias
y casas distria su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones

in other

currencies)

77-70001-March

1978-2,200
