A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/112
22 February 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 89
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/49/729/Add.6)]
49/112.

Support for the Global Learning and
Observations to Benefit the Environment
(GLOBE) programme

The General Assembly,
Convinced that the continuing deterioration of the global environment at
all levels, due to the impact of constantly increasing human activity, remains
a serious concern requiring further attention, including enhanced awareness
and intensified action,
Recalling its resolution 47/190 of 22 December 1992, in which it endorsed
the results of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development,
including Agenda 21, 1/
Taking note, in particular, of chapter 25 of Agenda 21 entitled "Children
and youth in sustainable development", chapter 36 entitled "Promoting
education, public awareness and training", and chapter 40 entitled
"Information for decision-making", which call for greater efforts to involve
youth, promote public awareness and enhance the collection and exchange of
environmental data in support of the pursuit of sustainable development,

1/
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992 (A/CONF.151/26/Rev.1 (Vol. I and
Vol. I/Corr.1, Vol, II, Vol. III and Vol. III/Corr.1)) (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions Adopted
by the Conference, resolution 1, annex II.

95-76843

/...

A/RES/49/112
Page 2

Noting the recent entry into force of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change 2/ and the Convention on Biological
Diversity, 3/ the entry into force of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea, 4/ and the recent successful conclusion of negotiations on
the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries
Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, particularly in
Africa, 5/ which require for their effective implementation much greater and
more effective collection and exchange of relevant environmental data,
Recalling its resolution 48/192 of 21 December 1993 on strengthening
international cooperation in the monitoring of global environmental problems,
Convinced of the need to inspire the youth of the world with enthusiasm
for the conservation, preservation and protection of all aspects of the global
environment and in the pursuit of sustainable development, and to provide
encouragement and support for their participation in that effort,
1.
Welcomes the Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the
Environment (GLOBE) programme initiated by the Government of the United States
of America on 22 April 1994, which aims to enhance the collective awareness of
individuals throughout the world concerning the environment, increase
scientific understanding of the Earth and help all students reach the highest
standards in science and mathematics education;
2.
Also welcomes the willingness expressed by many Governments to
participate in shaping and carrying out the GLOBE initiative;
3.
Encourages Governments, organs, organizations and programmes of the
United Nations system, including the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, as well as other intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations, to take part, as appropriate, in the
development and implementation of the GLOBE initiative, with full regard for
sovereign national rights and interests and within the respective mandates of
the organs, organizations and programmes concerned, including in the pursuit
of sustainable development;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that appropriate account is
taken of the GLOBE initiative in the efforts of the United Nations system to
support the implementation of Agenda 21, particularly in the coordinating
functions of the Inter-agency Committee on Sustainable Development of the
Administrative Committee on Coordination;

2/

A/AC.237/18 (Part II)/Add.1 and Corr.1, annex I.

3/
See United Nations Environment Programme, Convention on Biological
Diversity (Environmental Law and Institutions Programme Activity Centre),
June 1992.
4/
Official Records of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law
of the Sea, vol. XVII (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.84.V.3),
document A/CONF.62/122.
5/

A/49/84/Add.2, annex, appendix II.
/...

A/RES/49/112
Page 3

5.
Also requests that the Economic and Social Council and its
subsidiary bodies, in particular the Commission on Sustainable Development,
take full account of the GLOBE initiative, within the context of sustainable
development, in reviewing and promoting the implementation of Agenda 21;
6.
Invites Governments to communicate information to the Commission on
Sustainable Development, in accordance with General Assembly resolution
47/191, on their participation in the GLOBE programme within the
implementation of Agenda 21, especially with regard to its chapters 25, 36 and
40.
92nd plenary meeting
19 December 1994
