TWENTY-SECOND

YEAR

th
MEETING:
NEW

13 JUNE 1967

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 135 8/Rev. 1)
Adoption of the agenda

...,... ,.. . . ... ., ,,. .. .. .

. . . . . . . . , . , , . _. . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . .

pay
1

Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and
Denmark addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/7902) . . . . . .
Complaint of the representative of the United Arab Republic in a letter to the
President of the Security Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and security in the Middle East
and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/7910) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . i

l

Letter dated 9 June 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics addressed to the President of the Security Council
concerning an item entitled: “Cessation of military action by Israel and
withdrawal of the Israel forces from those parts of the territory of the United
, Arab Republic, Jordan and Syria which they have seized as the result of an
aggression” (S/7967) . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , .

S/PV. 1358

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
d‘
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . ,) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Securify Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Secutity Council, The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED AND FIFTY-EIGHTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday, 13 June 1967, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. Hans R. TABOR (Denmark).

,

Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern
Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/791 0)

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and %orthern Ireland and United States of America.

Letter dated 9 June 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
addressed to the President of the Security Council
concerning an item entitled: “Cessation of military action
by Israel and withdrawal of the Israel forces from those
parts of the territory
of the United Arab Republic,
Jordan and Syria which they have seized as the result of
an aggression” (S/7967)

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 3581Rev.l)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902)

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
previously taken by the Council, I shall now, with the
consent of the Council, invite the representatives of Israel,
the United Arab Republic, the Syrian Arab Republic and
Jordan to take places at the Council table, and the
representatives of Lebanon, Iraq, Morocco, Saudi Arabia,
Kuwait, Tunisia and Libya to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber, in order to
participate without vote in the discussion.

3. Complaint of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907).
4. Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/7910).

i

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. Kidron (Israel),
Mr. M. A. El Kony (United Arab Republic), Mr. G. J.
Tomeh (Syria) and Mr. M. H. El-Farra (Jordan) took places
at the Council table, and Mr. S. Chammas (Lebanon),
Mr. K. Khalaf (Iraq), Mr. A. T. Benhima (Morocco), Mr. J.
M. Baroody (Saudi Arabia), Mr. R. A. Al-Rashid (Kuwait),
Mr. M. Mestiri (Tunisia) and Mr. W. El Bouri (Libya) took
the places reserved for them.

5. Letter dated 9 June 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
addressed to the President of the Security Council
concerning an item entitled: “Cessation of military
action by Israel and withdrawal of the Israel forces
from those parts of the territory of the United Arab
Republic, Jordan and Syria which they have seized as
the result of an aggression” (S/7967).

2. The PRESIDEN?:
The meeting that had been tentatively scheduled for yesterday evening was postponed after
consultations with the members of the Council. This
morning I received a letter from the representative of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics requesting me to
convene a meeting of the Security Council this afternoon;
that request has been circulated in document S/7979.
Accordingly, I consulted my colleagues and convened the
Council at this time.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Reprosentatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902)

3. I should also like to draw the attention of the members
to the text of a revised draft resolution submitted by the
Soviet Union together with the request for this meeting.
This revised text has been circulated in document
S/7951/Rev.2. There have also been circulated since our
last meeting three further addenda to the SecretaryGeneral’s reports; those addenda are contained in
documents S/7930/Add.4, Add.5 and Add.6.

Complaint of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international
peace and security” (S/7907)

4. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): Mr. President, the
1

other Arab countries and occupied the city of Jerusalem
and a considerable part of the territory of Jordan. And
finally, even after the Security Council had adopted a
decision calling for an immediate cease-fire and a cessation
of military activities in the Near East, Israel, in defiance of
the two Security Council resolutions adopted respectively
on 6 and 7 June [233 (1967) and 234(1967)j, treach.
erously invaded the Syrian Arab Republic, bombed the area
of Damascus and occupied part of the territory of this Arab
country.

Security Council has been convened’urgently today at the
request of the Soviet Union in order to consider the item
entitled “Cessation of military action by Israel and withdrawal of the Israel forces from those parts of the territory
of the United Arab Republic, Jordan and Syria which they
have seized as the result of an aggression”-this item, as YOU
know, having been included in the Security Council’s
agenda a few days ago on a proposal by the Soviet Union.
5. In the very first hours of Israel’s aggression against the
Arab States the Soviet Union, as we hope members of the
Council will remember, branded the Israel aggressors and
vigorously demanded that their treacherous and criminal
acts should be condemned, that military activities should
cease immediately and that the Israel forces should withdraw behind tire armistice lines. Unfortunately, however,
the Security Council was not able to adopt a decision to
that effect, which was dictated by the emergency that had
arisen and which it should have adopted in accordance with
the United Nations Charter as the body primarily responsible for the maintenance of international peace and
security. This was due to the position taken by the United
States, a permanent member of the Security’ Council, and
by certain other members who were against approving a
decision condemning the aggressor and demanding the
immediate
withdrawal of his troops to the positions
occupied before the outbreak of hostilities. At that time,
some hypocritical appeals were heard here to the effect that
it was wrong to complicate matters, that it was essential to
concentrate merely on the question of a cease-fire, and so
forth. The Council knows now exactly why the accomplices
of the aggressor took that stand. The reason was that they
were attempting to enable Israel to gain time for seizing
more territory and carrying out its unseemly and criminal
plans and purposes.

9. Even if one allows for the fact that there were unsolved
problems between Israel and the Arab countries and that
tension had existed in this part of the world, this does not
in the very least justify the war which has been launched by
extremist circles in Tel-Aviv against the Arab States.
Without going into a detailed analysis of the military
aspects of the events, it is clear that it was Israel which
dealt the first sudden blow that enabled the aggressor to
gain the initial successeson which he had been counting
from the very outset.
10. We all remember well how in the period immediately
prior to Israel’s aggression an artificial atmosphere of
psychosis was created; we remember how tension was
whipped up and the ground was prepared for aggression,
and what kind of accusations were heaped upon the Arab
States. Subsequent events have shown that the United Arab
Republic, Syria and the other Arab States did not have any
aggressive intentions at all, that they were not preparing to
attack and that it was Israel which was feverishly hastening
its piratical attack on the Arab States.
11. Certain circles are trying to make out that it is
difficult to conceive of such a small State as Israel as an
aggressor against the Arab States, with their population of
tens of millions. But this specious idea, which the representative of Tel-Aviv in particular has been trying to
propagate in the Security Council, is beneath all criticism.
The Israel army was nurtured and trained with the
assistance of the Western imperialist powers. As Israel was
preparing for its aggression against the Arab States, it was
being carefully watched over and encouraged in every way,
particularly by Washington.

6. This was the reason why for some time the Security
Council was obliged to deal only with one of the aspects of
the problem created by Israel’s action in unleashing an
aggressive war in the Near East-a war for which preparations in Tel-Aviv had been going on not for a day or a
month but for years, an aggression which was inspired and
directed from across the ocean.
7. The fact that the Security Council has been obliged to
hold emergency meetings almost without interruption and
to take repeated decisions on what is substantially one and
the same question, coming back again and again to repeat
its demands for an immediate cessation of military activities
by Israel, is due to the fact that ruling circles in Tel-Aviv
have ignored the Security Council’s decisions and, in
defiance of the Council’s demands, have tried to continue
and extend their aggression, seizing more and more territory in Arab countries.

12. The aggression by Israel was not an accident, or the
result of a miscalculation, error or misunderstanding. No. It
was carefully thought out imperialist provocation, and the
time for putting it into effect was planned by all parties.
This aggression was designed to bring about political
changes in the Near East which would be advantageous to
imperialism, particularly United States imperialism, and to
alter the so-called “balance of forces” in this area. Its
purpose was to attempt to undermine the national liberation movement of the Arab peoples, and to weaken the
progressive regimes in the United Arab Republic, Syria and
other Arab countries. Israel was acting as a tool in the
hands of more powerful imperialist Powers. And its
aggression is the result of a conspiracy between certain
imperialist forces, headed by the United States of America,
against the Arab States. It is well known that the peoples of
the United Arab Republic and other Arab countries have
during the past years won some great historic victories in
the conquest of national independence and freedom.

8. On 5 June, as you know, Israel suddenly launched an
air attack on airfields at Cairo, Damascus and other points
in the territory of the United Arab Republic, Syria and
Jordan. Then, Israel’s armed forces penetrated deep into
the territory of neighbouring Arab States. When all the
facts are put together, it is clear that Israel committed a
previously-prepared and carefully worked out act of aggression against the United Arab Republic. At the same time,
the forces of Israel’s aggression flung all their might against
2

-

Important social reforms have been carried out in these
countries in the interests of the working masses of the
people.

more and more Arab countries have begun to take steps to
strengthen their national independence? It was not in any
sense the Arab peoples or countries which were interested
in fanning the flames of military conflict in the Near East.
It was the forces of imperialism and the oil monopolies, of
which Israel is an accomplice.

13. Israel’s aggression is directed against the national
freedom and State independence of millions of Arabs from
Kuwait, Damascus and Baghdad to Cairo, Algiers and
Casablanca. There is not a shadow of doubt that behind
Tel-Aviv there are at work the same imperialist forces which
are trying to obstruct the free national’development of the
Arab States-and which have trained the Israel army,
equipped it with up-to-date military equipment, lavishly
supplied Tel-Aviv with the resources it needs and provided
it with economic, moral and political assistance and
support. It should be added, too, that behind the Israel
extremists it is easy to discern the shadows not only of the
Pentagon generals but also of the indefatigable militarists
on the banks of the Rhine. Bonn’s direct complicity in the
affairs of the Israel extremists cannot be concealed behind
any screen of neutrality. Not only did Bonn act as an
instigator; not only did it sacrifice diplomatic relations with
a number of Arab States for the sake of a closer partnership
with IsraeI. it was also supplying arms and equipment to
the Israel army and, at the height of the Near East crisis, it
demonstratively sent a large consignment of gas masks to
Israel. Thus, against a background of war-like enthusiasm,
on a general basis of adventurism, rabid hatred for,
everything progressive, and hostility to the Arab peoples’
efforts to consolidate their independence and social progress, extremist circles in Tel-Aviv were allying themselves
not only with Washington, but also with the revanchists and
militarists of Bonn,

17. This is the situation, Mr. President, in which Israel
launched its aggression against the Arab countries; and
these are the true causes of the aggression, the real
circumstances and facts which the Security Council must
take into account.
18. The Soviet delegation has expressed its position of
principle since the very beginning of the Security Council’s
discussions on the question of Israel’s aggression, and it is
now fully confirming this position. We have drawn the
attention of members of the Council to the statements
issued by the Soviet Government on 24 May and 5 June
1967, to the representations made by our Government to
the Government of Israel and also to the statement issued
by the Governments of the socialist countries, in which
inter alia it was stressed that:
“If the Government of Israel does not cease its
aggression and withdraw its forces behind the armistice
line, the socialist States which have signed this statement
wilI take all necessary steps to help the peoples of the
Arab countries deliver a decisive rebuff to the aggressor,
defend their lawful rights, extinguish the hotbed of war in
the Near East and restore peace in this area.”
19. In view of the- continued aggression by Israel against
the Arab States, the Soviet Government warned Tel-Aviv
that it would bear full responsibility for this treacherous
act, this fragrant violation of a decision by the Security
Councjl, and it decided to break off diplomatic relations
between the Soviet Union and Israel. A number of other
socialist countries also decided it was impossible to maintain further diplomatic relations with the Israel aggressor.

14. In the pages of the U.S. News a& lvorld Report the
United States General, Max S. Johnson, a former senior
official for the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff, has
recently described the mood of leading United States
military figures as follows:
“Growing hostility of Middle Eastern nations toward
the United States and friendliness toward the Soviet
Union has been, in my judgment, a strategic loss of great
proportions.”

20. The Soviet Union has constantly supported the legitimate struggle of the United Arab Republic and other Arab
States which have been defending the legitimate cause of
strengthening their national independence and freedom and
consolidating their sovereignty and progressive social reforms.

15. Further, Mr. President, the United States General in a
moment of candour directly linked events in Viet-Nam with
the situation in the Near East, and noted that this area lies
at a “strategic crossroads” between Europe, Asia and
Africa. Indeed, although in the geographical sense SouthEast Asia and the Gulf of Tonkin are a long way from the
Near East and the Eastern Mediterranean, hardly anyone
will doubt that the United States aggression in Viet-Nam
has inevitably had a disastrous effect on the general
political situation in the world and has played a dertain
part, not by any means for the last time, in Israel’s
aggression against the Arab States.

21. For decades the Soviet Union and other socialist
States have been providing assistance of various kinds to the
peoples of the Arab countries in their legitimate struggle
against colonialism for national independence and the
development
of their peaceful economies. The Arab
countries have received a great deal of assistance of all kinds
from the Soviet Union and other socialist countries.
22. The United Nations, too, must make its voice heard in
defence of the just cause of the Arab peoples, if it is to
remain true to its Charter and to the decisions adopted in
the United Nations in support of the people’s national
liberation movement. The Security Council as well must
play its part in accordance with the United Nations Charter.

16. The forces of colonialism cannot reconcile themselves
to the idea that the resources of the Arabs must belong to
the Arabs themselves and that the Arab countries themselves have a legal right to determine the course of their
own development. Is it a mere coincidence that the active
involvement of the forces of imperialism and the unleashing
of Israel’s aggression have occurred at the very time when

23. In this connexion the Soviet delegation wishes to
stress that the Security Council’s decisions calling for a
3

cessation of military activities constitute only the first step,
only the minimum which could be achieved in circumstances in which a number of the Council’s members were
opposed to more radical and essential measures. These
decisions were designed to stop the aggression and bloodshed, to avert any further dangerous deterioration in the
situation and to prevent any extension of a military conflict
which was fraught with danger for the cause of peace not
only in the Near East.

30. This is the bitter truth, but it is the truth which must
be brought home to those who are trying to whitewashand
justify Israel’s aggression against the Arab States.
31. Information being received indicates that the in@.
enous Arab population is being forcibly ejected from Gaza,
Jerusalem and other areas. An occupation administration is
being set up in the territories seized by Israel forces,aad
military governors are being appointed for towns ad
provinces. Everything indicates that the practices now being
applied are the same as those which the Hitlerite occupa.
tionists used in the territories of countries that werevictims
of aggression during the Second World War.

24. But no one must have any illusions or misunderstandings as to the fact that all the decisions which the
Council has taken hitherto represent only the first step on
which it was possible to agree only for a short period, and
only because it was necessary to protect the victims of
aggression from the piratical hordes of Israel.

32. Yesterday Prime Minister Eshkol of Israel stated:
“Be under no illusion that the State of Israel is prepared
to return to the situation that reigned up to a weekago,
We are entitled to determine what are the true and vital
interests of our country and how they shall be secured,
The position that existed until now shall never again
return.”

25. There is no doubt that in the situation now arising the
stage in which the Security Council could confine itself to
adopting a cease-fire resolution is already past. The Council
can no longer spend its time repeating or reaffirming earlier
resolutions which, it is quite clear, are completely inadequate. The Security Council must do its direct duty under
the Charter of the United Nations in accordance with the
exalted purposes and principles on which the existence and
activities of our Organization are based.

33. Exactly the same views are being expressed by General
Moshe Dayan who stated the other day that “if they (that
is, the Arab countries) don’t want to talk to us, to sit down
with us, then we shall stay where we are”. He continued: “I
don’t think that we should in any way give back the Gaza
Strip to Egypt or the western part of Jordan to King
Hussein.”

26. Israel’s act of aggression against the Arab States
cannot remain unpunished. The forces of aggression have
not only seized a considerable part of the territory of the
United Arab Republic, Syria and Jordan, but are also
continuing to occupy the territory of Arab countries. The
high-handed interventionists are gloating over their military
victory and, judging from statements made by the official
representatives of Tel-Aviv, they have not the slightest
intention of withdrawing their forces behind the armistice
lines.

34. Does this not reveal the true face of the aggressorand
his expansionist plans which were being carefully prepared
long before the actual events and were put into effect when
the forces of intervention decided that the most appro.
priate time had come? Perhaps people in Tel Aviv are
waiting for a special invitation; perhaps they think that the
peoples of the world and the United Nations will reconcile
themselves to the seizure and occupation of territory
belonging to other States. Perhaps they are expecting the
Arab countries, the Soviet Union, the socialist States and
other freedom-loving peoples to allow them to enjoy tlie
fruits of their arrogant and treacherous aggression, and to
give them an opportunity to dictate their own terms from a
position of strength, from the position of occupiers who are
trying to annex the territory of Arab countries by force.

27. Furthermore, we have already occasion to draw the
Council’s attention to the fact that a dangerous militaristic
psychosis and hysteria has recently been prevailing in
Tel-Aviv. Threats and ultimatums, almost unprecedented in
their arrogance and cynicism, are being issued from that
quarter. Plans are being made at full speed for expansion,
for seizing more territory and reshaping the map of the
Near East.
28. Once again we hear a resurgence of the notorious
geo-political theories of Zebensruunz and the establishment
of a “new order” and “vital frontiers” in the Near East. The
peoples are familiar wit$ ultimatums and wild theories of
this kind, and with these ideas about a new order and a
revision of the political map. It was the fascist occupationists who adopted slogans about reshaping the map of
Europe and the whole world, and who were trying to
establish a so-called “new order” by military force until the
back of the fascist beast was broken by the combined
forces of the Soviet Union and other peoples.

35. Those who have illusions of that kind are deeply
mistaken. The Tel-Aviv Government, of all Governments,
should ndt have any misunderstandings or illusions: far the
piratical acts which Israel has perpetrated, it will haveto
pay the fLd1penalty.
36. It is perfectly clear that the Israel aggressorsare notin
the least original either in their actions or in their methods
of pursuing their expansionist aggressive policy. Like the
Nazi fiihrer clique, they are trying to put the blame on the
victim of aggression; they are spreading slander and trying
to deceive the peoples of the world. They are copying those
who are helping and encouraging them. Surely everyone
knows that Washington, which has nurtured the Israel
aggressor with its aid and dollar generosity, has itself for
many years been pursuing a notorious policy from a
position of strength against other States. Surely everyone

29. It is monstrous that these plans and methods of the
fascist marauders, which were condemned by the International Tribunal, are now being revived by a Government
claiming to represent the people which suffered so
grievously and shed so much blood as a result of the
barbarities of the fascist butchers.
4

knows who in recent times has been seizing the territory of
other countries by force, bombing the capitals of other
States, waging a barbaric war, and then trying to dictate its
own terms.

fact of Israel’s aggression and occupation of the territory of
neighbouring States?
42. Some people at this table may perhaps believe that the
aggressor has a right to keep the territories he has seized
and to flout the rights of other peoples. But we should like
to ask hpw it would be appropriate to describe the piratical
acts of any State which, for instance, seized a part of the
territory of Argentina or Brazil, Denmark or Canada, and
then said that it would not withdraw from the territories it
had seized until the Governments of those countries had
complied with the demands of the aggressorand gone down
on their knees before him. It is this which is the crux of the
matter at the present time. And we believe that members of
the Security Council must approach the solution to this
problem with a full sense of responsibility and with all
seriousness, having full regard to the consequences which
might arise from a failure in this case to observe the most
important principles of international law and the vital
provisions of the United Nations Charter.

37. We see that the same adventurist policy is being
repeated in the Near East as well. It is clear that the same
criminal hand is at work and the same imperialist methods
are being used in the Near East, in South-East Asia and in
Latin America. We know that a few days ago napalm was
dropped on the soil of Arab countries too, and that on this
soil, foul crimes have been perpetrated, and are still being
perpetrated to this day against the peace-loving Arab
population. All this is a link in the single conspiracy of the
imperialist forces against freedom-loving peoples which are
defending their sovereignty and freedom and have risen in a
sacred struggle against the colonial oppressors for the noble
cause of national liberation.
38. The Security Council has a duty, a direct duty,
without any delay or any procrastination, to take the most
effective and active measures against the aggressor, to
condemn the aggressor and secure the immediate and
unconditional
withdrawal of Israel’s armed forces from
those parts of the territory of the United Arab Republic,
Jordan and Syria which they have seized as a result of an
aggression. And we should like to point out that the
Security Council in resolution 236 (1967) which was
approved on 12 June, has already taken the first step in the
direction of condemning Israel’s actions. It is quite obvious
that this decision condemning any and all violations of the
cease-fire refers wholly and fully to Israel, inasmuch as it is
only Israel which is continuing its aggressive acts in defiance
of the Security Council’s decisions. This understanding of
the Security Council’s resolution is clear beyond any doubt
from .the fact that the preamble to the resolution contains a
reference to reports by the Secretary-General indicating
that, in spite of the Security Council’s resolution and
demands for a cessation of military activities, Israel is
continuing to penetrate deep into Syrian territory and has
even bombed Damascus, the capital of the Syrian Arab
Republic.

43. The fact that Israel’s armies are continuing to occupy
parts of the United Arab Republic, Syria and Jordan must
be condemned by the Security Council in the strongest
terms.
44. It is for this reason that the Soviet delegation is now
once again drawing the attention of the Security Council to
the item which has been included in the Council’s agenda at
the request of the Soviet Government, and which is entitled
“Cessation of military action by Israel and withdrawal of
the Israel forces from those parts of the territory of the
United Arab Republic, Syria and Jordan which they have
seized as the result of an aggression”.
45. We should like to draw the Council’s attention once
again to the draft resolution which the Soviet delegation
submitted in the Security Council on 8 June 1967
[S/79.51fRev.l].
We have taken into account the changes
which have occurred in the situation in the Near East in the
past few days, and we are now submitting a revised text of
the draft resolution for consideration by the Security
Council. This text reads:

39. It is clear that the Security Council cannot stop at
this. What it needed is a firm, vigorous and direct
condemnation
of all the actions of Israel which has
unleashed a criminal aggression against the Arab countries.

‘<The Security CounciZ,
“Noting that Israel, in defiance of the Security Council’s resolutions on the cessation of military activities and
a cease-fire [resolutions 233 (1967) of 6 June 1967,
234(1967) of 7 June 1967 and 235 (1967) of 9 June
19671 has seized additional territory of the United Arab
Republid, Jordan and Syria,

40. It is well known that some representatives in the
Security Council are trying to make out that certain
circumstances are not altogether clear, and that things must
be elucidated, clarified, investigated, studied, and so on and
so forth. We categorically reject these unfounded assertions.

“Noting that although military activities have now
ceased, Israel is still occupying the territory of those
countries, thus failing to halt its aggression and defying
the United Nations and all peace-loving States,

41. We would like to ask, Mr. President, what further
evidence is required for adopting a decisive condemnation
of the Israel aggressors, Today, at this moment as we are
sitting in the Security Council chamber, Israel interventionists ark occupying parts of Arab States totalling four
times as much as the territory of Israel itself. IS there
anyone who doubts this? Do not the war criminals sitting
in Tel-Aviv admit themselves that they intend to continue
the occupation of these territories? Do we need any more
reports, investigations, studies and so forth to confirm the

“Considering

unacceptabZe and unlawful

Israel’s ter-

ritorial claims on Arab States,
“1. Vigorously condemns Israel’s aggressive activities
and continued occupation of part of the territory of the
United Arab Republic, Syria and Jordan, regarding this as
5

51. The Security Council’s very first duty under tile
United Nations Charter, apart from condemning the aggres.
sor, is to adopt a decision calling for the withdrawal of he
aggressor’s troops from the territories of the United Arab
Republic, Syria and Jordan immediately and uacoadi.
tionally-I
repeat, Mr. President, immediately and
unconditionally. Israel’s forces must be withdrawn in their
entirety behind the armistice line, and moved back out of
the respective demilitarized zones.

an act of aggression and the grossest violation of the
United Nations Charter and generally recognized principles of international
law;
“2. ~enzan& that Israel should immediately
and
unconditionally remove all its troops from the territory
of those States and withdraw them behind the armistice
lines and should respect the status of the demilitarized
zones, as prescribed in the General Armistice Agreements,” [5’/79.5I/Rev.2.]

52. The Soviet delegation, Mr. President, would like to
express its confidence that the Security Council will doits
duty, and we appeal to members of the Council to adopta
decision without delay to protect the Arab States,a
decision which would put an end to the aggressionaad
restore the legitimate rights of the United Arab Republic,
Syria and Jordan and the other Arab States.

46. The Soviet delegation positively insists that the Security Council should adopt this proposal, and not postpone a
decision on the matter any longer. Its importance, urgency
and immediacy are not open to the slightest doubt, and we
must act decisively to fulfil the obligations imposed on
every member of the United Nations and on every member
of the Security Council by the United Nations Charter. It is
well known that some people are trying to make out that
the question of the withdrawal of Israel forces from the
territory they have seized should be linked with certain
other conditions, with a settlement of the general situation
in the Near East, and so on and so forth. The Soviet
delegation, Mr. President, categorically rejects attempts of
this kind.

53. We should like our draft resolution to be put to the
vote as soon as possible, today, at this meeting of the
Council.
54. If the Security Council does not take immediate
measures, then a grave responsibility will rest with those
States which have not done their duty as members of the
Security Council. In that case, it will be necessary to seek
other ways of ensuring that the United Nations doesits
duty in,accordance with its Charter.

47. At the Security Council’s meeting on 24 May the
United States representative, Ambassador Goldberg, said
that: “The United States is firmly committed to the
support of the political independence and territorial integ
rity of all”and I emphasize “all’‘-“the nations in the area.”
[13#2nd meeting, para. 10.1 We should like to ask whether
this statement by the representative of the United States of
America is still valid. If so, is the United States prepared to
confirm that it opposes the territorial claims of Tel”Aviv?

55. The PRESIDENT:
Jordan,

I call on the representative of

56. Mr, EL-FARRA (Jordan): We have already broughtto
the attention of the Security Council the continued
expulsion of Jordanians from their homes and farms, their
towns and cities. The Israel invaders were and still are
carrying out a well-calculated plan to expel more Arabs
with a view to repeating the pattern they had embarked
upon in 1948. That plan included thousands of UNRWA
refugees within the west bank of Jordan. The New York
Times reports that 100,000 Jordanians have been expelled.
It is reported that in some places Israel loudspeakers
warned the Jordanian inhabitants in the invaded area,
saying “You have two hours to leave; after that, we cannot
guarantee your safety.”

48. The Soviet delegation considers it necessary to put a
direct question to the representative of the United States of
America and other western delegations: do they agree that
the Israel forces should be removed immediately and
unconditionally from the territory they have seized, and
should be withdrawn behind the armistice lines? Are they
prepared to recognize that the continued occupation of
Arab land by Israel’s armed forces is illegal, criminal and
contrary to the United Nations Charter and the elementary
principles of contemporary international law?
49. The distinguished representatives of India and Mali
have in their statements already stressed the need to adopt
a decision calling for the withdrawal of the armed forces of
both sides behind the armistice lines, and only then to
discuss other problems relating to the so-called underlying
causes.

57. According to The New Y&c Times of today, the fli!$t
of refugees to the eastern bank of Jordan continues. In an
article published in The New York Times of today, written
by Terence Smith, it is stated:
“The flight of refugees to the eastern bank wasstill
going on today. At a point on the Jordan, a few miles
south of here, hundreds were fording the shallow riverOfl
foot.

50. The position adopted by India in the Council is based
on the well-known principle of international law that the
aggressor must not be allowed to enjoy the fruits of his
crime. A number of delegations, and particularly the
Nigerian delegation, have drawn attention to the fact that
there has been an attempt here in the Security Council to
put some new terminology into circulation, and to foist
upon the Security Council some new ideas about cease-fire
lines. We must protest against any attempts to invent any
new lines or new positions which would consolidate and
justify Israel’s aggression.

“On the road leading out of Jericho to the Jordan,
there was evidence that not all the refugees heading for
the eastern bank made it. The bodies of at least a dozen
men and women were lying next to a barbed wire fence
about fifteen yards back from the road.
“According to Shihaden Dajani, the director of the
nearby Boys Town farm, the refugees were hit by Israel
fighters.
6

1

“ ‘They came over in flights of 40 planes each’, he said,
‘they came in low, shooting their machine gun bullets all
along the road.’ ”

may be interpreted as an encouragement to aggression. The
aggressor would enjoy the fruits of his aggression and the
use of force would become a substitute for the principles of
the Charter.

The article continues:
62. The draft resolution of 9 June 1967 [S/7952/Rev.2]
submitted by the United States does not safeguard the
principles I have just mentioned. It is not acceptable to my
delegation. It brings in questions which are not before the
Council. It complicates the question of the need for
condemnation
and unconditional
and immediate withdrawal.

“Mr, Dajani reported that Israel soldiers had broken
into twenty-five houses on the 3,000-acre Boys Town
farm,
” ‘They took nearby everything we had,’ he said. ‘They
took radios, clocks, television sets, everything but the
mattresses.’

63. In many of his interventions, the representative of the
United States, Ambassador Goldberg, advised the members
of the Council not to make inflammatory statements. This
suggestion is intended, if we understand it correctly, to
cultivate peace, but since the behaviour of the Zionists
within the United States is directly connected with the
question of peace, it would be greatly appreciated and
greatly helpful at this important stage if the United States
representative would condemn Zionist practices in the
United States which, even in this delicate situation, are
playing a most destructive role. In raising this important
question, we feel we are acting within our Charter rights,

“Mr. Dajani said he had complained to the military
governor about the looting and had received assurances
that it would stop.
“ ‘It didn’t work,’ he said. ‘They looted my house three
times. I lost what jewellery I had and our cameras.’ ”
58. This Boys Town is an institution established for the
orphans of the victims of 1947. It was established by a
great humanitarian Palestinian, This institution was established with the support of humanitarian Arab, American
and European charitable institutions. I wonder what these
organizations, which had the humanitarian heart to help the
helpless and the orphans of the refugees, would say now,
when they find that even this institution is not safe from
the attack and cruelty of the Israelis.

64. My delegation disagrees with the contention that the
practices of the Zionists in the United States are guaranteed
by the United States Constitution and covered by the
freedom of speech and freedom of expression clause. This
freedom does not cover acts and deeds against public
policy. Freedom is not identical with irresponsibility. The
Zionists have gone to the extent of threatening the lives of
Arab ambassadors who are fulfilling their duties in this
important body. One wonders whether this also comes
under freedom of expression or freedom of speech.

59. So far, no decision has been taken by the Security
Council to put an end to this act of lawlessness.We cannot
understand why a human problem of this kind, which
embodies elementary human rights, should be left for so
Iong without an effective remedy. We are grateful to
UThant, our Secretary-General, for all the constructive
efforts he has made in this connexion, and we hope that he
will find it possible to present a report to the Council on
this important and most urgent matter.

65. This wholly un-American activity of the Zionist
groups within the United States violates United States
tradition. It was for this reason that I spoke about a curtain
between us and the people of the United States, imposed
by Zionism. It is this curtain which makes many Americans
unaware of the Palestine tragedy. Can you imagine,
Mr. President, that according to a poll published in Princeton, New Jersey, and in the Washington Post of 12
June-that is, yesterday-a poll which reflected the nationwide reaction to the Israel-Arab war, less than half of one
per cent of the American people want the United States
Government to support the Arab nations and-and this is
very important for the United Nations and the Security
Council to know-only 1 I per cent want the United States
Government to work through the United Nations.

60. The Israelis are committing acts of genocide. The
methods’ used, the force employed and the inhuman
manner, described in The New York Times today, in which
our people were expelled from their farms, homes, towns
and cities, constitute a crime of genocide. I think the
Council may want to have a full report, with sufficient
factual information about the security and welfare of the
people now living in the illegally occupied area. We also
need more information about the exodus of those who have
been expelled.
61. Another question which is most serious and important
is the question of the condemnation of the invaders and the
demand for their immediate withdrawal. Any delay in
taking a decision condemning the aggressor and demanding
immediate withdrawal would reflect on the prestige and
dignity of and, indeed, the respect for this great body, the
United Nations. Ambassador Keita, of Mali, very rightly
reminded the Council of this in his last intervention. The
cease-fire should be followed immediately and without any
further delay by an unconditional withdrawal. It is incompatible with the principles of this world body to permit carry
delay and to inject any foreign substance. Otherwise this
7

66. United States public opinion would have been different had the people known that the whole people of
Palestine were displaced and uprooted to make room for
Jewish foreign immigrants and that, as a result, we have
more than 1.5 million refugees. It is the Zionist campaign
of distortion in the United States which has brought about
this unawareness of our just cause.
67. The Zionist campaign, which is still continuing, has
gone so far as to attack a man who is the symbol of
decency and objectivity. The Zionist campaign in pages of

attitude of the late John F. Kennedy. It was the late
President Kennedy who said: “Let every nation know,
whether it wishes us well or ill, that we shall pay any price,
bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend,
oppose any foe, to assure the survival and the success of
liberty.” And it is Robert F. Kennedy who now, a few days
after the Israel crime against liberty, instead of adopting a
stand dictated by the American sense of fairness, instead of
pointing his finger at the irresponsible behaviour of the
Israel leaders, in an obvious attempt to accommodate the
so-called Jewish vote in the forthcoming election year,
comes to speak about our leaders, calling them “irres.
ponsible leaders [who] have turned their people’s frustra.
tion outward”.

advertisements published by the Zionist districts in all parts
of America, has tried to undermine the effectiveness and
authority of the United Nations by making charges against
UThant, saying that he did not obtain, either from the
Security Council or the Assembly, an order to withdraw the
United Nations Emergency Force, something which all
Security Council members, including the great Powers, have
agreed was legally within his right and authority.
68. Statements of Mr. Eshkol and Mr. Dayan, published
on Sunday and this morning in The New York Times, in
which they attack the United Nations, show a clear
co-ordination between the behaviour of Zionism in Israel
and the behaviour of their agencies, the pressure groups in
the United States of America.

75. Jordan has been considered a friend of the United
States. But I regret to say that Jordan was betrayed by its
so-called friends. We were assured that the territorial
integrity of all nations in the Middle East would be
protected. We were told that the movement of the Sixth
Fleet in the Mediterranean was intended to put that policy
into effect, to stop the aggression from whichever side it
came. But when Jordan was invaded and a substantial part
of its territory was illegally occupied, the Sixth Fleet kept
silent. One cannot but wonder whether the Sixth Fleet was
there to protect Jordan or to facilitate the task of the
invaders. The fact that the Israelis committed the aggression
was very clear. The American ship, Liberty, which was
attacked by the Israelis, was not sitting idly in the
Mediterranean.

69. I have already brought before you the tragedy of the
exodus of those who were expelled from the land in which
they had lived from time immemorial.
I have asked for
effective measures to protect and ensure the safety of
others still living in the invaded area.
70. We were asked not to make inflammatory statements.
Ambassador Goldberg said that what is needed here is not
hot words. Thus we are expected to be silent while our
people are being slaughtered in the invaded area. We are
asked not to call a crime a crime; we are advised to avoid
explaining the terrible acts of genocide committed against
our people. Maybe we are expected to confine our reaction
to meditation, to make our voices heard in churches and
mosques, but not to seek remedy in the Security Council.

76. This is what Newsweelc had to say about the ship,
7 1, We agree that hot words alone are not the meaningful
answer to hot deeds. We may not have other means at
present, but we can only hope that through honest and
sincere words we can open a closed door, and that we can
lift the dark curtain so that truth be not a stranger in the
land of Jefferson and Washington.

Liberty. I am quoting from Newsweek of 19 June 1967, of

this week:
“First of all, the Liberty was no ordinary vessel but an
intelligence-gathering ship on a ‘ferret’ mission. It carried
elaborate gear to locate both Israel and Egyptian radio
and radar and to monitor and tap all military messages
sent from command posts to the battlefield. Although
Israel’s apologies were offically accepted, some high
Washington officials believe the Israelis knew the
Liberty’s capabilities and suspect that the attack might
not have been accidental. One top-level theory holds that
someone in the Israel armed for&s ordered the Liberty
sunk . . . .”

72. How can we, the delegation of Jordan, a smaI1 Member
of the United Nations, find mild and soft language to
describe the American napalm bombs used by the Israelis
against our people and our heroic small army, which fought
without adequate machinery, without air cover, but with
every sacrifice, with all courage, with manlness and
determination?
And with this and many other Israel
atrocities, how can we find an excuse for American
politicians who, for cheap political gains, exploit the
suffering and the losses inflicted upon us and the acts of
genocide committed against our people?

I am referring to the Liberty, the ship that wasattacked by
the Israelis where thirty-three Americans were killed and
seventy-five were injured. I repeat, this is what the article
has to say:

73. How can a stand like that taken by Senator Robert F.
Kennedy be looked upon but with dismay and disappointment-all
the more so when such an attitude comes
from an American with great future ambitions. If Senator
Robert F. Kennedy permits himself in this critical situation
to exploit our tragedy for personal gains, and permits
himself to intervene in the domestic affairs of thirteen
sovereign Arab States, are we to blame for taking a stand to
expose those who neither told the truth nor had the dignity
to remain silent?

“One top-level theory holds that someone in the Israel
armed forces ordered the Liberty sunk because he
suspected it had taken down messagesshowing that Israel
started the fighting. (A Pentagon official has already tried
to shoot down the Israel claim of ‘pilot error’.) Not
everyone in Washington is buying this theory, but some
top Administration officials will not be satisfied until
fuller and more convincing explanations of the attack OII
a clearly marked ship in international waters are forthcoming.”

74. The American people gained great prestige in the
world community because of the heroic and courageous

77. Surely the present attitude of the United States
vis-&vis an immediate withdrawal will give us an answer. We
8

arethe friends of the United States people, but friendship is
a two-way street; so is interest. If the United States
Government is going to ignore the legitimate rights of the
Arabs,if the United States Government intends to have
expediencyas its guiding principle, then this will pose a
&Uenge to every Arab.

and consideration by the Council today, to discuss both’
draft resolutions, not in the spirit of invective, which,
regrettably, has characterized our debates of the past
several days, but on the merits, because of the grave
seriousness of the problem and because of the necessity for
this Council to arrive at a sober and considered judgement
of what its responsibilities are in the area.

78. The Arab people and their Governments are learning
today,more than ever, that their strength does not stem
fromthose who, on the one hand, claim to be their friends
and,on the other, use two criteria for justice and practice.
Our people are now realizing more than ever that their
strengthis in their unity and that their struggle should start
athome, so that they can get rid of all forces and influences
whichstand in the way of Arab liberation.

85. Throughout the nineteen years since the admission of
Israel to the United Nations, the United States has
supported many attempts to resolve the underlying causes
of tension and instability between the Arab States and
Israel. We have sought to assure acceptance of the political
independence and territorial integrity of ail States in the
area: Arab States and Israel alike, all Members of the
United Nations, all Members entitled to the protection of
the Charter. We have also sought an end to acts of force, of
whatever kind, acts which also are hostile to the spirit and
intent of the Charter. We have sought an equitable and
humanitarian solution of the problem of the Palestinian
refugees. We have supported plans for the development of
the resources of the Jordan River in a way which will help
all States and do harm to none. We have pressed for
recognition of the rights of all nations, including Israel, to
free and innocent passageof the Suez Canal and the Gulf of
Aqaba. Above all, we have sought the conversion of the
Armistice of 1949 into a permanent peace as contemplated
in the General Armistice Agreements themselves.

79. Those States which betrayed their own assurancesto
theArabs are giving a lesson to the Arab masses, who are
nowmore than ever convinced that they can never trust
forcesof domination and exploitation. We received and we
keepreceiving empty words here in the Security Council
and outside the Security Council. But these utterances
cannottoday fool those who are the victims of a vicious
conspiracyundertaken by many forces.
80. We come to the Security Council seeking remedy. The
sameforces that betrayed us in our just cause helped in
bringing about this tragedy. They are now working inside
the Security Council, and behind closed doors, outside the
Council, to frustrate our efforts and the efforts of the
Council for immediate action. Some of those forces of evil
arenot serving the interest of their people. They are serving
theinterests of the Zionist minority, against the interests of
themajority.

I

86. We have not changed our views or policies about the
entire situation because of the unfortunate events which
have occurred recently. Virtually all our efforts, as we
know, have been unsuccessful. The Near East has lived for
nineteen years in a state of tension which now, for the third
time, has erupted into war. The even-handed efforts of the
United States to prevent and end the present violence and
the past violence are spread on the records of the United
Nations and of international diplomacy for all to read.

81. We may not be able to check these forces now, but we
llavethe means to expose them and their intrigues to our
public opinion for it to make an accurate judgement. Then
our people will have to play their part in fighting these
forcesof evil and their interests, wherever they find them.
Ourpeople, with their unshakable determination, will have
to revolt against these forces and start their struggle from
within,

87. The depth of our commitment was made manifest in
1956 at the time of the Suez crisis. And more recently it
was made evident again, in the even-handed approach of the
United States towards border incidents in 1966. We
supported a call in the Security Council, also supported by
the great majority of the members, on the Syrian Government to restrain terrorist raids launched from its territory.
Then, in November 1966, we joined in the unanimous
censure of Israel for its retaliatory raid against As Samu in
Jordan.

82. The answer to this challenge posed by Ziar&m and
imperialism is a united Arab effort to check Zionist
expansionism.
83. In conclusion, let me make it very clear that Jordan is
nothappy about the part so far played by the United States
andsome other Powers here in the Security Council vis-&vis
our cause. If this United States policy continues, some
politicians in America may win Zionist and so-called Jewish
votesin the United States, but the American people, as a
result,will definitely-and I repeat, definitely-lose all their
interestsand friends in the Arab East.

88. I need scarcely recall to this Council that it was a
Soviet veto which prevented the milder action of the
Council directed against Syria from being adopted. It may
also be instructive to recall one aspect of the course of
events in the past month leading directly to the outbreak of
the fighting, an aspect which has not been fully or
adequately discussed in the Council but which I am
compelled to discuss by reason of some remarks by the
representative of the Soviet Union today.

84. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): The
United States
has introduced a draft resolution
/S/7952/Rev.Z] which we believe holds the hope of a
lastingpeace in the Near East. The Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics has submitted a revised draft resolution
[S/79.51/Rev.2], which its representative has talked about
today. I propose, in the interests of furthering the debate

89. In early May of this year reports were circulated in
Syria and the United Arab Republic of a supposed Israel
military build-up on the borders of Syria, allegedly backed
by the United States and aimed at the overthrow of the
9

Syrian Government. President Nasser of the United Arab
Republic recently revealed one source from which his
Government had heard this inflammatory rumour, namely
Moscow. Yet Secretary-General U Thant, on 19 May, stated
that United Nations observers had found no evidence to
support the charges of an alleged Israel military build-up in
the area. And indeed, he could not have reported any
complicity on the part of the United States, for such
complicity was non-existent.

(234 (1967)], which was proposed by the Soviet Union;
and that after that, precious time was again wastedia
protracted debate and negotiations before a third cease-fire
resolution [23.5 (I 96 7)], applying to the situation in Syria,
could be adopted. This was true even though here also the
United States was ready to act immediately and had in fact
sought to anticipate the situation the previous day by
supporting a resolution condemning any violation of the
cease-fire, and indeed proposing to sponsor such a resolu.
tion .

90. Let me remind the Council too that while these
inflammatory charges, inspired by Moscow, were inflaming
the situation in the Near East, the Soviet representative’s
only answers to my country’s call for urgent action by the
Council was a complaint that we were dramatizing the
situation. He should know better than anyone what
dramatizing means. This totally false accusation of a United
States-Israel plot helped substantially to inflame the crisis
in which Israel and Egypt confronted each other for the
first time in ten years across borders no longer patrolled by
the United Nations.

95. Now fortunately, and belatedly, the cease-fireis in
effect. But we cannot rest there. The cease-fire,aswe have
repeatedly said, is no more than the first essential step in
the Council’s duty. Our Charter responsibility is the
maintenance of international peace and security. The guns
are mercifully silent in the Near East today, but that region
is still a long, long way from true peace or true security,
The question now facing the Security Council, therefore, is
simply this: What is the next step we must take towards
peace and security for the nations of the Near East? Where
do we go from here? The question is not where we further
debate or exchange recriminations or invective; the question is: Where do we go from here?

91, On 17 May, as the world well remembers, President
Nasser, citing the supposed danger of an Israel invasion of
Syria, requested the withdrawal of the United Nations
Emergency Force. And when UNEF vacated Sharm el
Sheikh, the United Arab Republic immediately reimposed
its blockade of the Gulf of Aqaba, after ten years of free
and peaceful navigation of that Gulf.

96, There are two answers to this question before the
Council: that of the Soviet Union in its draft resolution and
that of the United States. Before stating the casefor my
Government’s proposal, I should like to comment briefly
on that of the Soviet Union.

92. These are the facts. The whole world community
knows them. We in the Council above all others are fully
conversant with them.

97. The Soviet proposal could be stated in simple terms as
follows: Condemn Israel for its aggression; and Israel,
withdraw your troops and let everything go back to exactly
where it was before the fighting began on 5 June. In other
words, the film is to be run backwards through the machine
to that point in the early morning of 5 June when
hostilities had not broken out.

93. Throughout this period, the United States of America,
in the Security Council, as the Council’s records disclose,
and in all its diplomatic activities, urged the utmost
restraint on alI parties. We exerted every effort to prevent
an outbreak of hostilities and to assure that vital international maritime rights in the Gulf of Aqaba would be
respected, Unfortunately, our urgent efforts to convene the
Security Council and to get the Security Council to act
before an outbreak of hostilities were stalled by other
Powers which chose to ridicule the seriousness of the
situation and failed to support our urgent efforts to find a
peaceful solution. As a result, largely through Soviet
obstruction, the Security Council, between its first meeting
on 24 May 1967 and the outbreak of the fighting on 5 June
1967, was unable to adopt a single resolution or take any
effective action to prevent an outbreak. Throughout this
time the whole area remained a tinderbox. Armies were
mobilized and poised for war, and inexorably war came.

98. But what would the situation then be? Once again
opposing forces are to stand in direct confrontation, poised
for combat. Once again there is to be no international
machinery to keep them apart. Once again Aqaba is to be
blockaded to the free and innocent passageof all maritime
nations. Once again nothing is to be done to resolve the
deep-lying grievances on both sides that have fed the fires
of conflict in the Near East for twenty years. And
significantly, once again there is no bar to an arms raceia
the area, the arms race which has so substantially contributed to the tension in that region.
99. If ever there wasa prescription for renewed hostilities,
the Soviet draft resolution is that prescription. I do hope
that the Soviet Union does not contemplate with equs
nimity the prospect of a fourth round in the Arab-Israel
struggle. This is precisely what the Council should concert
its efforts to avoid.

94. At the very outbreak of the fighting, the United States
immediately sought a cease-fire and supported efforts made
by our distinguished President and others in the same
direction. The record of the meetings of the Security
Council shows clearly who obstructed the cease-fire, the
first, indispensable step for bringing the conflict to an end,
and why it took two days to adopt a simple cease-fire
resolution [233 (1967)] which should have been adopted
immediately and without debate. The record also shows
that, regardless of the sponsor thereof, the United States
speedily
supported the second cease-fire resolution

100. Let us recall that the General Armistice Agreements
of 1949l state that their purpose is: “to facilitate tire
transition from the present truce to permanent peace”-1
repeat “permanent peace”-“in Palestine”.
1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Fourth Yeerl
Special Supplement Nos. I to 4.

10

01. We all know that there has been no transition and
lat there is no permanent peace in that area at all. On the
Dntrary, there is war. A bandage was applied to the wound
ighteen years ago, but the wound has never been allowed
I heal. It is still an open and festering wound today. All
le eighteen years of the armistice regime have witnessed
irtually no progress on any of the basic issues from which
le conflict arose. As long as those issues are unresolved,
ley will continue to envenom the political life of the Near
ast.
02. The Soviet proposal does not encompass a genuine
7proach to their solution. It cannot lead toward peace. It
rather a big step backward towards another war, What the
ear East needs today are new steps toward real peace, not
1st a cease-fire, which is what we have today; not just a
agile and perilous armistice, which is what we have had
)r eighteen years; not just withdrawal which is necessary
.rt insufficient. Real peace must be our aim, and in that
jnviction my delegation submitted on 9 June, even before
te cease-fire became fully effective, a draft resolution from
hich I shall now read the most important provision:
“The Security Council,
‘L. . *

“2 Ci& for discussions promptly thereafter”-that is,
after the cease-fire-“among the parties concerned, using
such third-party or United Nations assistance as they may
wish, looking toward the establishment of viable arrangements encompassing the withdrawal and disengagement
of armed personnel, the renunciation of force regardless
of its nature, the maintenance of vital international rights
and the establishment of a stable and durable peace in the
Middle East.” [S/7952/Rev.2.]
13. Our objective in making this proposal is to encourage
decision by the warring parties to live together in peace
Id to ensure international assistance to this end. It is
icessary to begin to move, not some day but now,
omptly, while the memory of these tragic events is still
vid in our minds, towards a full settlement of all
Itstanding questions-I
again repeat “all outstanding
lestions”-between the parties such as the resolutions the
nited Nations has contemplated for nearly twenty years.
14. There are legitimate grievances on all sides of this
tter conflict, and a full settlement should deal equitably
ith all legitimate grievances and all outstanding questions
3m whatever side they are raised. In short, a new
undation for peace must be built in the Middle East.

generation or we can go back to the treatment of symptoms
which has proved such a dismal failure in the past, In this
we should adopt a simple, pragmatic rule taught by all our
medical advisers: “You cannot cure cancer with a bandaid.”
107. In this grave situation fraught with so many differences of opinions and attitudes, the tendency is to say
that it defies solution. But we cannot accept that type of
counsel. Let us rather state that no one can say that
solutions are impossible. The sad fact is that for many years
they have not been tried really seriously, and now, at the
end of this tragic week of war, let us remember the death
and suffering that all the parties have borne and let us open
the way to solutions that will be sufficiently enduring and
sufficiently just to be an acceptable monument to their
sacrifice and to the pledge that is contained in the United
Nations Charter.
108. In dealing with this subject and since we are here in
New York, we are constantly reminded by various spokesmen, including my good friend, the representative of
Jordan, Mr. El-Farra, of American public opinion. And
again I should like to make something very explicit. I do
not apologize in any sense for the expression by any
American group of their point of view about this problem,
whether it is the Action Committee on American-Arab
Relations headed by Dr. Mehdi, who met with me, or by
the head of any Zionist organization. Our Constitution, and
we are very proud of it, permits free expression of opinion
by our citizens. The other day we witnessed a vivid
demonstration
of the character of the United States
Constitution. The Action Committee on American-Arab
Relations held a peaceful demonstration in front of the
White House and so did various Zionist and Jewish groups.
Both demonstrations were permitted; both took place
peacefully under our Constitution; both are permissible
under our system of government. We are proud of that, and
we do not apologize in any way for it. We do not apologize
in any way for what any person says in our country about
any matter of public opinion.
109. I would say for Mr. El-Farra’s information that very
often public opinion expressed in the United States is not
public opinion which is exactly complimentary to our
Government. Yet, whether it is complimentary or not, it is
the entire basis of our society that our citizens should have
the right to express themselves freely on all issues. The right
of comment and the right of dissent, our Supreme Court
has said, is a right of American citizens both in time of
peace and in time of war and is our most precious heritage.

15. Doubtless, agreements between the parties on these
ofoundly contentious matters will take a long time, but
e United Nations, speaking through this Council, has an
gent obligation to facilitate them and to help build an
tnosphere in which fruitful discussions will be possible.
lat is the purpose of the draft resolution we have
bmitted.

110. I should also like to say again in this Council that I
do not think that it is appropriate-and I shall say this again
and again-or that it serves the purposes of debate to refer
to comments made by various citizens or individuals or
public officials. It is legitimate-I have said this and I repeat
it-to comment upon the foreign policy of our Government, the declarations made by the President, the Secretary
of State, myself and others who have responsibility for
enunciating the foreign policy of our Government.

6. The Security Council is now faced with a clear-cut
iue. We can either attack the causes of the disease which
s plagued the Near East with war three times in a

111. When other officials of the United States Government
in the legislative branch-and I shall be very precise:

Senator Kennedy-or Governor Rockefeller or anybody
else-express themselves, they are also exercising their rights
as public officials and American citizens. I do not think
that the time of the Council ought to be spent in debating
the views of our citizens and officials, or in entering into
our domestic affairs. .What is more relevant, if I may say so
with due respect, is the position that is stated in this
Council on behalf of the United States Government.
112. Reference has been made to the attack on our ship,
Liberty. I stated in the Council in the strongest terms the
protest of our Government against that attack, and we have
renewed that protest in the strongest terms to the Israel
authorities. We regard that attack to be an unjustified
attack. I have welcomed expressions made by some, but not
all, of the members of the Council of regret at the lives we
have lost in this conflict, just as I have expressed regret
about all other lives lost in this conflict, including the lives
of the combatants themselves. Surely we must express
regret about all bloodshed and loss of life in this conflict.

117. We have taken a first step in the cease-fi;e, and
commendably the cease-fire is holding. We have many tasks
to perform in bringing about a just and equitable solution
which, as the Secretary-General has so strongly stressed to
us in his report, is so badly needed in that troubled area of
the world. Let us pursue those tasks in a spirit expressed by
perhaps the greatest United States President, Abraham
Lincoln: “With malice toward none, with charity for all”.
Let us bind up the wounds of this conflict and bring peace,
the most precious gift of all, to all people in the area.
118. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Saudi Arabia. As the Security Council
table has already been filled as a result of invitations
extended to four representatives, the representative of
Jordan has very kindly indicated his wi!lingness to withdraw temporarily from his seat at the Council table while
the representative of Saudi Arabia makes his intervention, I
appreciate this gesture of the representative of Jordan and I
invite the representative of Saudi Arabia to take a place at
the Council table and make a statement.

113. I should like also to address myself to some other
comments that have been made. We do have in the
aftermath of the fighting an urgent responsibility to see
that the Council takes all action within its power to protect
those already victimized by this war. There are solemn
obligations which we must recall concerning the treatment
of the victims of war under the 1949 Geneva Conventions,’
in particular the obligations concerning civilian populations,
as the representative of Argentina, Mr. Ruda, pointed out
on 11 June [1357th meeting]. These are particularly
relevant in the light of the reports we have heard of the
movement of civilian populations from their homes, many
of them refugees from earlier conflicts.

119. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): It is not easy for me
not to speak with emotion. However, Mr. President, if you
think I become too emotional, you have a mandate from
me to stop me.
120. Places of worship in the Holy Land have been
respected throughout history. In Islam it is not permitted
that a national flag of any Moslem State be hoisted over the
minaret of a Mosque. Likewise, Islam always respected the
places of worship of other religions than its own. You only
have to turn to history, to the middle of the seventh
century, when Omar Ibn Al-Khattab, the Caliph, visited
Jerusalem, and the patriarch of the Church of the Holy
Sepulchre invited him to worship inside the church. “No”,
said Omar Ibn Al-Khattab, “I will not do this”. The
patriarch was taken aback. He thought, “Here is a victor
who looks down upon us, who would not gracefully enter
the church and worship the same God”-for it is the same
God that both the Christians and the Moslems worship.
When Omar Ibn Al-Khattab saw how displeased the
patriarch was, he said, “I told you on purpose that I will
not worship inside your church lest, in the years to come,
the Moslems who may wish to revere my name would say,
‘Here Omar prayed, and there shall be a Mosque erected;
Christ is from the spirit of God, who is also one of’ our
prophets’ “. And he turned to his God, and they gave him a
rug, and he prayed to God outside the Church of the Holy
Sepulchre. And today in that same spot next to the Church
of the Holy Sepulchre there is a mosque known as the
Mosque-not the Great Mosque-of Omar, a small mosque,
where Omar Ibn Al-Khattab prayed. He was prophetic of
what would have happened had he gone inside the Holy
Sepulchre to pray. He knew that some hotheads might
build a mosque or might turn the Holy Sepulchre into a
mosque.

114. I have already expressed in the Council my Government’s concern for the welfare and safety of the populations of the west bank of the Jordan. Our concern includes
all who find themselves in areas of the Near East disrupted
by this conflict, and particularly those who now find
themselves in areas under Israel control.
115. The United Nations through its resolution establishing the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine
Refugees
[Genera2 Assembly
resolution
302 (IV]], assumed particular responsibility for the refugees of the 1947-1948 fighting. We supported that resolution and the subsequent resolutions renewing its mandate.
We have been the principal contributor to the work of
IJNRWA, and therefore have a legitimate concern that the
refugees of the 1947-1948 conflict be treated with the
humanitarian concern to which they are entitled.
116. We also have an equal concern that other civilians
displaced during the recent conflict from their homes, and
particularly those on the west bank of the Jordan, will be
allowed and encouraged to return to their homes and that
all civilians will be provided with adequate assurance of
their safety in the same locations in which they resided
before hostilities began. We urge all concerned, and
particularly the Government of Israel, to exert every
possible effort to that end.

121. And what is happening today? An emblem of the
Zionist aggressors has been hoisted on the minaret of a
mosque. Please pass it on [indicating photograph]; show it
to our colleagues, Sir, with your permission.
122. Why? This is why we have never accepted the
Zionists in our midst, and will never accept them. Let my

2 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75 (1950), Nos. 970-973.

12

good friend, Mr. Goldberg, take this out of his mind. There
shall be no peace, not because he and I do not wish to have
peace, but because it is the mood, the temperament of the
Arab world. He mentioned some metaphors about cancer
and about maladies. The Arab world, unfortunately-and I
do not glory in what I am saying, I deplore the facts-will
not accept a cancer inside of it. The cancer may kill the
patient; the patients here‘are the Arabs. But the cancer will
be killed with the patient in a holocaust. The illustrious
Ambassador spoke of the right of dissent covered by the
Constitution of the United States, which we all revere, and
the right of expressing one’s views. I do not claim to be a
prophet, but what I have just said derives from my
knowledge of the Arab people. What am I? I am an Arab
myself. The Arabs will never accept Western Zionists in
their midst, They consider them a wedge in the heart of the
Arab world. They consider them an abscess,unfortunately,
that will always be causing them fever.
123. Since Mr. Goldberg, my good friend, mentioned
medical similes and metaphors, the Western Zionists are an
abscess; and you know that pus causes inflammation. When
wilI the patient get well? Only when that pus is drained,
only when the Zionists are squeezed out. Maybe not in my
lifetime or in the lifetime of my good friend, but there will
be a lot more suffering and tribulation. And this is what I
have been trying to tell many government officials since
I939 in this City of New York. I even spoke in City Hall on
the same platform with Zionists. I found myself outnumbered in City Hall during the war. I was stranded here
during the war. In case someone thought I was a rug
merchant here-all kinds of rumours were spread about
me-1 officially represented since 1939 three Arab Governments: Lebanon at the World’s Fair, later Syria and now
Saudi Arabia-my Syrian friends are all young, they do not
remember that-and unofficially I represented all the Arab
countries, because I was active on this question of Palestine
for many years-and I am not a Palestinian, as The New
York Times once erroneously reported.
124. I am an Arab, first and foremost, a Pan-Arab. I am
speaking as a Pan-Arab, without rancour or hatred, to our
Jewish brothers of the area, not cousins-again I must say
that. How heartened I was that six persons of the Jewish
faith spoke to me over the telephone yesterday. One of
them was ,born in Jaffa; another was born in Aleppo and
two others-they told me that they speak Arabic. They
chatted with me in Arabic. They had listened to my speech.
This is what they told me, my good friend Ambassador
Gddberg, “Why should this happen to us? ” I said, “TO
whom? ” “To us, who have no quarrel with you. We are
Arabs. We speak Arabic. Those Ashkenazim’j-meaning
the
Jews from southern Russia-“They have caused a feud
between you and us.” Of course, they are European,
otherwise they would not be so disciplined. They would
not be so organized, as always, to influence the big Powers
since the time of Germany, since the time of William II who
was friendly to the German Jews. And they asked him to
see the late Sultan, Abdul Hamid-may
his soul rest in
peace-the same Sultan of the Ottoman Empire, when the
Ottoman Empire was getting weak, about whom Gladstone
said, “Turkey will always be backward unless the Koran is
wrapped with the veil and thrown down into the sea.”

125. We know what the Western countries think, and why
there were so many Armenian massacres. So many Greeks
had lived and settled there before the Ottomans came, since
the Byzantine Empire, because in those dark ages of the
nineteenth century, imperialism saw to it to divide the
communities that lived in peace, side by side, so much so,
that many Jews had opted for Islam-and they are called
Dunmeh-in order to save their lives. Feuds were created by
the Western Powers inside the Ottoman Empire.
126. And why am I mentioning all this? Becausewhat we
are witnessing today is a continuation of the past. The
dramatis personae have changed, but the spirit, the policy,
is still the same. And who would forget, when I was
seventeen, when Lloyd George pushed the poor Greeks,
who were good Ottomans, who were the people of the land
in Smyma, and asked them to rebel. They lost their
property, they lost their houses because unfortunately
some of their leaders in Smyrna and in the vicinity became
the tools of Western imperialism. The Ottoman Empire was
one of the most tolerant empires in history. I lived under
the Ottoman Empire. Why were the Ottomans tolerant?
Because they came from Asia. There is more tolerance,
religious tolerance in Asia. The Millets had their own
religious courts-Lord
Caradon will bear me out. The
orthodox had their courts. The Moslems, of course, had
their courts of Shari’a Islamiya. The Jews had their courts
inside the Ottoman Empire. They were all Ottomans. They
were more tolerant because they had suffered, not because
God discriminates and He makes them a better breed, but
because the Asians had suffered throughout their history,
throughout six thousand years of history. They knew what
it was to suffe‘r. Of course, they were not all angels. They
were human. But the tradition was one of tolerance. Omar
Ibn Al-Khattab, the Caliph, did not worship inside the
church so that it might not be turned into a mosque.
127. Islam itself does not permit a flag to be hoisted over
the minaret of any mosque, because God is greater than
nations. God is the greatest; man is a shadow, a guest on
this earth, a grain of sand on the shores of eternity. Today
he is here, tomorrow he is no more. And man has created a
cult of personality. Westerners created an image of man. I
do not want to mention names out of respect to my good
friend, Mr. Goldberg. They make a god of man, of almost a
demi-god. There is the cult of the personality of the man in
the news, but we Arabs, whenever we find anyone who
becomes inflated by himself, and as I have said, we are
human, we admonish such a person. We say that greatness is
an attribute of God, the Creator; you are only a human
being.
128. How did the Zionists, with whom my good friend,
Mr. Goldberg, wants us to live in peace, act? They hoisted
a flag over a minaret, the minaret of a mosque. There are
Moslems sitting around here. There are 600 million of you.
Well, I am sorry to say, there will one day be a day of
reckoning, which I must deplore because it will mean more
bloodshed. It will mean that many innocent Jews will be
massacred by some hotheads; and why should the innocent
Jews be massacred just because their Zionist leaders, drunk
with a theocracy, setting the pendulum of history back,
think that they can lord it over other people?

there. They did not leave their homes. They had acce!,
the radio, so why did they not leave their homes? ‘I
had not heard at that time of what happened eat
Yassin, a village of over 250 persons which one day at d
was surrounded by the European Zionists. At dawn
killed the men,. the women, the children and the anir
and they cut down the trees. There were other incidi
not like Deir Yassin, but a good number of them 7
similar to Deir Yassin, yet people talk of the Nazis.

129. Again, I say that Judaism is a noble religion, but
unfortunately the Zionists, instead of having Zion of the
soul, as the father of Yehudi Menuhin mentioned in his
book The Decadence of Judaism3 do not glory in what
Isaiah said, they do not heed Micah to do justice. Will
somebody get me a Bible. Laugh at your Bible, most of
you, because you have forgotten your prophets. Those
Zionists, not the Jews who use Zionism of the spirit, but
the political Zionists, have forgotten their God, and it is
stated in the Bible that whenever they erred-and I have
read the Bible many times in my days, that is why I asked
for a copy-“and God was angry that He created Israel, and
then He regretted and forgave them”. This was not only
once throughout their history, when they were in the land
of Canaan, but many times. The Western Powers still
advocate peace between the Arabs and the European
Zionists. I would not want to mention the word “Jew”
because the Jews are our brothers.

134. I remember, at that time, I had occasion to adI
myself to that incident, about ten or fifteen years
when Mr. Nosek, now the Under-Secretary here in char)
the Office of Conference Services, was representath
Czechoslovakia; and before I spoke-it wason a questic
human rights-1 said to Mr. Nosek: “I have heard of Li
and we all deplore what had happened there, Tel1 ri
want to check the facts: it seems that some of the c1
killed some Nazis; there was retaliation by the Nazis,,
the Nazis kill all the men and women and childre
Lidice? ” He said: “NO, they killed only a certain nul
of men above a certain age.” He could bear me out, bl
is probably busy, in the Office of Conference Se&
the United Nations.

130. The Zionists use Judaism as a motivation for a
political end. I will bet anything that most of the Zionists
including the generals and the officers are secular like the
majority of the Christian community or, for that matter,
many Moslems. But the Zionists have used Judaism as a
motivation for a political end, and the representatives of
the United States, whom we love and admire in many ways,
either do not have a grasp of the matter or they have been
brainwashed by the Zionists. It cannot be anything else.

135. Now, one would think that excessestake pIal,
every war. They do; that is true. What is the differencr
example, between killing all the people of Deir Yassiri
the Westerners dropping A bombs on Dresden, ancl
Nazis dropping bombs on Coventry during the Se
World War, and for that matter Mr. Truman having ord
after he knew the war was almost over, the droppir
bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki? Well, these are
atrocious, but we are not dealing with Japan or those 1;
countries. I mentioned them just to adduce what
happened.

131. Even with regard to the Communists, and remember
I have always told you that I am a monarchist, and I am a
contemporary
of the Russian Revolution, they never
hoisted the Soviet flag over churches or synagogues. I am
talking of the Soviet Government, although there may have
been some excesses as in all revolutions. The Soviet
Constitution
also guaranteed freedom of thought and
religion, and although the Communists declared themselves
officially as atheists, they respected the creeds of others.
Neither did the Christians try, when they took the Holy
Land, to hoist the emblems of England and France, and
whoever joined them in those days many centuries ago,
over the mosques. But everything is permissible for the
Zionists because the Western Powers have been influenced
by them. Everything is permissible for Israel to do, even to
hoisting a f!ag over the minaret of a mosque.

136. I am a humble student of the Bible; and, remet
the Jewish prophets are my prophets too. I had occasic
the Third Committee, ten or fifteen years ago, to quo1
Book of Joshua. I repeat that Quotation:
“And they utterly destroyed all that was in the
both man and woman, young and old, and ox, and s
and ass,with the edge of the sword.
“But Joshua had said unto the two men that had
out of the country, Go into the harlot’s house, and
out thence the woman, and all that she hath, as ye
unto her.

132. I hope you have seen the photograph, Mr. President,
and I hope that it has been passed around. Many may have
seen it in The New York Times and The Post of today, but
I thought that because you gentlemen had been very busy,
you may not have had time to read your daily newspaper.

“And the young men that were spies went in
brought out Rahab, and her father, and her motheli
her brethren, and all that she had; and they brougl
all her kindred, and left them without the camp of I

133. My younger brother, who was gracious enough to
allow me to take this seat, Ambassador El-Farra, has told
the Council about the fate of the Arab refugees. The
Zionists have always claimed that the Arab Government, in
1948, exhorted the refugees to leave their homes because
there would be another round. There is nothing further
from the truth, and I will prove it, It is well known that in
the Zionist State today there are-1 do not know the exact
number-150,000,
200,000 or 250,000 Arabs still living

“And they burnt the city with fire, and all tha
therein: only the silver, and the gold,“-no wonde
silver and the gold; they did not burn that-“an
vessels of brass and of iron, they put into the treasl
the house of the Lord.”

3 Moshe Menuhin, The Decadence of Judaism in Our Time (New
York, Exposition Press,1965).

137. Eighty per cent of the Arab land and ho
Instead of the poor harlot, who had to sell her body
14

the gold and the silver, they took 80 per cent of the Arab
possessions. Who? The oriental Jews? No, not our
brothers. The European Jews? No: the political Western
Zionists. They are not Jews. If they were Jews, they would
heed the prophets of mercy and compassion. The Bible, the
Jews’ Bible, is replete with the teachings of the Prophets.

colleague and my good friend-and I say “my good friend”;
do not think I am being cynical; I am very fond of
Ambassador Goldberg as a person. What does he want us to
have-peace with the European Zionists, the aggressors?
145. People in the gallery are laughing. You shut up! We
are talking seriously here.

138. No, sir. They robbed Palestine, those Western
political Zionists. I am not talking about the spiritual
Zionists. And we are supposed here to make peace.

146. The PRESIDENT: I hope the representative of Saudi
Arabia will excuse me for interrupting him. May I ask the
audience to remain silent so we can listen to the speaker.

139. Peace? What kind of peace? The peace of the
grave? There is peace with them in the grave. When
somebody dies, then he is at peace-everybody. But you
cannot kill a hundred million Arabs, can you? Peace with
injustice knows this? What does the Charter say? I have
read it time and again; it is my second Bible. Peace with
justice! Where is the justice? To transplant a sort of a
kangaroo State in our midst because those poor victims
suffered, because the Jews suffered in Europe. I am sure, if
Herzl had been alive, he would not have allowed this. He
was trying to use peaceful methods to have a sort of a
spiritual home, not a national State.

147. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): You may giggle, but
not laugh.
148. Peace? What kind of peace? The peace of the
robber? A peace which imposes something on you? We
have that kind of peace every day. When there is a hold-up,
one gives everything in order that his life may be spared.
What kind of peace is that? Is that the peace of the United
Nations? Is that peace with justice? What kind of peace is
it?
149. As I was saying, my good friend Ambassador
Goldberg pointed out, and rightly so, that everybody
should be allowed to express himself.

140. Nationalism has been the curse of Europe and the
imported curse of Asia, because it has led to many wars. We
are supposed to transcend nationalism here in the United
Nations, but, unfortunately, every State is still chauvinistically nationaIistic when it suits its purpose or when its
politicians think its interests are jeopardized. The Zionists
have made nationalism out of religion.

150. Do not distract the Secretary-General, Mr. Bunche, I
am talking. I want him to hear every word, my dear
Mr. Bun&e. He is my Secretary-General, I do not have
occasion to talk to him. He is so busy with Viet-Nam, and
now with Palestine, He should learn what we have suffered.

141. I have just heard-I should like the Secretariat to
check on it because this has happened before-that many
television stations have cut their programmes since I have
been talking, possibly because there are 2 million Jewshere
in New York, many of whom are Zionists. I hope not, but I
think it would be discrimination; and I would ask my
colleague, the representative of the United States, if it is
true-and I would hope it is not true-to see that freedom
of television will flow on the media and that the voice of
Baroody should not be stifled outside. I am not so
dangerous; I am human. I should like to talk to many of the
Jews in the galleries peacefully, but there are many outside,
and they should know what goes on here.

151, Then there is the subject of freedom of information,
which is my pet subject and has been since 1947. I wasone
of the proponents of the Draft Convention on Freedom of
Information,
not freedom of licence, mind you. The
information media, whether auditory or visual can create a
lot of mischief if, instead of dealing with free opinion, it
promotes propaganda, States would be poisoned if the
information media, under the guise of freedom, peddled
licence.

143. And many Americans said: “Let us have the United
Nations in the United States”, because America withdrew
from joining the League of Nations due to the displeasure
of the uncle of our erstwhile colleague Henry Cabot Lodge.
He took it to heart that Mr. Wilson did not take him to
Versailles, and so he said: “To heck with the League of
Nations.” So now that the Americans were emerging as a
great Povirer it was decided we should ensure having them in
the United Nations because, after all, we believed that they
should help in organizing the new world.

152. And now I come back to this same city where we are
today, New York City. I did not want to repeat this, but I
am constrained to repeat what the slogans were in 1947 and
in 1948: “Give a dollar to kill an Arab”. That is freedom of
information too. But we do not mind. They still say that
after nineteen years. I do not glory in adducing this because
it saddens me. And if I were to see a Zionist in the street,
threatened with a bullet, I would forget that he is a Zionist.
He is a human being. We Arabs are noted for that. We have’
many faults, but we would throw ourselves forward to save
a man who may be shot with a bullet, We do not act like
those peopl in Queens when someone was murdered or
raped and th9 rty-seven people saw it and did not dare to do
anything. I do not blame them, because they were alienated
from society. There is no more institution of the family.
Everybody lives for himself, for his business, for his job.
The job, the job; business; money. One does not live by
bread alone, Nobody lives by bread alone.

144. What a new world! What do the Western Powers
want-peace? There are all kinds of peace. I heard my

153. If we were animals, it would be better, because
animals are controlled by wisdom, which is inherent in their

142. Why did we have the United Nations in the United
States? The Soviets wanted a platform because they were
surrounded; they are Communists; they are the monsters of
the past, so they wanted to prove they are human. That was
one of the purposes of this Organization.

15

instincts. We men have perverted our instincts. We cannot
live by bread alone. If there were no religion, or a code of
ethics instea$ of religion, or humanitarianism,
we would
devour one another in no time. And we are doing it every
day, because the moral values have passed out of our lives. I
do not wish to take up the Bible again, lest I am tempted to
read more of it,

there? And still some people say: the Zionists should have
Palestine because God saw fit to reveal Himself throu&
their Prophets in the Holy Land. All right. Their Prophets
are our Prophets too. And then we have additional
Prophets. Jesus was a Prophet. And them Mohammed was a
Prophet. They all came from the area. We did not say that
Islam as such should have Palestine-nor the Christians. The
European Christians tried to wrest the Holy Sepulchre
during the Crusades. Where are they now, the Crusaders?
Where are their castles, their bastions? Tourists go and look
at them.

154. Now, our Western friends, either overtly or covertly-and I have a great deal of respect for my good friend,
Ambassador Goldberg, because he is overt, but many of
them are covert-are engineering a sort of peace, the peace
they want to impose on the Arab world. And they upbraid
our good friend Mr. Fedorenko for being sinister in tabling
a draft resolution that they claim will perpetuate war. They
forget that the Soviet Union has opted for coexistence.
They seem to have forgotten that. Both great Powers
worked out coexistence when Mr. Khrushchev came to this
country. Why? To fish in troubled water? Why should
they? Either the Americans or the Russians, why should
they fish in our water? Anyway, our water is scarce; we
have no water.

159. We are very tenacious, we Arabs and, mind you, the
Jews of the area are very tenacious. Otherwise they would
not have remained Jews till today. In spite of aI the
adversities that the people of the area have suffered, we are
still tenacious. More tenacious, but may not survive the
atom bomb. If anyone of you here lose it, then that is the
end of mankind.
160. Did God give a title deed to anybody? Who had the
power of attorney
from God? Mr. Balfour and
Mr, Truman? Where is the power of attorney-procuratiorl,
in French. Where is the power of attorney? Is it in the
hands of the Zionists? In the West where they have
libraries for documents? Where is the power of attorney,
the title deed? No, my dear friends, God does not turn title
deeds over to any people, nor does He give them any power
of attorney. Otherwise, He would be a discriminatory God.
He would not be God; He would be an artificial God. It is a
hoax to say that God gave them the land. Whom do they
think they are fooling? They are fooling themselves. Can
such things still be put over in the twentieth century?
“What God gave them this land? ”

155. It is aggression. It was terrorism. It was injustice
perpetrated on the people of Palestine regardless of whether
ihey were Arab or heathen or religious, or whatever they
happened to be. These people were the indigenous people of
Palestine, and many of them were Jews, no doubt; many’of
them were Christians. Or they had been Jews and perhaps
they were converted into Islam. My own family is a very
old family. More than half of them are Moslems; a third of
them are Christians. It does not mean that we are
ethnologically different, the Moslems from the Christians;
we are the people of the area, with the same culture. The
European Zionists robbed the natives of their land, of their
homes, 80 per cent of it.

161. What did David say in the Psalms? If my memory
does not falter, David, who is one of our Prophets too, said:
“The earth is the Lord’s, and the fullness thereof.” It is the
Lord’s, the Creator’s. The earth does not belong to one
faction, one creed, one group; the earth is the Lord’s, and
the fullness thereof. It is not for the Jew or the Moslem or
the Hindu or the Buddhist. We are all ephemeral. Today we
are here, tomorrow we are not here. “The earth is the
Lord’s, and the fullness thereof.”

156. Why? Because Jews suffered. Who are they that
suffered? They are the Jews. Jews? What Jews? Many
Jews who had suffered did not survive. Many of them
unfortunately, were killed by that tyrant, Hitler, but as I
had mentioned before, there were other millions that were
aIso massacred: millions of German civilians, millions of
Europeans. Of course, there should have been humanity;
there should have been something to rehabilitate the Jews
who survived. We are all for it. But at whose expense? At
the expense of the indigenous people of Palestine.

162. The mighty Western Powers want to create and
uphold peace. With what? With justice? Whom do they
think they are fooling? Themselves.

157. Why? Why did not Mr, Truman open Kansas, or why
did not our friends of the British Commonwealth open
Australia for the Zionists? No. Because Palestine was the
habitat at one time of the Kingdom of Judea. All right.
Then came the Persians, the Pharaohs of Egypt and others.
Everybody passed through Palestine. There were the
Romans too. Religiously, as I stated the other day, it is the
Holy Land of all the three major religions. Do w.e want to
talk logic and common sense?

163. Now I go back to those refugees whom my friend
Ambassador El-Farra mentioned. I do not know how he
could speak about them. If I were in his place I could not
even open my mouth to speak. They are his people, his own
people, his family. But we believe in God, and God gives
him strength to fight ‘for justice, for peace with justice.
164. The Zionists gave notice in advance that they would
by-pass the United Nations of which they are a Member.
They should never have been a Member. They are an
artificial Member. You were in Denmark, Mr. President, and
you were then much younger than today; but I witnessed
all this tragedy here in the United Nations-their success,
and how the Zionists carved out a country for themselves in
Palestine. The heads of three States were contacted. A

158. Or, as Mrs. Roosevelt used to tell me: The Zionists
are there to stay. Why? I asked her. Because they suffered
a lot. Oh, you should make some sort of an arrangement
with them. But we cannot make any arrangement at the
expense of the Palestinians, I said. You cannot make
arrangements. What about the indigenous people living
16

cardinal of Christianity was acting at their behest in certain
countries which 1 do not have to mention. These Zionists
MOW the tricks of the game. They have the media of
information. They have the money and they know how to
use it. They did not have the votes. I do not want to
embarrass any country, but a friend of mine who is today
the president of an Asian university had to quit becausehis
&ief of state told him, “Reverse your stand in the General
,&sembly”, with reference to his speech, which wasagainst
be partition. I have, in the archives of Saudi Arabia, a note
from another delegate, this time an African. Said hc: “I am
sorry, but last-minute instructions have come from my
Government to reverse my stand, and I have to vote against
you”. I translated this to none other than Prince Faisal,
who is the present King. And in Washington a good
American friend of mine told me that they tried to pay
aother delegate $8,000 for his vote. I will produce that
man here in the Security Council, if you want him, and he
will put his hand and swear on the Bible-because he
happens to be a Christian-and he will swear to this. I do
not want to embarrass him, but if you ask me to do so, I
will bring him here.

Mr. Goldberg who is not here; but you are now the
representative.
170. “Give me liberty or give me death”-every American
knows that Patrick Henry said that. In Virginia I saw the
plaque: “Give me liberty or give me death.” This is your
motto. Why should we Arabs act differently? .“Give me
life, but take away my liberty”-what
kind of life is that?
Is that what they want us to do, the reverse of your
motto? No, sir, we are all human. You are all good fellows,
I know, but you are the pawns of the politicians. All of
you, you are the pawns of the politicians. We do not want
the peace of the grave, we do not want peace with injustice.
No, the Arab people will not die unless, as I said, there is a
holocaust.
171. We are being counselled by certain Powers to be
reasonable and pragmatic; I know that this is a Greek word.
The first one who used it in the psychological sense was
another American, William James, the father of pragmatism. Pragmatic in what? In the life of people, or
pragmatic in business? We do not want that pragmatism,
Everything will be dissolved if we are pragmatic.

165. This is how the Zionists from Western Europe
created their artificial State in our midst.

172. I could speak on and on and on on this subject;1 have
been speaking on it for forty years, twenty years inside the
United Nations and twenty years before that. They say
“Why does not Baroody give up? He is too old.” One of
the cables I received said, after cursing me, “Your ideas and
you Iook senile”. I do not know how senile I look. He no
doubt was a Zionist who said this. I forgave him because he
had been brainwashed, to have written to me in this way. I
am not senile. But that shows how they inculcate the
American politicians. But the American politicians yield in
order to catch the voters.

166. And we should have peace; but they served notice in
advance, the Zionists, that they would by-pass the United
Nations and exact their pound of flesh in talks with the
Arabs. But no Arab dares to talk with them unless he is a
puppet and the puppets will be dealt with appropriately. I
will be sorry for them as human beings, because nobody
should kill anybody else in this world. Thirteen Arab
leaders were shot like birds, on the rumour that they were
going to talk with Israel, during the last two decades.

173. As regards the Western Powers, I have just come from
Europe and I saw the mood there. I should not be unfair to
the United States. But the people of Western Europeamongst them Jews, friends of mine-told me “Why should
the intransigent Zionists do this to us? ” The American
people have some of the best ideals, otherwise they would
not have created such a great country. But watch out. I will
not name them; I do not wish to call them by name. I said,
“Let these politicians wash their mouths before they speak
about the Arabs because the Arabs might get dirty from
their foul mouths”. There is a systematic campaign against
us, but I pity them. They do not know what they do. They
would sell their souls for a pittance so that they might
perpetuate themselves in power. Greatness is an attribute of
God, not of human beings.

167. So then, let us not mislead ourselves here in the
United Nations by saying that any talks will solve the
problem. I wish they would, but I have said that the
injustice perpetrated against the Arab world and the
indigenous people of Palestine rules out any arrangements
that may be concocted behind the scenesthrough pressures
and negotiations. Any such arrangement, I must warn you,
will be abortive because of the temper of the Arab people,
who are no less resilient than the British. When Dunkirk
fell, Mr. Churchill did not say, “We have lost the war”; he
promised his people blood, sweat and tears. When Napoleon
was at the gates of Moscow, and later when Hitler repeated
it, the Russians did not give up. Why? Were they fooled?
No; they were fighting for their homeland and they were
not fooled. If they had been fighting for somebody else’s
homeland they would have been fooled; but they were
fighting for the verdant isles of the United Kingdom and for
Holy Russia, and for the motherland, lest it be desecrated
by an invader who had no business being there.

174. I now come to the draft resolutions before us. I am
going to be technical for a change, having given you the
background. There are two resolutions before us, contained
in documents S/7951/Rev.2 and S179521Rev.2. The highlight of the United States draft resolution is that, in
paragraph 2, it calls for “discussions promptly thereafter
among the parties concerned, using such third-party or
United Nations assistance as they may wish, looking toward
the establishment of viable arrangements encompassing the
withdrawal and disengagement of armed personnel . . .”

168. Why should the Arabs be different? Are the A.rabs a
different breed of people, are they not human, have they
no dignity?
169. I wish Mr. Goldberg were here, because I would have
liked-Yes, I want you, Richard: to transmit all this to

[S/7952/Rev.2].

4 Mr. Richard F. Pedersen, Deputy Permanent Representative on
the Security Council.

175. The highlight of this operative paragraph is that
discussions should be conducted through third parties in
.7

order, as Ambassador Goldberg explained, to attain or
achieve a lasting peace. If after everything I have told you
you still believe that there will be lasting peace, then I have
wasted my breath and your time. I told you that this would
be academic after all. The purpose is noble. In practice it is
like trying to treat an absess in the liver with aspirin. There
will be a little peace. But what is time for the Arabs, with
their six thousand years of history. Then there will be
another outbreak of hostilities. Why? I do not have to go
into the whole panorama before you again today. All Arabs
are explicit about their stand. Therefore, I appeal to my
United States friends and colleagues to forget about such a
paragraph; it is not feasible. It is wishful thinking inasmuch
as its purpose is noble for creating peace.

into a holocaust, a third world war. That is why our good
friend from the Soviet Union has been treading softly. He
knows that his country might be involved in a confrontation if he went beyond a certain limit.
180. Then we come to the other draft resolution, and I am
talking technically. I will tell you what goes on behind the
scenes, although you know much of it; but I know a little
too. There is a lot of lobbying around here in the United
Nations not to obtain nine votes for the Soviet draft
resolution. I am telling you exactly what is going on,
because I have my channels of information, having lived
here long enough. If the Soviet draft resolution does not get
nine votes, then it fails. Also the United States draft
resolution is bound to fail. Therefore, what they are saying
now is that the two super Powers do not want to have a
confrontation on account of the Arabs and Zionists,
thereby leading to a great war. “To heck with them both; a
plague on both their heads. Let us shift this question
perhaps to a special session of the General Assembly”-under whatever chapter or paragraph.

176. But what kind of peace? Temporary peace in the
light of what Mr. Ben-Gurion, the patriarch of Zionism,
mentioned. I quote from the New York Post of 12 June
1967: “Former Premier David Ben-Gurion urged the Jews
to resettle . . .“. He should have said the Zionists, because
there are many Jews who are not Zionists. The Jews are
everywhere; they are human beings having loyalty to the
countries in which they live. I have no doubt that there are
innumerable loyal American citizens of the Jewish faith.
Their loyalty is to America, and they do not have a dual
loyalty, as Mr. Ben-Gurion wants them to have.

181. Another special session. We know about peacekeeping operations. We know about the special session on
South West Africa and its results: zero, zero-an Arabic
invention. At least there was a good Arabic invention,
without which the computers of the Western Powers would
not be able to function. Zero. As we witnessed, it waszero.
I warned them during the Assembly’s twenty-first regular
session, “do not have a special session”. As Clemenceau
said, “If you want to kill any item, constitute a committee
and refer the item to it”. That special session wasjust such
a kind of committee. The results were zero.

177. There are many Jews in Russia; they forget that they
are Jews. Their religion is between them and their God.
There are atheists in Russia. That is their privilege. There
are those of the Orthodox Church and that is their
privilege. But they are loyal citizens of their country. Let
nobody sell us the hoax that the Russians persecute the
Jews.

182: Now if the two major Powers do not want to have a
confrontation, in so far as the Zionists are concerned and
the Arabs are concerned, the results will be zero. But the
great Powers will still go on-“this will allay the Arabs; and
the difficulties will be solved by time and time heals
everything”. Many such proverbs are misleading. Time will
not heal. This is a rubric, a slogan which may or may not be
true. Time heals if it is something on the surface and you
can use ointment. I am again using Mr. Goldberg’s similes
and analogies. But how can you heal cancer with time?
“Time will heal everything.” People are very simple-minded
the whole world over. That may be fortunate, because if
they were not there would perhaps be a lot more
commotion in the world. “Time will heal everything. It is
hoped Arabs will tell the Zionists, ‘make some concep
sions’.” And Zionists will make some concessions, no
doubt, with largesse, and then “time will heal everything in
the United Nations”. The United Nations had better fold
up if it were to come to that, because it cannot take
another setback like it has been taking-war in the Far East,
the threat of war in the Middle East, South West Africa still
under the thumb of imperialism. What for?

178. I know about the Russian revolution as I was a
contemporary of that revolution. Many Jew.swere among
the architects of the Russian revolution. Have the New
York Zionists forgotten this fact? The Jews were the pillars
of reform in Russia. The American Jew is, ashe should be,
loyal to America. But Mr. Ben-Gurion wants him to have a
dual nationality: “Make your money in America but send it
to us and have your heart in Israel”. All this does not
preclude one co-religionist from having deep feelings for his
co-religionist. I do not say that they should not, whether
they are Jews, Christians, Moslems, Buddhists, Hindus, or
whatever religion they belong to.
179. The article in the New York Post continued:
“Former Premier David Ben-Gurion urged the Jews to
resettle the Old City of Jerusalem immediately as well as
some other communities captured from Jordan”. What the
patriarch of Zionism said is tantamount to: “Annex the
land and hoist the Zionist emblem not only over Jerusalem
but also over the places of worship.” The Moslems and the
Christians should come like sheep to the Church of the
Holy Sepulchre and to the Mosque of Omar by suffrance,
asking permission to go and worship their God. Why?
Because Zionists have the keys, the figurative keys, to
heaven, it seems, and to hell. The Zionists can open the
gates of hetl when they want to, and open the gates of
heaven when they want to. When I say they can open the
gates of hell when they want to it is because that through
their influence I am sure that they would plunge the world

183. I am amongst the most loyal to the United Nations. I
have served its causes and many a time I forgot my
nationality when it came to the United Nations. I thought
it would transcend the balance of power and the political
arrangements between States. But it is following the same
pattern as the League of Nations, which I observed in my
early days.
18

-

184. Whom arc we fooling ? Are we fooling ourselves or
just public opinion? Public opinion in the Arab world
cannot be fooled any more. And I want to sound a warning
to none other than Jew and Gentile, if I may use the terms.
We Arabs do not want the Jews to be hurt. As I said during
my last intervention, leave us alone. Leave us alone. We
have not hurt you; we have not hurt Europe nor have we
hurt America. Leave us alone. For heaven’s sake, leave us
aIone. But they do not leave us alone. If they do not leave
us alone, we will think of “liberty or death”. We will opt
for liberty.

Zionists are responsible for Hitler-their
policy at the
Conference of Versailles”. I pricked up my ears, He said,
“You know, they have always been after the establishment
of that national State”-he said that homeland or something like that, I am paraphrasing-“in Palestine. And you
know, I am an oriental Jew. They have spoiled it for us
because Germany, which was pro-Jewish during the Kaiser’s
days, has become vehemently anti-Jewish”. I said, “Why is
Hitler like this? ” He said, “Those Zionists manipulated
foreign currencies in the twenties when it was forbidden to
the German to deal in foreign currencies. Their number is
4 per cent of the Berlin population. They have come to
own and control 56 per cent of the property”. I said, “Isn’t
that an exaggeration? ” He said, “It may be an exaggeration, but a lot of property passed into their hands. This is
one of the factors”, he said. Then I asked: “Why did you
come here, you are not a European Jew? ” He said, “Well,
they started to put emblems on my door. I was going to
marry a German girl. I am not very religious, but I am a
Jew. So I thought I had better leave before the calamity”.
And he was right.

185. We have no grudge against the Jew as such. In fact,
the Jew prospered in our midst throughout our history. The
Jew was an Arab. I am talking of the Sephardic Jew; I am
talking of the Oriental Jew. They were our brothers and
they still are our brothers. But this is another breed. They
are not Jews in the real sense of the word, the Zionists,
because if they were Jews they would do as Micah said and
as Isaiah said. Micah said, “Walk humbly with thy Lord”,
not with the arrogance that I am afraid is contaminating us
as human beings in our part of the world. They are entitled
to live. Let us open the gates of emigration simultaneously
so that any Zionist who thinks he has no future amongst
the hundred million Arabs may leave and go back to where
he came from. There are so many opportunities in Europe.
Why should they always be living under the sword of
Damocles, so to speak. Let us open the doors of immigration simultaneously for the people who owned the land,
and water will seek its own level. There will be no trouble
between the Jews and Arabs if those who remain there are
ethnically and culturally our brothers. Not the intransigent
Western Zionist, but the real Jew, the Jew who has the
same God as the Christians and the Moslems, not only in
name, but in practice. There are many Jews who really walk
humbly with their God. There are Jewish friends of mine all
over, in the East and in the West. We are not against the
Jews. The Zionists are against the Jews. Before I bring this
intervention to an end, I will give you a concrete example.

188. Mr. Ben-Gurion, the same Mr. Ben-Gurion, says-and
he will leave a legacy behind him-that Israel should be the
place for the in-gathering of the Jews. Will the Jews of New
York City leave the skyscrapers they have built, to go to
Israel? He wants them so that they may be locked in war
with the Arabs. Never mind, Mr. Ben-Gurion’s prophecy
should be fulfilled. The idea of Herzl was to solve the
Jewish problem, because of the persecution of Jews, by
creating a home in Palestine-that was his idea. But there
are, I believe, 16 million Jews in the world. How does
Mr. Ben-Gurion, or anyone of his persuasion, expect to
squeeze 16 million into Palestine, who would not want to
leave the Western countries or the Eastern countries, where
they are loyal citizens?
189. But I sound a warning, because I feel sorry for the
Jews. I have always felt sorry for the Jews who were
persecuted, because they were human beings like you and
I-but I also feel sorry because they will one day become
the scapegoat-not in Christian countries as such, because
the Christians have forgotten a lot of their religion. When
anything goes wrong in those Christian count,ries, they will
blame the poor Jew; they will say, ‘LYou were at the root of
our trouble”, although he may have been totally innocent.
This is the warning I should like to sound. It may take long,
but it happened in Germany, it may happen once again.
When people have reverses, they look for a scapegoat and
the Jews have been chosen as scapegoats throughout
history, unfortunately so, deplorably so. We do not want
the Jews to be hurt, But what is the picture? It is grim
indeed, And Zionists are still hurting us.

186. During the 1930’s, I was in the country of my good
friend, Lord Caradon, in London. I was having tea in the
Savoy Hotel at 5 o’clock, and I heard two persons
conversing in Arabic. I turned around and they noticed that
probably I was an Arab. They smiled and we began talking.
One of them was an orange exporter from Jaffa, a Christian
by the name of Khouri, and the other was a Jew from
Baghdad by the name of Elias. Mr. Khouri had a business
appointment and had to leave. Mr. Elias brought his cup of
tea to my table so we could have our tea together. That was
in 1937, thirty years ago. I said to him, “You must be from
Iraq, aren’t you? ” He said, “You knew from that mark on
my face.” Many Iraqis have a scar on their face caused by a
parasite. He said, “Yes, I am from Iraq.” I could also tell
from the accent. He was talking in Arabic, and not in
Hebrew, He was a Jew. I said, “Tell me about yourself, I
would like to be briefed.” So he said, “I lived in Germany
before.” I asked “What brought you here? I guess it was
Hitler’s policy.” He said, “Yes, Hitler’s policy brought me
here.”

190. Having made myself amply clear, it is not so much
out of conviction, but because I have studied this question
throughout more than four decades. Otherwise I would
have failed in getting my message across not only to the
Security Council, but to anyone who will study what I said.
If everything goes differently, and if there will be no
suffering, no one will be happier than I. But if things go the
way I have described them-and the portents are on the
wall-at least I would have had the satisfaction tiefore I
Ieave this earth, that I have spoken with honesty and I have

187. I said, “I would like to know what is happening
inside Germany, and why is Hitler so intransigent? ” He
replied, “Look, I am a Jew myself, but to- a large extent the
19

spoken sincerely, and before I die, my conscience will be at
rest, that I meant not to hurt either in thought or by design
our Jewish brothers, but that in humanity I have attempted
and endeavoured to warn the Zionists, who are in humanity
also brothers of us all, that they have erred and it.is better
that they should not persist in a dream which they have
created themsdves, a dream which if it has not been
fulfilled as yet, will not only fail but may plunge the world
into a third world war, because of their influence in many
capitals of the Western world.

created there cities, towns, villages, farms, new forms of
society, a national spirit and a true patriotism which
expresses itself in service and in sacrifice. These have
elicited the admiration of multitudes of people throughout
the world, in Africa, in Asia, in the Americas, in Europe,
from all walks of life who see in Zionism and who see in
Israel the fulfilment of a divine prophecy and a sublime
historical reparation.
197. But I do wish to state clearly and unreservedly my
utter and total rejection of the charges which have been
levelled against my country. They bear no relation to the
truth. They are wilful and deliberate distortions of facts
which have been in the hands of the Security Council for
the past two weeks, and, indeed, for the past nineteen
years.

191. I beg you, Mr. President, to forgive me for having
taken so much time in unfolding the facts as I see them.
But I should like you to recall, and the Secretary-General
knows, that Saudi Arabia has never sought a seat in this
Council throughout twenty years, although we are a
signatory to the Charter, nor have we claimed to tell the
international community what it should do in social or
economic affairs, having never sought a seat in any Council
of the United Nations. We kept ourselves as people who
would like to learn rather than to be didactic as many of
the major Powers seem to be. We are still learning. But we
do not have to learn on this question, What I have told you
here comes not out of my mind but from the bottom of my
heart and all my thoughts are imbued with the prayer that
there shall be peace with justice in the world.
192. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

198. Let us look again at the events which preceded the
outbreak of fighting on 5 June. On 18 May, the Government of the United Arab Republic demanded the eviction
of the United Nations Emergency Force which was deployed along the Gaza Strip and the Sinai desert and at
Sharm el Sheikh at the entrance to the Gulf of Aqaba, and
on that day UNEF ceased to exist. Was this an act which
promoted peace? Was this an act which demonstrated
peaceful intent? It was not; it was preparation for
aggression. The Emergency Force had to be gotten out of
the way so that the aggression on Israel could be prepared
and mounted.

I call on the representative of

193. Mr. KIDRON (Israel): Mr. President, I thank you for
this opportunity that you have given me to present my
Government’s case to the Security Council. At the outset, I
should like to explain why I am here and not Ambassador
Rafael, who is the Permanent Representative of Israel in the
United Nations. The reason is that Ambassador Rafael was
called to Jerusalem for a few days of consultation and I am
taking over in his place until he returns. I hope that that
will be by the end of this week.

199. On 23 May, the United Arab Republic declared that
the Strait of Tiran would be closed to Israel shipping and to
ships of other nations carrying what were described as
strategic goods, that is to say, anything which the United
Arab Republic chose to define as strategic goods, to Israel’s
southernmost port of Eilat. Was this act of blockade a
peaceful act? Did this re-imposition of the blockade
demonstrate peaceful intent? It did not. This was a clear
act of hostility and the exercise of an internationally
rejected claim to belligerency. A blockade is a classical act
of war.

194. After a respite of about one and a half days, the
verbal assault on Israel has been resumed. Once more my
delegation is faced with a campaign of vilification, in
intemperate language, and of gross misrepresentation of its
motives and of its actions. A veritable edifice of prevarication has been built up designed to put Israel in the dock
and to depict her as an aggressor.

200. During this time, that is, the last week of May, Egypt
started a massive build-up of forces in the Sinai desert.
Some 80,000 men were assembled, with hundreds of assault
aircraft, a thousand tanks. These huge forces were deployed
in an offensive position along the Sinai frontier with Israel,
along the Gaza Strip and at the approaches to Eilat. The
deployment of these forces was accompanied by a mounting crescendo of warlike propaganda from Cairo. A holy
war was proclaimed by the religious’ authorities in the
Egyptian capital, and the Egyptian people were urged to
march forward in a jehad to destroy Israel. The Egyptian
President naturally was foremost in inciting his people for
the coming war. This is what he said before the Central
Council of Arab Trade Unions on 26 May 1967:

195. I do not wish to employ the same language or to
tread the same paths of calumny, vituperation and distortion along which certain speakers have attempted to drag
this Council. Such as, for example, this vile libel over the
Liberty tragedy, a dreadful error of war conditions for
which my Government has expressed its sincere and
heartfelt regret to the United States Government, or the
obscene fulminations-and,
I repeat, obscene fuhuinations-from the representative of Saudi Arabia about the
Jews and about Zionism,

“The Arab people want to fight. We have been waiting
for the suitable day when we shall be completely ready,
since if we enter a battle with Israel we should be
confident of victory and should take strong measures. We
do not speak idly. We have lately felt that our strength is
sufficient and that if we enter into battle with Israel we
shall, with God’s help, be victorious. Therefore, we have

196. I am a Jew; I am a Zionist. It is a privilege to be a
Jew; it is a privilege to be a Zionist. It is a source of pride to
be a Jew; it is a source of pride to be a Zionist. Zionism is
the finest expression of the national liberation of the people.
It has restored an ancient nation to its ancestral home. It has
20

now decided to take real steps. The battle will be a
full-scale one, and our basic aim will be to destroy Israel.”

died of asphyxiation. Delayed by an air raid, the ICRC
doctors on arrival at the site immediately gave treatment
to some of the wounded and collected various indications
pointing to the useof poison gas.

201. What were we in Israel and what was the Security
Council expected to make of these words? A call for peace,
or a call for war?

“Extremely disturbed and concerned by these methods
of warfare, which are absolutely forbidden by codified
international and customary law, the International Cornmittee at once communicated its delegates’ report to all
authorities concerned with the Yemen conflict, requesting them to take the solemn engagement not to
resort in any circumstance whatsoever to the use of
asphyxiating gases or any other similar toxic substances.”

202. On 30 May, President Nasser signed a military
agreement with King Hussein of Jordan, and Jordan began
to mobilze. On 4 June, a similar agreement was signed with
Iraq, and Iraqi detachments began arriving in Jordan and in
Egypt. Was this evidence of peaceful intent? Were these
agreements in keeping with the Charter of the United
Nations? Were these aggressive movements of troops in
accordance with solemn agreements which Egypt and
Jordan had entered into with Israel in 1949 with the object
of preventing all hostile acts and serving as a transition to
permanent peace? They were clear evidence of a preparation for aggression.

It is surely no wonder that the Israel Government was
compelled to seek gas masks; it was the same enemy.
207. No amount of casuistry, no heights of vehemence, no
shrillness, no vituperation can alter the truths which I have
just uttered. No distortions can transform this victim into
an aggressor.

203. While these military moves were going on in Egypt,
Jordan and Iraq, Syria had also mobilized its forces to the
last man, and 50,000 troops were poised aggressively on the
heights which overlook Israel. We were surrounded. The
armed ring was closed. All that the Arab forces were
waiting for was the signal to start.

208. And if one requires more evidence, it was supplied
this morning, in The New York Times, which has been
quoted so often in the Council during the past two weeks,
in a story datelined Beirut, 12 June. This is the quotation:
“A military analysis of the war appearing in the
Damascus newspaper AZ Thawra, the Government organ,
asserted that the Arab forces should have concentrated
their offensive against Israel on the Jordanian front while
Syria and Eqyptian troops used defensive tactics to tie
down Israel forces.
“. I

204. Tl1a.t signal was given on 5 June, when Egyptian
planes in accordance with the plans contained in battle
order 6/67 of Air Force and Air Defence Headquarters of
the Eastern Area in Sinai, dated 26 May 1967, took off for
their assigned targets in Israel, while at the same time an
artillery barrage on Israel farming villages was opened from
the Gaza Strip. Shortly afterwards, Jordan guns sited amid
the holy places of the Holy City of Jerusalem started
shelling the Israel capital, causing heavy casualties, and the
Syrian artillery joined the devil’s chorus in the north. The
aggression had begun.

“The results of the battle, it added, showed the
importance of the Syrian strategy of a war of guerrillas
inside Israel as well as orthodox warfare from outside. It
suggested that the ‘entire Arab homeland should turn into
a well-trained barracks as soon as possible’ to continue
the guerrilla strategy.”

205. This is the record; this is what happened. Israel was
designated to be the helpless victim of a massive assault. In
accordance with its rights under Article 51 of the United
Nations Charter, the victim defended itself, alone and
successfully.

209. But the record goes even further back than that; it
goes back eighteen years, nearly nineteen years, to when
the State of Israel was founded. Nineteen years ago, the
Arab States declared war on the State of Israel, which had
been established in accordance with a resolution of the
General Assembly [.Z81 @I)]. This was how the Secretary
General of the Arab League at that time, Azzam Pasha, put
it on 14 May 1948: “The Arab States”-he said-“will
conduct a war of extermination and a momentous massacre
which will be spoken of like the Mongolian massacres and
the Crusades.” In pursuance of that the armies of six Arab
States-Egypt,
JordTn, Iraq, Syria, Saudi Arabia, and
Lebanon-marched into the new State of Israel in order to
accomplish its extinction at birth.

206. Here I want to interpolate a comment on a remark
by the Soviet representative, who blamed Israel and
condemned her for seeking gas masks in Germany. This was
evidence to him that Israel was not alone. There wasevery
reason for the Government of Israel to seek gas masks.
Memories are not short, and for the Council’s information I
should like to put in the record a statement made by the
International Committee of the Red Cross on 2 November
1966 in Geneva on the question of the use of poison gas.
This is the statement:
“The International Committee of the Red Cross has
again received from its delegates in the Yemen reports of
bombing by toxic gas. A medical team led by the head of
the International Red Cross Mission in Yemen went on
May 15 and 16 to a village in the northern part of the
country to attempt to give aid to the victims of bombing
which had taken place some days previously and as the
result of which, according to survivors, many victims had

210. The Secretary-General of the United Nations at the
time, Mr. Trygve Lie; described that as an aggression: the
first armed aggression ever to have taken place in the
history of the United Nations.
211. A distinguished predecessor of the representative of
the Soviet Union, Mr. Gromyko, characterized it as a threat
21

to peace and as military operations aimed at suppression of
the national liberation movement in Palestine. His colleagues
Mr. Tsarapkin and Mr. Manuilsky were equally explicit in
their condemnation of that Arab aggression.

218. And what does the Armistice Agreement say? The
wording is more or less identical in all four General Armistice
Agreements:

‘;lrticle I:
“With a view to promoting the return to permanent
peace in Palestine and in recognition of the importance in
this regard of mutual assurances concerning the future
military operations of the Parties, the following principles, which shall be fully observed by both Parties
during the armistice, are hereby affirmed:”

212. This is the same Israel; these are the same Arab
States. The aggression is also the same. For nineteen years
now, Israel has been compelled to live in a state of siege.
There is not a border which is not crackled with fire; there
is hardly a village or a town in the country without a
bereaved family and which has not seen the fruits of
agonizing toil to make the land fruitful and prosperous
destroyed in an instant by the guns and the bombs of Egypt
and Jordan and Syria. Not a day has passed without a
broadcast threat to our very existence.

One of those principles is that:
“No aggressive action by the armed forces-land, sea, or
air-of either Party shall be undertaken, planned or
threatened against the people or the armed forces of the
other;“.

2 13. This from President Nasser of Egypt: ‘<We will act to
realize Egypt’s solidarity and the closing of the ranks that
will eventually put an end to Israel. We will liquidate her.”

Another principle is as follows:
“The right of each Party to its security and freedom
from fear of attack by the armed forces of the other shall
be fully respected.”

214. This from President Al-Atassi of Syria: “We raise the
slogan of the people’s liberation war. We want total war
with no limits, a war which will destroy the Zionist base.”

And yet another:
“No element of the land, sea or air military or
para-military forces of either Party, including non-regular
forces, shall commit any warlike or hostile act . +.“.

215. This from Jordan: “Drive Israel out of Gaza by force,
and don’t stop at Gaza, but liberate all of Palestine, for
world opinion is with us. Throughout the ages, the Jews
have sought peace and security, and they thought that
Israel would give them these. But Israel itself will drown in
the sea; for Israel there is neither security nor peace.”

And finally:
“This Agreement, having been negotiated and concluded in pursuance of the resolution of the Security
Council of 16 November 1948 (62 (1948)] calling for the
establishment of an armistice in order to eliminate the
threat to the peace in Palestine and to facilitate the
transition from the present truce to permanent peace in
Palestine, . . .“.

2 16. We have been besieged, blockaded,
attacked,
threatened; our destruction has been openly proclaimed.
Every weapon, political, diplomatic, economic and military,
has been used against us for nineteen years. And all this has
taken place under cover of the Charter of the United
Nations and of the General Armistice Agreements, and with
impunity.

219. Are these obligations, are these commitments, are
these undertakings, to which the Arab States are party, in
conformity with their actions, with their proclamations,
and with their deeds during the past nineteen years? Is the
belligerence, openly proclaimed, the belligerence which is
the official doctrine of the United Arab Republic and the
other Arab States-the belligerence which is the root of all
the crisis in our area-is that belligerence compatible with
the Charter of the United Nations and the obligations of
the Arab States?

217. What do those documents say, and what are the
obligations applying equally to Israel and the Arab States
which derive from them? Here is the Charter of ,the United
Nations, Article 2:
“I. The Organization is based on the principle of the
sovereign equality of all its Members.

220. I should now like to say a few words about the
present situation. The cease-fire called by the Security
Council in its resolutions is in full effect with the United
Arab Republic, with Jordan, and with Syria; and my
authorities are co-operating fully with the Chief of Staff of
the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization,
General Bull, in order to ensure this. However, there is a
point about the cease-fire which has not, my delegation
feels, had sufficient emphasis: the Governments of Algeria,
Iraq, and Yemen have openly proclaimed their intention to
pursue belligerence against Israel, in brazen defiance of
Security Council resolutions, and in open violation of the
Charter of the United Nations. Kuwait has even gone SOfar
as to inform the Security Council of its determination not
to observe the Council’s decisions. Other Arab Governments, which declared themselves in a state of war with

“2. All Members, in order to ensure to all of them the
rights and benefits resulting from membership, shall fulfil
in good faith the obligations assumed by them in
accordance with the present Charter.
“3. All Members shall settle their international disputes
by peaceful means in such a manner that international
peace and security, and justice, are not endangered.
“4. All Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any
State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the
Purposes of the United Nations.”
22

226. The situation which obtains now provides the Security Council, the United Nations, the international
community, with an historic opportunity to put an end to
nineteen years of belligerence, of incitement, of aggression,
and to achieve peace, security and stability in the Middle
East. My Foreign Minister, in his address to the Council on
6 June [1348th meeting], touched on some of the ideas
which we feel might be taken into consideration to achieve
this. They include a recognition by the Arab States that
Israel exists and has a right to exist; that Israel is as much a
part of the Middle East as they themselves are. They
include the establishment of direct, sovereign relationships
between Israel and the Arab States. They include the
peaceful settlement of disputes; freedom of passage through
international waterways; that the security, the integrity and
the independence of all States in the Middle East shall be
assured. We are pleased to note that many of these concepts
are reflected in the constructive draft resolution presented
by the United States delegation a few days ago
[S/7952/Rev.Z].

lsrael,have not, up to now, announced their return to the
respectof their solemn obligations under the Charter.

221, It is important to note that all these Governments
haveactively participated in the aggressivewar against Israel
by actual military operations, on land and in the air, by the
&Patch of troops and materiel to the zone of the fighting,
aadby the deployment of ground and air forces in adjacent
areas. Until all Governments concerned communicate
officially that they have relinquished belligerence and have
implemented the cessation of all military activities in the
ares,according to the resolutions of the Security Council, it
is obviousthat the cease-fire cannot be regarded as fully in
effect.
222. Upon the cessation of hostilities, the Government of
Israel adopted prompt measures for the restoration of
formal civilian life in the area under its control. The
Government of Israel is concerned to ensure the safety and
welfareof inhabitants in these areas and strict regulations
havebeen issued and are being implemented to that end.
Electricity, water and health services have been resumed,
despitegreat difficulty. The Arab police of the Old City of
Jerusalemhave been recalled to duty and are assisting in the
maintenanceof public order.

227. However, none of these aims can be achieved under
the system which has existed up to now. This system has
given rise during the past nineteen years to three major
armed clashes. There can be no return to these dangers.
They have not promoted peace. They have served as a cover
for belligerence, in word and in deed. They have caused war
with all its tragedies. Israel does not seek war, and we never
sought war. War is a grievous and tragic burden. There is no
more cherished objective, no more ardently sought aim of
our national policy than peace with our Arab neighbours.
Peace will not be achieved by going back to the sterile
arrangements of the past. This is a great opportunity, an
historic opportunity to go forward, to achieve a stable
settlement which will benefit all the peoples of the Middle
East, Arabs and Israelis alike. We seek no more than this.

223. The actions taken by the Israel authorities in trying,
and under very difficult conditions, to restore civilian life
to normality, as far as this is possible in the present
situation, have been marked with appreciation by a
prominent resident of the Old City, Mr. Anwar Al-Khatib,
whohad been Governor of the Old City. He declared, the
day before yesterday, that the inhabitants of the Old City
and of the west bank as a whole had been astonished by the
goodbehaviour of the Israel troops and of the way in which
they had acted in their relations with the local population.
224. Moreover, urgent attention is being given to the
needs of the refugees. During the fighting there was
obviously some movement of people from one place to
another,mostly inside the west bank area. There have been
movementsin a westerly direction as well as in an easterly
direction. Some people crossed to the east bank to rejoin
their families. However, there has since taken place a
large-scalereturn movement from the east bank to the west
bank. And the Israel authorities are doing nothing to
preventthis.

228. None of this will be gained by the negative and
one-sided draft resolution just presented by the representative of the USSR. It is destructive in intent. It is designed
to put the clock back, to restore the conditions of hostility,
of belligerence, of blockade, of boycott, of armed clashes
on the borders every day, of sabotage and of murder. My
delegation respectfully expresses the hope that the Security
Council will reject it out of hand.
229. Permit me to close my remarks by repeating and by
emphasizing that our eyes and our hearts are turned to
peace. Our dearest wish, our most cherished aspiration, is
that peace shall reign in the Middle East and that all States
in the area, the Arab States and Israel, may live their lives in
amity, in concord and in constructive endeavour for the
good of all peoples,

225. 1 have been informed recently that an agreement
betweenIsrael and the United Nations Relief and Works
Agencyfor Arab Refugees is under discussion and that it is
expectedto be signed very shortly, which will provide for
the continuation of all UNRWA services. Similar arrangements are being made with international voluntary organizations engaged in caring for the refugees and civilians in
general.I am authorized to assure the Council that the
Government of Israel and all its authorities fully respect the
provisionsof the Geneva Convention of 1949 relative to the
Treatment of Prisoners of War. The Government of Israel
has established contact with the International Committee
of the Red Cross, which has a delegation in Israel now,
concerning the question of prisoners of war and their
speedy exchange. My Government hopes that the other
Partiesconcerned will act likewise so that the exchange of
Prisonerscan be implemented speedily.

230. The representatives of the Arab States have rejected
the proffered hand in the past; they are doing so in the
council today. They say they do not want peace with
Israel, that they will never make peace with Israel. They
want war. They dream of the second, the third, the fourth
round. We pray that this mood will. change, that the Arab
States will come to realize that the victories of peace are
greater than the victories of war; that the Middle East, from
which the sublime truth of the Prophets went forth
thousands of years ago to a world still in darkness, will once
23

again become a beacon of the spirit of peace, which it has
been ordained to be by history.

population transfers carried out in the most orthodox Nazi
tradition. The Council should immediately adopt the most
vigorous measures to instil in the Israel occupier a bit more
decency and a greater awareness of its responsibilities
towards its fellow-men.

231, The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Tunisia. The representative of Syria has
very kindly indicated his willingness to withdraw tern
porarily from his seat at the Council table while the
representative of Tunisia makes his intervention. I appre
ciate the gesture of the representative of Syria and I now
call on the representative of Tunisia to take a place at the
Council table and make his statement.

238. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Morocco, and I understand that the
representative of Jordan has kindly indicated his willingness
to withdraw temporarily from his seat at the Council table
while the representative of Tunisia makes his intervention, I
appreciate this gesture of the representative of Jordan and I
now call on the representative of Morocco to take a place at
the Council table and make his statement.

232. Mr. MESTIFU (Tunisia) (translated fvonz French): I
should first like to thank the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic for having generously yielded to me both his
seat and his turn to speak.

239. Mr. BENHIMA (Morocco) (translated porn Rench):
I should like to express His Majesty’s Government’s full
support for the appeal which the Tunisian representative
has just addressed to the Security Council regarding the
status of Arab populations, particularly the refugees, whose
position is internationally recognized.

233. In a letter dated 12 June 1967 to the President of the
Security Council, [S/7974], I drew his and the Council’s
attention to the extremely alarming situation in Jordan
caused by the Israel authorities, which are bringing undue
pressure to bear on the people living on the west bank of
the River Jordan to induce them to leave their homes and
cross to the other side of the river. I mentioned various
press dispatches, including one from United Press International, which, contrary to what the Israel representative
has just stated, indicated that that was a deliberate policy
of the Israel authorities.

240. My Government has instructed me to address an
appeal to the Secretary-General that all measures will be
adopted by the United Nations specialized agencies, in.
eluding WHO, FA0 and UNICEF, immediately to provide
all necessaryhumanitarian assistance to the one million new
refugees driven from their land and to the civilians forced
by the Zionist invasion to begin a new exodus, this time, to
a destination 1 do not know. This is an official and formal
request to the Secretary-General. We hope that the United
Nations will adopt these steps immediately, as they
represent the least that it can do in the present circumstances.

234. The representative of Jordan has just given us a
wealth of details on that operation, leaving no doubt as to
the occupying authorities’ actions and the intentions of the
Tel Aviv Government. The New York Times, which can
hardly be faulted for excessive sympathy towards the
Arabs, estimated that 100,000 persons have been driven out
of their land and homes.

241. It is no mere turn of phrase when I say that I listened
most attentively to the long statement the Israel representative has just delivered. Perhaps it should be conceded that
a certain personal factor influenced the presentation of the
statement and that the language we have heard during the
past few days has noticeably changed. I nevertheless believe
that the substance of the Israel representative’s statement
calls for some comment.

235. The Tunisian Government believes that the Security
Council should consider this aspect of the issue and adopt a
clear-cut resolution as quickly as possible to put an end to
these inhumane actions by the Israel aggressor. The Council
cannot stand by and do nothing about this flagrant attack
on human dignity, this premeditated attempt to undermine
and invalidate all the efforts of the international community, through the United Nations, to settle the tragic
problem of the refugees which has plagued it since the State
of Israel was established.
236. The representatives of the Tel Aviv Government
expound their love of peace here, while everything they do
and all their machinations are carefully calculated to
prevent peace from ever reigning again in the Middle East.
It is their deliberate intention to sow the seeds of violence
while they continue to brandish the olive branch in this
Council. The Western friends and protectors of the State of
Israel justify their sympathy for the Zionists by pointing to
the suffering and painful experiences European Jews
suffered at the hands ‘of the Nazis and European antiSemites. But when they are told of suffering endured by
Arabs on Arab territory or by Africans on African territory,
these same scruples, these same principles, suddenly become very flexible, even accommodating.

242. In addressing the Council for the first time since he
arrived from Geneva, he did not wish his identity to remain
a mystery. He told us that he was Jewish and that he was a
Zionist, that he was proud to be Jewish and proud to be a
Zionist. I do not believe that anyone can challenge another
person’s right to be proud that he belongs to a particular
faith. We Moslems have never questioned the value of
Judaic spiritual teachings. Since our faith was established
even after Christianity, we were not the ones who inculcated the concept of the guilt of the Jews.We were not
the ones who made the crucifixion of Jesus and the search
for his executioners a dogma of the faith. We do not believe
in the crucifixion and we did not invent the dogma of
Jewish responsibility for it. This theory of the guilt of the
Hebrew people, which has plagued it throughout its history,
was the invention of another religion. I believe that eminent
ecclesiastical authorities have discussed the issue, in terms
which I shall not dwell upon.

237. The Government of the Republic of Tunisia urges the
Security Council to demand the prohibition
of further

243. Divine will decreed that Mesopotamia would be the
cradle of the three religions and different prophets pr@
24

claimed the word of God at various times through the ages,
from this same land the Lord had designated as the
birthplace of His message. It did not matter how that
message was transmitted, each prophet supplementing the
message which came before, each time in a manner
reflecting the particular era in man’s thinking.

Poland regained its territory and reparations had been made
by Germany to the victorious Powers, I did not gather that
anyone daimed the right to a double reparation, one, for
example, as a Frenchman and the other as a Jew, Those
with a clear understanding of their rights of citizenship
were satisfied that the country of which they were citizens
had obtained the reparations which had to be made
following victory to the victims of Nazism. Consequently,
the Jews of these countries, who had already received the
necessary reparations from their Governments, did not have
to look upon themselves as an international Jewish corn
munity and claim a homeland as compensation for Hitler’s
massacre of the Jews. Neither as Jews nor as victims of
Nazism could they legitimately lay claim either legally or
morally to Palestine as a homeland for Jews and Zionism.

244. The notion that we contest the right of Judaism to
exist must therefore be discarded once and for all, No
historian can point to any pogrom iri the Arab world. The
story of the Jewish people, a sorrowful story perhaps, has
not been played out on the stage of the Arab world. The
Jews have never suffered because they were Jewish under
the Abbaside, Omeyyades or Turkish empires, or under the
Arab empire in Spain. However, on several occasions they
have been forced to flee from Europe-from Germany,
France and Spain, whence they fled the Inquisition. And it
was in the Moslem countries-which at the time possessed
vast territory and world power-that they found refuge.
There not only their lives were safe but they enjoyed a
position under which their religion continued to flourish,
their people could live according to their personal status
and their synagogues were protected. I might add, with
regard to my own country, that many Jews became
ministers and governors of large provinces and distinguished
court physicians, and that never, until Israel was carved out
of PaIestine, did a Moroccan Jew feel that he had a
homeland outside Morocco.

248. We have heard a long and very composed statement
that sought to depict the State of Israel as a peaceful force
which for the past nineteen years has constantly expressed
the desire to live in peace with its neighbours. Neighbourliness is a highly venerated concept in Arab culture. Respect
for one’s neighbour is a duty as important as respect for
one’s parents and family. But can the immigrants whose
reasons for leaving those countries I have just pointed out
be considered neighbours of the Arab world? Are they
simply the neighbours of the bordering Arab States? Are
they the neighbours of the two million refugees whom they
drove from their homes? Whose neighbours are they to
demand that they should be treated according to the
traditional values of good neighbourliness? How did Israel
come into existence? Was it created out of a desire for
peace? For nineteen years, many delegations in this Hall
have described the circumstances leading to the creation of
Israel in detail. In our culture we have a precept which says
that the dead must not be spoken of except in terms of
their good deeds. I am afraid that, as I speak of those
respdnsible for the creation of Israel, my respect for that
precept falters somewhat. I know that those who made
mistakes, at Yalta perhaps, felt very guilty about them and
wanted to rectify them in 1948. But although those
distinguished leaders of the time, who, having won the war,
held in their hands the destinies of perhaps 90 per cent of
the people of the world, were motivated by a sentimentality which their faith or political belief may have
justified when they imposed the establishment of Israel in
the name of humanitarian principle and feelings, they
forgot that in signing Israel’s birth certificate they were
committing another great injustice in the name of mankind
by condemning 2.5 million Palestinians and Arabs from
other countries to exile.

245. However, I challenge the argument that Judaism is
being confused with Zionism. Zionism is a totalitarian
philosphy which did not emerge for the first time on the
day Hitler decided to exterminate the Jewish race. It was
invented in the writings of well-known philosophers long
before the appearance of Nazism and at a time when the
Jewish upper middle class in Germany, the Netherlands,
Switzerland, Paris and London, held full sway and power.
In 1915 or 1916, when the first Zionist philosophical
writings, the first appeals for a homeland for the Jews, were
published, the Jewish community throughout the world
was protected where it had no power and, in the financial
capitals of Amsterdam, Zurich, Hamburg, London and
elsewhere, the Jews held the purse-strings, so to speak.
246. Israel as a Jewish homeland cannot be justified by
invoking Hitler’s massacre of the Jews. In 1942, when the
Vichy Government, through the Resident General in the
Protectorate of Morocco, demanded that all Jews be
dismissed from the Moroccan administration, the King of
Morocco made a solemn appeal to the entire population
and categorically refused to allow laws which applied in
Occupied France to be extended through the legal fiction
of the Protectorate to a sovereign Territory where citizenship had nothing to do with religious faith. Mr. Rem? Cassin
has paid a tribute to this position in his writings.

249. At the time there was the excitement of the Yalta,
Potsdam and other agreements which, reverting to nine
teenth-century concepts, sought to establish peace by
dividing the world into spheres of influence with consequences which, unfortunately, were distressing from the
human point of view and serious politically. We are seeing
the results in the Middle East today. If Israel had not been
created, it would have been a peaceful region, its peoples
living in peace, with great potential for immense wealth,
great culture, that is to say, with the moral and material
assets which would have enabled them, during the last
twenty years, to bring to all mankind, in their region and
elsewhere, the gift of their spiritual and material resources.

247. When the allies won the war, the countries which had
been occupied by the Nazis obtained the necessary reparations. Some several thousand Polish Jews (who were Polish
citizens), French Jews, German Jews, and Jews of other
occupied countries felt that the reparations paid to their
countries and the compensation they received after the war
constituted just compensation for the the occupation of
their territory and the massacre of their people. But after
25

250. The creation of the State of Israel generated unrest in
the Middle East and the countries which allowed it to be
created are the same countries which, for nineteen years,
have been refusing to face reality.

sometimes dictate conflicting positions but where these
Powers, out of self-interest for the future, but in the name
of peace, could very well forget that the Middle East can
become the victim of this peace.

251. We have had assurances-and I delieve they are
sincere-that the United States, among others, wanted to
defend the territorial integrity of all the countries in this
region and that they have tried to protect the refugees.
That is very true but, as in every political action, should we
adhere to the cause or the finality of the political effect?
Does the responsibility for the creation of Israel make it
possible to salve one’s conscience by throwing a few scraps,
not even the equivalent of half a dollar a day, to those who
were driven from their country and who now, twenty years
later, are again living in refugee camps? Does the defence
of territorial integrity merely consist of studying a map to
find out where the pipelines run, where the stragetic
positions lie, which factories should be preserved and which
destroyed?

257. We are the first to want peace; throughout our
history, we have never taken up arms to conquer or to
attack. We are among those in this Organization who have
accepted sacrifices, seen our territory amputated, suffered
attacks on our dignity because, every time, we felt that
each group of countries should be willing to surrender a
fragment of its sovereignty or of its territory in the interest
of the more lofty objective of world peace and security, if
that was the price demanded.

252. I have no taste for personal recriminations in this
Council. I have the highest personal esteem for the
representatives who have tried to justify their positions, and
that is why I shall refrain from directing my remarks to any
particular member.
253. But, since the Council has been meeting to consider
this situation, what has been done to protect territorial
integrity? Two-thirds of Jordan is occupied, so is the Gaza
strip; Suez is under foreign control; Eilat is occupied. Is it
the intention that peace should be established on that
basis? Do you, Mr. President, does any member of the
Council believe that the obviously sincere appeal made to
us and the provisions of a resolution which we would like
to think of as an expression of a sincere wish to restore
peace can be justified in the present situation?

258. We will not agree to a return to the status quo ante in
the Middle East by telling ourselves: “Now there is an
irreversible situation created by factors which should be
weighed and used as a basis for discussing the future.” If
that is the conclusion to which we are being led by those
who, from the first day that India courageously and
conscientiously tried to persuade the Council to adopt a
draft resolution demanding the withdrawal of troops to the
positions they held on 4 June, refused to consider that
possibility and are now telling us that they cannot go back
to the situation which previously prevailed, do those same
people think that they will be able to induce us to take as a
point of departure for the future a situation brought about
by a clear-cut aggression and perhaps even diplomatic
complicity? I shall refer at a later stage to articles in
magazines, which are internationally
known for their
sympathy towards the State of Israel, although their owners
are on good terms with the Arab world, drawing attention
to deals made in certain capitals by Mr. Abba Eban, before
his return to his country a few hours prior to the outbreak
of hostilities.

255. Now we are once again being lured by appeals, by
reminiscences of the past, b,y the same tactics as in 1956, to
accept a cease-fire while armies are being reinforced and are
advancing with impunity into territories where there is no
threat, no suggestion of a military operation, no act of
aggrecsion, nothing that has been alleged.

259. These historical truths must be told. Perhaps that
diplomatic complicity did not assume the proportions of
direct participation in the war, but the silence, the
procrastination, the appeals which had the ring of sincerity,
were no more than a smoke screen for an international
manoeuvre which is just beginning to come to light. Peace
can be established in the Middle East, whatever the price.
Peace could easily have been re-established in other parts of
the world which constitute more serious threats to international security, because of the powerful nations they
bring into confrontation. Today, there is a sudden eagerness
to safeguard peace because it was considered wrong for a
sovereign State in the Middle East to ask the United
Nations forces to withdraw from its territory, or that a
port, which was being used to strengthen the military
potential of a country which was at war with it, should be
returned to its sovereignty.

256. A few days ago, I said heatedly that if the Council
had exercised its full authority with regard to responsibility
for aggression from the outset, you would not have a
situation in the Middle East today which resembles the
dismemberment of the Ottoman Empire or the conditions
imposed on Turkey at the Lausanne Conference. YOU
would not have a situation in which, tomorrow, we might
perhaps see the great Powers discussing peace terms over
our heads in a region in which contradictory interests

260. Mr. Eban said last time that Eilat was a lung through
which Israel drew breath. But Eilat was not part of the
territory of Israel, even after the armistice. It was occupied
after the terms of the Armistice Agreements. If Israel
wishes ,to become stronger and to breathe, let it not breathe
through another’s lungs. Does it not consider its Mediterranean coastline enough, with the ports of Haifa and Tel
Aviv? According to its own statistics, only five to six per
cent of its economic resources come into the country

254. For the past ten days, the Council and the various
speakers have repeatedly drawn the attention of the great
Powers to the fact that aggression does exist, that territories
have been occupied and that this appeal for a cease-fire is a
bitter reminder of the truce accepted by the Arabs when
they were twelve kilometres from Tel Aviv and which
became a smoke screen behind which ships unloaded the
weapons needed to reverse the military situation in the
ports of Haifa and Tel Aviv.

through the port of Eilat. Is that a sufficient reason for
going to war and jeopardizing international peace? Tomorrow, in Latin America, are we going to let Bolivia demand
that Chile give it an outlet to the sea because it does not
have one? Have we realized the consequences of such a
precedent, which will leave the door open for anychallenge,
any day, in Africa, in Latin America or anywhere else
where countries are land-locked and have no outlet for
trade or shipping? Is the claim to the port of Eilat by the
country to which it belonged the real threat to peace
today? We are told: aggression was committed against us,
we went to war and we were victorious. But military
situations do not come to an end. These conflicts have been
going on in the Middle East for nineteen years. Can the
advance of the Israel troops, the invasion of Arab territory
be justified on the grounds that a peace-loving country saw
the military build-up of the Arab Powers? Where does
Israel get its arms? The declaration on preserving the
military balance in the Middle East has always prevented
the Arabs from having the weapons to stand up to Israel,
whereas Israel benefited from bilateral agreements outside
the tripartite quarantee. I would go so far as to say that the
tripartite guarantee was not upheld because the amount of
weapons of a certain origin which we now know and which
Israel used is totally out of proportion to deliveries of arms
to the Arab countries when they asked certain capitals for
arms for self-defence against Israel. Israel has always
asserted, “I cannot exist in this region; I must expand” and
called for four million Jews to occupy the Negev desert. At
the same time did it not ask for arms to withstand any
move to prevent the immigration of those people?

was even last night. We are told that the cease-fire is
general. We welcome the efforts which have achieved this
result, but we do not want a Pyrrhic peace. We do not want
the ten days of diplomatic manoeuvring which led to the
cease-fire to enable Israel to attain its ends. Mr. Abba Eban
told us the other day that the next phase should be to build
new structures in the Middle East. Moshe Daysn said on
television: we are in such and such a part of Arab territory,
why should we get out?
265. Today, at the end of the statement made to this
body, the Council and indirectly the Arabs were told what
the terms for peace are. Well, if the cease-fireis a truce, an
armistice, we are still among those who will show their
loyalty to the United Nations by accepting it. But I should
like to quote something Rivarol said-although I do not
accept all his extreme-right ideas: “Woe betide those who
stir up the innermost depths of a nation.” If tomorrow the
Arab world does not find its territories as they were on
4 June, and we might perhaps go further, as the whole
Assembly said they were to be under the terms of the 1948
armistice, a nation will have been stirred to its innermost
depths. If peace is to be universal, it must be paid for by
the whole universe. In a particular international crisis, a
part of the world which was hoping with the greatest will to
improve its economic and social lot, which wastrapped in a
military betrayal and abandoned generally by the diplomatic community, should not be chosen to be the one to
pay for Israel’s consolidation and for peace among the great
Powers.
266. The PRESIDENT: I have a number of speakers on
my list. I have consulted members of the Council as to the
further procedure of the Council. Some members are in
favour of our adjourning now for a couple of hours. Others
are in favour of our adjourning until tomorrow morning.
However, there being no motion, I would permit myself to
suggest that we continue, but that we have a suspension for
fifteen minutes. If I hear no objection, we shall suspend for
fifteen minutes.

261, These are some examples taken from a series of facts
which cannot be challenged, which can be found in
international archives, in statements at the United Nations,
in the world’s responsible magazines, in editorials signed by
well-known commentators on international affairs, and are
not merely Arab claims, which might be open to question.
Today, with superb oratory, the Israel representative tried
to cover up these facts and make the Council forget that it
is faced with a problem which is not Judaism, or denial of
the right of Jews to live in the territory which is the cradle
of their religion because, until 1948, the true Jews of the
region lived and prayed there in peace, alongside the
Moslems, the Christians, in the same houses, celebrated the
holidays of all the three religions of the country in a
common hope and a common prayer, knowing that they
belonged to what we call the People of the Book.

267. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I do not wish
to stand in the way of this suggestion that you have put to
us, Mr. President, and I think it would be valuable if we
could have a short break, as you say. I would, at the right
opportunity and at the right time, wish to make an appeal
to the members of the Council, and particularly perhaps to
the Ambassador of the Soviet Union, to agree that we
should continue our debate tomorrow. I had hoped for an
occasion to put this suggestion to him. The draft resolution
which he said he wishes us to vote on tonight is a
resolution, as he has explained, of the very greatest
consequence.

262. Zionism upset this common philosophy of life.
Zionism is a materialistic philosophy which disturbed the
community of thought and belief in which this part of the
world was living peacefully, respecting all religions and
faiths, Herzl and Balfour are responsible, not the Arabs’
attitude against Judaism or against the Jews who were
massacred by Hitler.
263. I apologize for speaking at such length about that
part of the Israel representative’s statement. I was afraid
that a new face which came here to put forward this thesis
in a new style might divert the Council’s attention from the
real problems it has to tackle.

268. I would certainly wish to speak to it, but I did not
see it in its present form until I came to the Council this
afternoon, and I would not be able to speak to it
adequately without consulting with my Government. I
would have thought that it might be in the interests of all
of us if we could, at a convenient time this evening, break
and continue tomorrow rather than to proceed late tonight.

264. It is true that we are meeting today in a new context:
the situation in the Middle East is different from what it

269. I wish to make the point now, so that the Soviet
representative in particular mightconsider the appeal which
27

I have put to him. After we have had the short break you
proposed, Mr. President, perhaps he would be good enough
to comment on the appeal I have made.

machine-which, it must be pointed out, has been wholly
placed at the service of the territorial and other claims of
Israel-have been saying that the State of Israel cannot
remain within its present borders, that it wants to remake
the map of the the Middle East to its own advantage. The
position taken by the United States press is only too easy
to understand. The press obeys the dictates of the United
States imperialist circles which have instigated, armed and
supported the Israel aggression against not only its neighbouring Arab States but against all the Arab States in order
to achieve the objectives which the imperialists have set for
themselves in that region. However, neither world public
opinion, nor the United Nations as an prganization with
pretensions to universality, nor the peoples of the world as
a whole, nor the peace-loving States can accept such a
policy or such a position. Now when the peoples of the
whole world, and especially the peoples of the continent
which was the stronghold of imperialism, have risen up
against it and are throwing off foreign rule, they cannot
tolerate a remaking of the map of the world through
aggression and the legal fiction that might makes right.

270. The PRESIDENT:
As I understand there is no
objection to my suggestion, the meeting will now be
suspended for fifteen minutes.
The meeting was suspended at 7.50 p.m. and resumed at
8.15 p.m.

271.

Mr.

TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated
ffom
We have just had the opportunity of hearing the
Israel representative review nineteen years of history,
history as he sees it, in which he naturally overlooks all the
sufferings of the Palestinian people, the Arabs of Palestine,
who were driven out of their country by the millions. In
telling that story he tried, as an ardent Zionist, to make a
case for Zionism in order to justify the aggression which has
just been committed against the Arab States. If Zionism is
the underlying cause of this aggression and if it is
responsible for the events that have occurred in the Middle
East-and it seems that it is-then it certainly needs to be
defended before the peoples of the world.
French):

276. Those peoples support the Charter of the United
Nations, they are for international law, which should
prevail in relations among nations. Yet, today, the United
States newspapers are full of statements by Mr. Eshkol to
the effect that Israel will take its own decisions without
regard for the United Nations or its resolutions. Israel itself
will decide what it will do, how it will remake the map,
how it will decide to present its claims, and how it will win
them.

272. Now no one can have any doubt about who is the
aggressor: the aggressor is on the scene of the aggression,
the aggression is glaring. The events of the past few days
cannot be changed by recounting history from a specific
point of view.
273. The Israel aggression began at dawn on 5 June 1967.
The purpose of the aggression was, as everyone had known
for a long time, to halt the progressive development of the
Arab peoples who were in the vanguard of the anticolonialist struggle on the African and Asian continent; to
violate the territorial sovereignty of the Arab States, which
have thrown off imperialist rule and started out on the path
towards progressive development; to intervene in the
internal affairs of the Arab States; to strike serious blows at
the progressive regimes that have been set up, to overthrow
them and install Governments which would be submissive
and willing to take orders from the imperialists and the
mercenaries who make up the leadership of the State of
Israel. In that way it hoped to re-establish and broaden the
imperialist base in that region of the world, which is
particularly important not only strategically, as we all
know, but also economically because of its tremendous
natural wealth.

277. A brief summary of Israel’s claims was given, as we
all know, in an article published yesterday in ?%e New
York Times. Some of them are tirelessly repeated by
United States propaganda every day, every hour. The
purpose of the propaganda is to persuade us that the map
of the world cannot remain as it is and especially not asit is
in the Middle East, where victory has been won and
military gains made. People are expected to accept these
military gains. We know that military gains can go to your
head, but we think that the peoples cannot and should not
allow history to be dictated and the world to be ruled in
this way-and indeed they will not allow it.
278. Mr. Goldberg, the distinguished representative of the
United States, tried to present his country’s position in a
more favourable light by quoting documents published by
the Secretariat saying that no Israel troop build-up had
been observed at specific times when the Middle East crisis
was starting to deveIop. However, for a proper assessment
of the distinguished United States representative’s remarks
we need only refer to some subsequent statements reporting that Israel’s troops could be mobilized within twentyfour hours, that its whole army was ready for the attack
and that there were military sucI;esses because the troops
were in a state of alert.

274. Before the aggression and at the beginning of the
attack on the Arab States, the leaders of the aggressor
State, namely Israel, kept saying that Israel did not seek
territorial aggrandizement, and that all it wanted was peace.
And how did they intend to get peace-let me tell
you-through war, as it is very important for us to know.
Now the adventurers who are the leaders of the State of
Israel are openly saying that they intend to seize some Arab
land, gain control of certain strategic points in the Middle
East and dictate the terms for a solution that would satisfy
only their own lust for conquest which continues to grow
as time goes on.

279. In the circumstances, how much credit can we give to
Mr. Goldberg’s observations and statements? When a State
is permanently on a war footing, when it can mobilize its
troops within twenty-four hours without anyone noticing,
what is the point of asserting that there was no troop
build-up at a given time? The intention is sufficient. We

275. For several days now, not only the Israel press but
particularly,
it seems, the United States propaganda
28

know that the Secretary-General is not an intelligence agent
who can find out what is in the minds of the Government
of Israel and of the mercenaries there or what their
intentions are. The Secretary-General cannot know what
those who began the aggression, who have perpetrated it
and are continuing it now, had in their minds and hearts.
280. Moreover, in his statements Mr, Goldberg said, if I
remember correctly, that he did not want to go back,
through the decisions the Security Council might take on
the Soviet draft resolution [S/79.51/Rev.2]
to the precarious peace that existed before. He urged the adoption of
his own draft resolution. He maintained or implied in his
resolution that the aggression had not been conrummated.
He tried to make us feel that the aggression should not be
condemned. If this is not an encouragement of aggression,
an endorsement of aggression on the part of the United
States, what can it mean? Not to condemn the aggressor,
not to want to return to the status quo ante, but to suggest
conditions for changing the situation and satisfying the
claims that the State of Israel tried to win by force, and has
attempted to impose through the aggression it has committed, all this is tantamount to supporting the aggression,
encouraging it, and supporting its continuation. The statements of the United States representative, which we are
asked to take as very solemn-we might almost say ringing
words-make us feel immediately that all the statements he
made before ,this aggression began have been forgotten,
281. You will remember that before the aggression the
United States representative quoted and requoted certain
statements about the territorial integrity of the States of
the Middle East and about their sovereignty which were
apparently intended to reassure the members of the
Council, and to which the representative of the Soviet
Union referred in his remarks at the beginning of this
meeting. However, the United States representative apparently forgot to reply. Not only did he not reply to the
Soviet representative, but he has not replied to many other
representatives who have been putting similar questions to
him for a long time. Perhaps he did not reply for reasons
known only to himself, but his reasons cannot satisfy the
members of this Council, or world public opinion and they
cannot, of course, be supported by the peoples of the
world.

285. The aggression which is now being carried out by
Israel against the Arab States is going to develop and
continue against the background of these events in the
United States. As long as the Arab countries are occupied,
the Israel aggression will continue. As long as these
territories are occupied, we must expect further incidents
and clashes. That is why the Security Council must take the
necessary measures.
286. YOU will recall that the Security Council has already
adopted three cease-fire resolutions. In the first resolution
[233 (.2967)], the Council called upon the Governments
forthwith to take all necessary measures to ensure an
immediate cease-fire. Everyone knows what the word
“immediate” means.
287. However, despite the verbal acceptance of the ceasefire by the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Israel and
reiterated by the Permanent Representative of Israel, the
cease-fire was not immediate. Why? Merely because it was
necessary, as it was before-and those who know history
have reminded us of this here-to occupy the Arab
territories, establish the fait accompli and then reassert the
claims which the Israel representative made once again at
the end of his statement. The Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Israel, and especially his representative here, have of course
made some reservations-as, for example, that the other
party should also accept the cease-fire-but the Council
then had to adopt two further resolutions [234(1967),
235 (1967)J to reprimand the Israel Government and to
call it to order over the cease-fire.
288. Instead of complying with the cease-fire resolutions,
Israel troops have continued their aggression, with the
result that further territory and other places in the Arab
countries have been occupied. It is now much more
essential than ever before that conditions of peace an
security should be restored in the Middle East.
289. Since the cease-fire resolutions were interpreted by
the Israel Government, with the support of some of its
friends sitting on the Security Council, as an invitation-as
they are-to continue its aggression, to occupy Arab lands,
and to impose its conditions on the Arab countries, we
must now speak in clearer and more precise language.

282. Certain circles in the United States that want a
foothold in the Middle East-and some of you know whom
I have in mind-may of course want to satisfy the claims
Israel is making as the fruit of its aggression, but the
peoples of the world cannot, should not and will not
meekly accept that demand.

290. This clear language is of course missing from the
United States draft resolution [S/79.52/Rev.2]. On the
contrary, the United States draft, on which I commented
when it was submitted a few days ago, emphasizes, as you
know, that arrangements must be worked out for a
withdrawal of troops, but these arrangements must be made
by the Israelis with the Arab countries. Secondly, the
effect of the draft resolution would be that the Arab
countries would surrender some of the rights that they have
and Israel would arrogate to itself certain rights it now
wants.

283. However, to tell you what is really happening, I must
say that the United States is making great efforts to validate
the claims of the Israel extremists. It seems that a special
committee has been set up in the United States for the
purpose of facilitating the job of dismembering the Arab
States for the benefit of the mercenaries who hurled their
armies against those countries.

291. In the circumstances, such a resolution, which is
designed to serve the purposes of the aggressor, can only
abet and prolong the aggression. The United States resolution seeks only solutions which favour aggression and
which neither the international community nor the United
Nations as an international organization could or should

284. All this encouragement has obviously led the
extemists who are now ruling Israel to initiate, then
continue and now to maintain their aggression against the
Arab States.
29

self.
aggressor was later evidently proved, to exercise
thorirestraint against the provocations of the Tel Aviv au
ties against part of the Arab nations. I submit that IrN e have
exercised the utmost self-restraint; only two hours later a
surprise and dastardly attack was launched against US- EVtXl
the aggressors themselves do not deny that their
fyi:
marched against several Arab countries at the same
and that they undertook what they call a surprise attack
and what was in fact a treacherous aggression.

accept. As we have already stressed, and stress once more,
the draft resolution can therefore promote only imperialist
interests and further the territorial claims of the Israel
extremists. It should accordingly be rejected, as I am sure it
will be when it is put to the vote.
292. The Security Council should not sanction incitement
to aggression or aggression itself, as the substance of the
United States draft resolution would have it do. On the
contrary, it should speak out clearly, take a clear stand
against aggression, condemn the aggression and demand the
withdrawal of the troops, as called for in the Soviet draft
resolution. This draft resolution calls for the vigorous
condemnation of the Israel aggression. This condemnation
is more essential than ever before because if we fail to
condemn the aggression now, we will have other aggressions
and other hotbeds of conflict in other regions to jeopardize
world peace. A number of aggressions are being carried out
throughout the world and those who are trying to prevent
the Council from condemning the Israel aggression do so
because they want to protect themselves against a similar
condemnation. I am sure everyone understands the aggressions to which I refer. There is an aggression in South-East
Asia and others in other parts of the world which are being
perpetrated by United States imperialism.

296. I feel it is my duty to the Council and to mankind
to
be frank with you. I feel it is my duty 10 do so because
my
country, our Arab sister countries and most certail~ly.
the
United Nations as a whole are passing through a decxslve
period. During this period and as a result of wflat
the
United Nations decides, the fate of the small coufltrles
is
affected. These moments do not concern the Charter Of the
United Nations alone; they most definitely affect the moral
and ethical principles of our present day life.
297. During these moments the Security Council is Put to
a severe test, a test affecting the morality and prestige
of
this Organization, which has been established for
safe.
guarding international security and peace, peace based on
justice and equity, not an artificial peace, not a Peace
based on the fait accompli, not a peace which is coil t=rY to
fundamental rights of peoples, not a peace wliich
is
imposed by great imperialist Powers and their jackals
on
other nations.

293. The Soviet draft resolution demands that Israel
should immediately and unconditionally
remove all its
troops from the territory of the neighbouring Arab States
and withdraw them behind the lines where they were when
they launched their attack against the United Arab
Republic and the other Arab States, that is, to the positions
they occupied on 4 June before the attack began. Moreover, Israel is to respect the territorial sovereignty of those
countries. Only after Israel has been condemned for its
aggression against the Arab States and forced to withdraw
its troops from the territories they have occupied can a
start be made towards creating the necessary climate for the
solution of existing differences and for the establishment of
a lasting peace in that troubled part of the world for the
common good of the international community. Unless this
is done, there will surely be no peace and the vital problems
of the Middle East will remain unresolved.

298. The world for the last few days has been
watching the endeavours of the Council, and indeed
will in the future assessthose endeavours.

ClOSelY

flistory

299. One of the elementary prerogatives of the Council
when confronted with such an act of aggression is to assess
the situation and work into the facts of that case. A.nd in
the case before you, is there any doubt about
the
perpetrators, the originators, the architects of that crime? I
submit, the case is not confused. On the contrary,
it is a
clear-cut case of aggression, premeditated aggression,
carefully planned and executed, and yet the Council
did not
rise to its responsibilities and condemn the aggressor. That
is one of the most elementary tasks of the Security Council.
Yet the Council wasmade unable to assessthe situ ation
and
to condemn the aggressor. That was so because of the
pressure, the heavy pressure, the intimidations
and the
threats exerted by the United States and the
United
Kingdom.

294. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of the United Arab Republic, to whom I now
give the floor.
295. Mr. EL KONY (United Arab Republic): My delegation has come to the Council with the firm belief that
this is the time for action and not for words. The Security
Council and the world at large are faced with a clear-cut
case of aggression not only against my country but also
against a number of other Arab States. This is not the first
time that the United Nations has had to deal with such an
aggression committed wantonly by Israel against my
country, nor is it the first time that the Tel Aviv authorities
commit such a treacherous aggression with the blessing and
assistance of outside Powers, We do not, at this stage, need
to prove that an aggression has been committed. I have had
occasion several times in this Council to state clearly and
without ambiguity that my country had no intention of
undertaking any offensive action. We had been urged by
our friends, and even by those whose collusion with the

300. The case, as I said, is not obscure. The representative
of Israel, when he first addressed the Council, was in a
mood of exhilaration. That mood was even more evident
by
the address which we heard from Mr. Eban. The
Inany
other statements and addresses which we have been reading
cannot but substantiate this fact. Besides the reports
of the
Secretary-General, could there be any clearer assessment
of
Israel’s responsibility in carrying out that aggressiall?
Agaifl
I say, in the face of all, that the Council did not discharge
one of its primary responsibilities.
301. The facts of life compel me to be blunt. Tile
United
States was definitely behind all these events in &c Middle
East. The United States together with the United Kingdofl
30
i

hasdrawn the blueprints of the situation confronting the
MiddleEast, the United Nations, and the world. They have
engiaeeredit; they have furnished all possible aid to
bra&aid in material, in equipment, in scientific data, in
iatelligeaceinformation, and no less in warfare, all devices
ior a wicked and treacherous aggression.

shame. When an overt act of aggression is committed, it is
the primary responsibility of the Security Council, as I have
already stated, to condemn that act and to take all the
necessary measures to restore international peace. In this
respect, the provisions of the Charter are amply clear.
Ending hostilities by prescribing a cease-fire is only a
preliminary step. The aggressor should never be permitted
to defy this Organization and claim any right over the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of another State.

302, Furthermore, an American vessel of the Sixth Fleet
wasspotted facing El Arish. May I ask for what reason a
part cf the Sixth Fleet should be in the vicinity of the
hostjljties?
It should be noted here that this contradicts the
ststsmentof the representative of the United States when
he ca several occasions said that the Sixth Fleet was
hundredsof miles away.

308. The United States delegation submitted
resolution which, in its operative paragraph 2,

a draft

“Cizlls for discussions promptly thereafter among the
parties concerned . . . the renunciation of force regardless
of its nature, the maintenance of vital international rights
and the establishment of a stable and durable peace in the
Middle East”(S/7952JRev.2].

303, Naturally, the aim was to score a success for Israel,
sndby that means to impose their objectives on us, but
theyare certainly wrong. This is a black spot in the history
of the United States. And yet, the representative of the
United States comes boldly before the Council and speaks
aboutpeace and the endeavours of his Government to avert
war.

This amounts, clearly and unambiguously, to an acceptance
by the Council of the Israel aggression as a means of
achieving its own wicked aims. Therefore, my delegation
cannot but oppose such an attitude which would mean
surrender to aggression. This is an endeavour on the part of
the United States Government to legalize the Israel aggression and to reward Tel Aviv for its crime. The United States
Government is an accomplice in this aggression. It cannot
claim that it is impartial on this question. It is disqualified
to come out with any solution.

304. This cannot be believed. A glance at the news
appearingfor several days in the newspapers coming from
Washingtonwould leave no doubt about the intentions,
past,present and future, of the United States with regard to
the Middle East. The establishment of committees, the
expressedfeeling of satisfaction with respect to the events
in the area, the designs and plans arriving at the solution of
all the problems of the area, an area which is many
thousandmiles away, all these are but an indication of the
intentions of the United States and its plans which it
intendsto impose on us. They are acting as if that area of
the Middle East is a backyard of their own, arranged in the
wayand in the manner to suit their own purposes. They
think that the Middle East is an industrial and economic
concernof theirs, that it is for them to shape its destiny.
This is definitely the reason behind the establishment of a
committee in Washington to look into all these matters and
sort them out and settle them to their satisfaction. This is
theessenceof their draft resolution.

309. I believe that the Security Council should, in the
discharge of its primary responsibility, adopt without delay
the United States draft resolution.
310. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russim): The Soviet delegation has
taken the floor to comment on the statements made at
today’s meeting of the Council.
3 11. As usual, the United States representative attempted
in his statement to repeat the familiar demagogic arguments
of United States propaganda. We reject the United States
Ambassador’s false reasoning in its entirety. It is obviously
unfounded and scarcely needs any further refutation.

305. AS a flagrant proof of the shameful attack perpetrated against my country, Israel forces are now stationed
on our territory as well as on the territory of other Arab
States.The Council has to act promptly. It should without
hesitation condemn the Israel aggression on the Arab States
andGIN upon the aggressor to withdraw its forces beyond
the armistice demarcation line immediately and without
anyconditions.

312. We should like merely to mention one point raised
by the United States representative-namely, why was the
Security Council unable to take the necessary decision in
the first hours or on the first day of Israel’s armed
aggression? The United States representative has his own
version of this, but the facts belie his imaginary ideas. A
decision could not be taken because the United States of
America refused to support the proposal that the aggressor’s troops should be withdrawn immediately behind the
armistice line. Why? Because it was deliberately helping the
aggressor to gain time for seizing more Arab territory.

306. Israel has been saying, time and again, that it owes its
existenceto the United Nations, Has Israel maintained its
VOWtc respect the obligations and provisions of the United
Nations Charter? Has Israel maintained the Armistice
Agreement with the United Arab Republic, or shall we
believethe leaders of Israel when they announce that the
ArmisticeAgreement with Egypt is dead?

313. This is the true version, and it cannot be changed by
any words or any falsifications by United States representatives. The United States representative again tried to
suggest that the question of the withdrawal of the Israel
troops from the territories they have seized should be
linked to certain other conditions, such as a general
settlement.

307. The decencies of the Charter have fared badly in the
extremeat the hands of Israel, whose dark conspiracy with
ethers and its aggression against my country will have
fcrsvera conspicuous place in the annals of treachery and
31

314. But surely it is clear what all this is leading up to.
The whole point-which is to condemn the aggression and
to bring about the immediate and unconditional withdrawal
of the aggressor’s troops-is being watered down and
replaced with something else. This will enable the aggressor
to continue the occupation. Thus, Washington is an
accomplice of the aggressor. This is the crux of the matter.
315. There are definite reasons why the United States
Ambassador, in spite of all the obvious facts, could not
pluck up enough courage to condemn the aggression,
although the whole world knows perfectly well who
perpetrated the piratical and treacherous attack on the
Arab States. It was the Israel interventionists, the Israel
aggressors.
316. In our statement at today’s meeting of the Council,
we have already described at length the Soviet Union’s
position in regard to Israel’s aggression against the Arab
countries. We have also stated with the maximum possible
clarity the Soviet Union’s position in regard to the various
proposals to the effect that the withdrawal of the aggressor’s troops from the territory of the United Arab
Republic, Syria and Jordan should be linked to other
conditions of various kinds-in the form, that is, of a
“package deal”. These are all disreputable manoeuvres
designed to help the forces of aggression entrench themselves in the Arab territories, and to obtain advantages for
the aggressor and encourage his expansionist designs.
317. The United States representative stated here that, if
the Security Council adopted the Soviet draft resolution,
this would mean a return to an explosive situation. These
may not be his exact words but this was the general sense
of his statement. Now what does this mean? Simply that
he is defending the aggressor’s position. We are told that, if
Tel Aviv’s aggressive designs are not satisfied, there can be
no peace in the Near East. If Tel Aviv’s claims to parts of
the territory of the United Arab Republic, Jordan and Syria
are not satisfied-or so the United States says-the conditions for war will exist. So, you unleashed a war in order to
change conditions. This is further evidence of participation
and complicity in the crime which has been committed; and
it is also evidence of open encouragement and defence of
aggression.
318. The Security Council must condemn most vigorously
the aggressive acts of Israel and its continued occupation of
the territories of Arab countries, The Council must demand
the immediate and uncQnditiona1 withdrawal of the aggressor’s troops,
319. The United States draft resolution does not contain
the necessary provisions to this effect, and it is therefore
unacceptable. It is in fact designed to encourage the
aggressor’s expansionist claims. We do not think there can
be any useful discussion on the basis of the United States
draft, which favours Israel’s aggressive designs. This draft
has no substance. There is nothing in it. There is nothing in
it to discuss or consider. If the United States delegation
wants to put the draft to a vote, it is fully entitled to do so.
In our view, however, the Security Council should not be
allowed to waste time on account of the United States draft
resolution. We must finish our work today and we must

take a vote today on the draft resolution submitted by the
Soviet delegation.
320. As many representatives have quite rightly pointed
out here, the Security Council has no right to wastetime,
or to tolerate even for a single hour the occupation of part
of the territory of Arab countries. For these reasons,tile
Soviet delegation will vote against the United States draft,
321. Let me say again that the Security Council’s very
first and most important duty in accordance with the
United Nations Charter, apart from condemning the
aggressor, is to adopt a decision calling for the withdrawal
of the aggressor’s troops from the territories of the United
Arab Republic, Syria and Jordan immediately and unconditionally. I repeat-immediately and unconditionally. Israel’s
forces must be withdrawn in their entirety behind the
armistice lines and moved back out of the respective
demilitarized zones.
322. The Soviet delegation would again like to expressits
confidence that the Security Council will do its duty, and
we appeal to members of the Council to adopt a decision
without delay to protect the Arab States, a decision which
would put an end to the aggression and restore the
legitimate rights of the United Arab Republic, Syria, Jordan
and the other Arab States. We insist that the Soviet Union
draft resolution should be put to the vote immediately; and
in order to avoid any misunderstanding or any incorrect or
dishonest interpretations of our draft in future, we should
like to emphasize that the demand for the immediate and
unconditional withdrawal of all Israel forces behind the
armistice lines, as expressed in the Soviet draft resolution,
naturally includes the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of the troops of the Israel aggressorsfrom the
territories of Gaza and Hamma, which are under the
administration of the United Arab Republic and Syria
respectively.
323. In conclusion, I venture to say again that, if the
Security Council does no take immediate measures,a grave
responsibility will rest with those States which have not
done their duty as members of the Security Council. In that
case, of course, it will be necessary to seek other ways of
ensuring that the Council does its duty under the United
Nations Charter.
324. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
United Kingdom on a point of order.
325. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): Earlier in
tonight’s proceedings, I gave warning that I would like to
suggest to the Council that we should not proceed longer
with our work tonight, but should be prepared to adjourn
until tomorrow. Throughout these proceedings, my delega.
tion has always been in favour of urgent action, and never
in favour of delay. But there are very positive reasonswIU 1
believe that it would be well, from the point of view of all
of us, to continue our deliberations tomorrow.
326. I speak with the greatest respect to those Who arc
inscribed to speak to us tonight, and we shall look forward,
of course, to hearing them tomorrow. But the essentiaf
point is the one to which the representative of the Soviet

32

le

id
e,
rt
1e
t.

EJ
le
le
al
:d
liI’s
1e
ve

Unica has drawn our attention now. He suggests that we
sl&l proceed to vote on a draft resolution which, in its
fins1form, we saw only as we entered this Council chamber
tonight.

335. I call on the representative of the Soviet Union on a
point of order.
336. Mr, FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated j?om Russian): The Soviet delegation has
already stated its attitude towards the question of continuing our work. We should merely like to draw your
attentiorr to the fact that not all the points made by our
United Kingdom colleague in his statement were clear or
logical. Everyone around this table can understand that we
are guided not by our own ideas, but by instructions from
our Governments. It was not surprising, therefore, that in
this case the United Kingdom representative wanted to get
in touch with his Government and obtain further instructions; but his arguments, as I see them, were not altogether
convincing.

327, on the fundamental and vital issues which are raised
in his draft resolution I wish to speak with the authority of
myGovernment. It is, however, not possible to do so now.
lt hasnot been possible to do so between the time when
thedraft resolution waspresented and tonight.
328. I therefore am most anxious that the position of my
Governmentshould be made clear and that I should have an
eppcrtunity of making it clear tomorrow. I am not anxious
fordelay; I am certainly not pressing that the voting should
bedelayedbeyond tomorrow. But I believe it is right and in
accordancewith our best procedures that we should be
giventime to consult our Governments before we take such
a vital decision as that which the representative of the
SovietUnion has invited us to take tonight,

337. I have no intention of taking issue with the points
made by the United Kingdom representative, but the Soviet
draft resolution was submitted as long ago as 8 June. The
revised draft does not differ in principle from the earlier
one, and so it is very difficult for us to understand the
United Kingdom representative’s remark that this is his
reason for requesting a special postponement. If one
stretches a point, however, even this can be explained
somehow. But the logic of the United Kingdom representative’s comments on the question of continuing our
work this evening, in order to hear statements by representatives who have already put their names down to speak,
is completely unintelligible. If you do not have any hidden
motives and if, as you said, you have no intention of
delaying the work of the Security Council or the adoption
of a decision (though I take the liberty of doubting this),
why should we postpone hearing the statements of representatives who wanted to speak today? This is what is not
quite clear.

329. I therefore feel it is right to move the adjournment of
thismeeting.
330. The PRESIDENT: May I ask the representative of
the United Kingdom under which precise rule he is moving
theadjournment?
331. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): Under rule 33,
sub-paragraph2, of the provisional rules of procedure.
332. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the Soviet
Union has asked to speak, but a motion has been made,
underrule 33, sub-paragraph 2, to adjourn the meeting.

he
ve
ot
lat
of
ed

333, According to rule 33, “‘Any motion for the
suspensionor for the simple adjournment of the meeting
shall be decided without debate.” Therefore, under the
rulesof procedure of the Security Council I now put the
motion for adjournment to a vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands,
112favour: Argentina, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia, France, Japan, United Kingdom of Great Britain
andNorthern Ireland, United States of America.

he

Against: Bulgaria,
Republics.

in

Abstain&g: India, Nigeria.

t0

5er
rrn
gaver
Y,:l

338. I turn now to the technicalities of the procedure we
have just adopted, I should like to point out that we have
indeed taken a decision to adjourn the meeting but we have
not decided to resume our deliberations tomorrow. As the
speakers on the list are ready and do not want to lose time,
why should they not be invited to speak today-after a
brief recess, say, of one hour-if we really want to work in a
business-like and responsible way in the Council, if we do
not want any delays and if we are not guided by ulterior
motives.

Mali,

Union

of Soviet

Socialist

The motion was carried by 10 votes to 3, with 2abstentions.

339. The PRESIDENT:
I have been very liberal, considering that a decision to adjourn had been adopted by the
Council. The representative of the Soviet Union wanted to
speak on a point of order, I understood; I called on him.
However, the Council has decided to adjourn now. I will
reconvene the Council on the basis of consultations.

334. The PRESIDENT:
The motion is adopted. The
meetingwill be adjourned until tomorrow. I take it that it
~culd be tomorrow morning,

The meeting rose at 9.20 p.m

are
rd,
tial

riet
33

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Notions
publicofions.moy
the world.
Consult
your
bookstore

PUBLICATIONS
be obtained
or write

q nd

from bookstores
to: Uniled
Notions,

distributors
Sales
Section,

throughout
New York

or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Les publications
dCpositoires
du

des
monde

Notions

Uniss,

Section

HAH

flOJYYMTb

LES PUBLICATIONS
Nations
entier.

Unies
sent
Informez-vour

des ventes,

New

M3AAHMFI

York

DES NATIONS

ou Genbve.

OPTAHMBA~MM

06bEAMHEHHblX

~I:~#IIIII~I
O~~~IIII:MI~H~
O~W~~IICUII~JX IIaqru? hlOitill0
ilIYXIT~‘TIlBS
110 Ilt!CX @lOllZlX
Jlllp&
~IGIlO~IlTL? CIlpUlliIl
H5Pa:lIlIIC
lIpO;la;IiC

COMO
tar

11111 IIIIlIIlITC
II0 IlJJlCCy : Op11naa1[11n
Ii3AfllIF6l,
&~IO-fiOl11<
II.?Il~~Cll8Ba.

CONSEGUIR

publicacioner

en lodes
porter
Venlor,
Nuevo

Litho

in U.N.

PUBLICACIONES
de

del
York

las Naciones

Unidar

Price:

$U.S.

Oihe~lrltelllll~lX

Ihlyir,

CClil~lIH

y cosos

dirtribuidoror

II
II0

UNIDAS

erl6n

en vento

o IV librero

o dirijose

1.50 (or equivalent

HAL(Mfl

IiyIIlITh
n KIlII~IiIII~lY MIlrtGlllllIiX
06 IKlpUlllllX
lI 11811lfY IillliilillO~

DE LAS NACIONES

mundo.
Consulle
o Cinebra.

UNIES

en vente
dans
ler libroiries
et les ogencer
oup&
de votre libroirie
ou adresrez-vour
b:

en librerior
o: Naciones

in other

currencies)

Unidas,

Seccibn

de

35531-January

1971-Z1100
