S/PV.8148

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8148th meeting

Thursday, 21 December 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bessho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Lie Cheng
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Woldegerima
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli Frieri

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-45781 (E)
*1745781*

S/PV.8148

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The Agenda was adopted
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Albania, Australia, Austria, Bahrain,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, Georgia,
Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Kenya,
Latvia, Liberia, Lichtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Maldives, Malta, Mexico, the Federated States of
Micronesia, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, the
Netherlands, Norway, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the
Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia,
Turkey and the United Arab Emirates to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2017/1051, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Albania, Australia, Austria, Bahrain,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia, Liberia,
Lichtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta,
Mexico, the Federated States of Micronesia, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, the Netherlands, Norway,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of Korea,
the Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa,
San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
United States of America and Uruguay.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
2/9

21/12/2017

In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay.
The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2396 (2017).
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): Three
years ago, the Council, in an extraordinary meeting
of our Heads of Government (see S/PV.7272), tackled
the problem of foreign terrorist fighters. In 2014, the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) was ascendant.
Terrorists had just captured large swathes of territory,
and ISIS’s ideology was inspiring thousands to travel
and join its ranks.
Today the tables are turned. ISIS is now on the run.
The United States, alongside the defeat-ISIS coalition
and its multiple partners, have liberated nearly all
of ISIS’s territory on the battlefield. Its ideology is
discredited, but the threat of foreign terrorist fighters
remains. Indeed, today ISIS is going underground
and on the move. As its territory shrinks, some ISIS
supporters are returning home, while others are moving
on to other countries. We have seen hardened terrorists
travel around the world to carry out deadly attacks in
ISIS’s name, and ISIS is calling on supporters — even
those who never set foot in a conflict zone — to launch
attacks from Jakarta to Manchester to the streets of
New York City.
In recent years, we have learned more about the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighter travel. For
example, today we see the return not just of fighters, but
sometimes even their family members, some of whom
have committed crimes and others who were victims
of ISIS themselves. We also have learned lessons
about the essential role of international cooperation in
preventing, tracking and detaining traveling terrorists.
Given this evolving challenge, the United States
applauds the Security Council for taking decisive action
today. Resolution 2396 (2017), which was just adopted,
will give countries around the world new tools and new
obligations to protect all our citizens at home and the
17-45781

21/12/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

international traveling public abroad. I will highlight
four of its most impactful measures.
First, the world has taken unprecedented steps in
this resolution to better detect and disrupt terrorist
travel across borders. All countries, not just a few,
will now develop the capability to collect and use
airline passenger information — specifically Advance
Passenger Information (API) and Passenger Name
Record (PNR) — data and biometrics to identify known
and previously unknown terrorists any time they may
try to board an aeroplane.
My Government has used API, PNR and biometrics
data to bring terrorists and criminals to justice and to
prevent them from carrying out their despicable acts
in the first place. We have used this data in ways that
respect the privacy, civil rights and civil liberties of all
Americans and those who travel to the United States.
Many other countries, including European Union
members, are in advanced stages of installing their
own PNR systems. A number of countries in the Middle
East and elsewhere have pioneered the use of biometric
technologies to ensure that even terrorists with false
passports can be identified and prosecuted.
The time has come for airline passenger information
and biometrics to protect not just those in America,
Europe or the Middle East but the entire international
traveling public, and to send a message to terrorists
that they are about to lose any hope of being able to get
on an aeroplane. We who have had the benefit of these
technologies since 11 September now look forward
to working with countries to make sure they have the
assistance and means to fulfill these critical obligations.
Secondly, today’s resolution, drawing upon the
lessons of recent years, recognizes the need to counter
this threat in a tailored, nuanced way. This is particularly
key with respect to the prosecution, rehabilitation
and reintegration of foreign terrorist fighters and
accompanying families. To do this right, we need the
involvement of civil society, including faith leaders
and youth; indeed, we need a true whole-of-society
approach. We cannot just rely on military and security
sector means to fight terrorism, since terrorists’ false
narratives can live on, no matter how many terrorists
we put in jail or kill on the battlefield.
We instead also need to mobilize whole societies
to counter violent extremism and fight terrorism while
respecting and promoting human rights, including the
freedom of expression. Indeed, the resolution reaffirms

S/PV. 8148

that Member States must ensure that any measures taken
to counter terrorism comply with all their obligations
under international law and underscores that respect
for human rights, fundamental freedoms and the rule of
law are complementary and mutually reinforcing with
effective counter-terrorism measures. We must work
together and holistically to address and counter the
drivers of violent extremism as well.
Thirdly, the resolution puts a renewed emphasis on
the need for countries to share a range of information,
including lessons learned and threat analysis. The
foreign terrorist fighter threat is transnational, so
we ourselves must learn to work across borders and
improve international cooperation. This includes
sharing information and working with a broad range of
partners, including the private sector.
Fourthly, and finally, the resolution will boost
the United Nations own work addressing the foreign
terrorist fighter threat. We know that different United
Nations bodies have a vital role to play and all must
contribute. The resolution will pave the way for tighter
internal United Nations coordination, including on
capacity-building and technical assistance. We hope
the resolution will help the United Nations counterterrorism bodies continue to harmonize their efforts,
each focusing on its comparative advantage.
I would like to conclude by thanking all members
of the Security Council for their collaboration on this
technical resolution. This strong outcome shows that the
Security Council remains firmly and unquestionably
united in the face of the terrorist threat. We look
forward to working with countries, United Nations
bodies, civil society and the private sector to implement
this groundbreaking resolution.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the delegation of the
United States for resolution 2396 (2017), which was
adopted today.
The phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters is one
of the most dangerous aspects of the unprecedented
terrorist threat that we are facing today. This
phenonomenon has become increasingly prevalent
over the past few years. Terrorists have been able to
move from Syria and Iraq to other countries and
regions throughout the world. This phenomenon is
therefore now linked to many other issues and factors,
which the Egyptian delegation has tried to address in
today’s resolution.

17-457813/9

S/PV.8148

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Egypt voted in favour of resolution 2396 (2017),
as it is at the forefront of counter-terrorism efforts. We
did not want to abstain in the voting or vote against a
counter-terrorism resolution, especially when it comes
to countering the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters, despite certain details of the resolution.
Although Egypt decided to vote in favour of the
resolution, it believes that the text could have been
much better than its current version if the opinions of
the countries on the front lines of the counter-terrorism
efforts had been sufficiently taken into consideration.
For example, paragraph 3, on one of the most important
aspects concerning the foreign terrorist fighters issue,
could have been stronger and had more impact on the
ground if it had included prescriptive language calling
on Member States to notify, in a timely manner, upon
travel, arrival or deportation of captured or detained
individuals whom they have reasonable grounds to
believe are terrorists, including suspected foreign
terrorist fightersm, and including, as appropriate,
the source country, destination country, any transit
countries, all countries where the travelers hold
citizenship, and including any additional relevant
information about the individuals, and further calls upon
Member States to cooperate and respond expeditiously
and appropriately, and consistent with applicable
international law, and to share such information with
INTERPOL, as appropriate.
The problem is that the current version of the
paragraph is not sufficiently compulsory. Egypt has
noted that fact and therefore suggested, during the
consultations, that more compulsory language be used.
However, that Egyptian proposal was rejected. The
reasons for that remain unclear, given that the reports
of expert panels have reaffirmed the importance of the
issue that we tried to introduce into the resolution.
Furthermore, operative paragraph 12, whereby
the Security Council decides that Member States shall
implement the passenger name record (PNR) system,
and operative paragraph 15, whereby the Security
Council decides that Member States shell develop
and implement systems for collecting biometric data,
impose new and costly obligations on all States. Given
the compulsory nature of both paragraphs and the
expected cost of the implementation of these obligations
by States, especially poor and developing countries, the
delegation of Egypt sought to link such implementation
to the availability of financial resources. However, we
saw that the resolution included only non-compulsory
4/9

21/12/2017

provisions on providing technical assistance and
resources for capacity-building.
All this aside, we are convinced that the fact that the
Security Council has adopted a resolution on countering
the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters represents
a complement to Security Council resolution 2178
(2014), which is very important. However, what is even
more important is to have political will on the part of
countries to implement these resolutions, and therefore
we need follow-up by the Security Council and to hold
accountable countries that are not implementing these
resolutions, especially those supporting terrorism and
providing shelter to terrorists. Furthermore, we must
provide financial resources and the necessary technical
assistance to countries so that they can shoulder their
obligations under these resolutions. It is not enough for
the Security Council to impose additional obligations
on countries by virtue of these resolutions without
providing such countries with the tools to implement
these obligations.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that Egypt will
continue to shoulder its obligations to be at the forefront
of international efforts to counter and defeat terrorism
while respecting international law, the rule of law and
human rights.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): As highlighted in our
statement of 28 November (see S/PV.8116), resolution
2178 (2014) was a milestone in the fight against
international terrorism. Its clear and timely guidelines
enabled the Security Council to introduce coherent
measures that could respond to the seriousness
and the scope of the new phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters.
In the spring of 2015, Italy fully implemented the
provisions of the resolution. First, it updated its law,
adding new types of offences regarding travel, training
and forms of terrorist funding. Secondly, it adapted
its mechanisms and working methods dedicated to
combating terrorism to emerging needs. These changes
have brought positive results, and a few judgments have
been handed down in Italian courts sanctioning the
conduct of foreign terrorist fighters.
Many things have changed in the past three years
in terms of combating terrorism on the ground, but the
global threat posed by terrorists continues to evolve
and diversify, which is why measures tackling the
phenomenon of returning or relocating foreign terrorist
fighters have become urgent. This is a complex issue
17-45781

21/12/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

that encompasses the political, legal and operational
fields of activities.
Today’s important resolution (resolution 2396
(2017)) introduced provisions that touch on all these
aspects and in particular point to the centrality of
international cooperation. Along with the greater
efforts required on the part of all Member States, the
resolution underscores the need for greater efficacy in
technical assistance, capacity-building and support for
countries that request it.
Italy attaches great importance to the fact that
the text, together with the measures on foreign
terrorist fighters to be adopted, also includes specific
measures for the family members of foreign terrorist
fighters, especially children. We welcome the efforts
of the Council to reconcile the need for a criminaljustice response when crimes have been committed
and the need to adapt measures tailored to individual
situations and to promote the integration of foreign
terrorist fighters and their families into the community.
This has proved to be the best way to prevent further
radicalization and the emergence of new threats to
society. The comprehensive protection of human rights
and the rule of law is of vital importance to the fight
against violent extremism and terrorism.
In this context, we value as particularly relevant
projects conducted during terms served in prison,
and the Nelson Mandela rules are an advanced tool
at the disposal of every country. Just as relevant is
the engagement of civil society in reintegration and
prevention programmes.
Italy hopes that future resolutions will contribute to
better defining the legal provisions regarding the return
and travel of foreign terrorist fighters to their country
of nationality or residence. This was not addressed
in resolution 2178 (2014), but proved to be a difficult
issue for the authorities of transit and destination
countries alike. We trust nonetheless that the resolution
guidelines and the cooperation of States and bodies
with the United Nations will enable us to find a shared
solution to be applied uniformly.
Italy is honoured to have contributed to the adoption
of a text that complements the fundamental resolution
2178 (2014), adapting it to the challenges that we are
all currently facing. Solving the difficult problem
of returnees and relocators through the adoption of
balanced and effective measures is a necessary step in
countering the new and emerging threat of international

S/PV. 8148

terrorism. But this is not enough. The new resolution
must be rapidly implemented, and Member States,
United Nations bodies and international organisms are
called on to take coordinated action, also in support
of those countries that do not have the resources or
capacity necessary to implement all the important
obligations that this resolution contains.
Italy will end its mandate in the Security Council
in a few days, but remains steadfast in its will to
contribute to the common efforts and give constructive
assistance to those countries requiring support.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Our delegation voted in favour of resolution
2396 (2017). We share the view that the mass outflow
of fighters from areas of armed conflict, first and
foremost from Syria and Iraq, entails additional threats
to security and requires an appropriate response from
the Council. We consider that this document does
not cancel earlier decisions of the United Nations on
fighting terrorism but, rather, complements them.
Of special importance here are the commitments to
criminalize various aspects of terrorist activity as well
as the prosecute or extradite rule, as enshrined in the
anti-terrorist conventions and resolutions of the Security
Council. It is vital to ensure that they are implemented
in full, while being guided by the principles of the
inevitability of punishment and the punishment being
commensurate with the crime. Any attempts to extend
either direct or indirect assistance to returning terrorist
fighters, including providing them with the possibility
to move freely, recruit new members and incite to
terrorism, would be a direct violation of the resolution
that we adopted today.
Rehabilitation and reintegration programmes
cannot be used as an alternative to the criminal
prosecution of these kinds of criminals. We also note
that it is important to develop international cooperation
in order to combat foreign terrorist fighters.
We attach special importance to the provisions of
the resolution on information exchange. In this regard,
a meeting of the heads of special services, security
agencies and law-enforcement organizations is held
every year in Russia, and we also have a databank
on combating terrorism. They both have proved
their worth.
Within the framework of working with returning
foreign terrorist fighters, we need to bear in mind that

17-457815/9

S/PV.8148

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

one of the key aims of terrorists is to spread the ideology
of terror everywhere. We think that it is only right
that the document we have adopted today represents
a development of many of the provisions of Security
Council resolution 2354 (2017), on countering terrorist
narratives. Overall, we must continue improving the
criminal and legal measures we have in this area. If
we limit ourselves to abstract slogans, the battle for the
hearts and minds of young people will be lost.
We will be able to attain results in countering the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters only if we
act collectively, with States in the leading role, and
by tapping the potential of specialized international
organizations, the private sector and civil society
structures. All anti-terrorist measures should be
adopted in compliance with the norms of international
law and in line with the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations. We expect the new
resolution on countering foreign terrorist fighters to
contribute substantively to that kind of work.
Mr. Lie Cheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): In
recent years, returning and relocating foreign terrorist
fighters have launched terrorist attacks in many parts
of the world, seriously threatening the security and
stability of countries of origin, transit and destination.
All Member States should enhance cooperation in order
to bring to justice foreign terrorist fighters who have
been involved in terrorist attacks, and take measures
to break up and neutralize mobility networks used by
terrorists so as to respond collectively to the challenges
posed by terrorism.
The Security Council has just adopted resolution
2396 (2017), which contains many important and
positive elements, including respect for the principles
and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations;
respect for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of States; and not linking terrorism
to any specific religion or ethnicity. The resolution
calls on Member States to step up border controls,
information-sharing, law enforcement and judicial
cooperation. The coordinating role of the United
Nations should be given full play and efforts must
be made to curtail the terrorist organizations’ use of
the Internet for propaganda, recruitment and other
terrorist activities.
We voted in favour of the resolution and hope
that it will be effectively implemented. China has
always strongly opposed terrorism in all its forms and
6/9

21/12/2017

manifestations. As an important member of the counterterrorism community, we are ready to work with other
countries and organizations to respond collectively to
the threats and challenges posed by terrorism in order
to maintain international peace and stability.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2396
(2017), on foreign terrorist fighters. I should like to
particularly thank the United States for having taken
the initiative of submitting the resolution, which very
usefully complements and updates the framework
established three years ago by the adoption of resolution
2178 (2014).
Those same fighters who several years ago went
to Syria and Iraq are today leaving the conflict zone
either to return to their countries of origin or to move
to a third State. In the case of France, as I have already
mentioned, there are currently some 700 French
nationals or residents of France in Syria and Iraq. In
addition to those individuals are hundreds of children
who were taken to the conflict zone by their parents or
were born there. More than half of them are less than
5 years old. With regard to returnees, some 245 adults
have returned to French territory since 2013.
The diverse range of profiles, such as the notably
high number of women and children, the many degrees
of radicalization and the ongoing attraction of the
barbaric Da’esh ideology — which is still too easily
relayed through the Internet — are some of the major
challenges that we must confront. The resolution that
we have just adopted constitutes a new and major step
in our collective mobilization against terrorism. The
resolution effectively and importantly complements
the normative framework defined by the Security
Council for addressing the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters and strengthens the toolbox at our
collective disposal.
More specifically, the resolution calls on Member
States to undertake supplementary measures in many
areas with the support of the United Nations, such
as in information-sharing — with a particular need
to improve the use of INTERPOL tools — border
management, cooperation with the private sector to
prevent the use of the Internet by terrorists, the need to
bring the foreign terrorist fighters to justice — along
with the central issue of gathering evidence — and
measures for reintegration into society, with a particular
focus on children. The resolution — and this is a point
17-45781

21/12/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

that France has particularly underscored on the basis
of its own experiences — emphasizes on the case of
children who should be taken care of in a targeted
way with appropriate psychological, sociological and
educational support.
In facing a threat of such magnitude, only close
international cooperation with the United Nations and
the relevant regional organizations and the involvement
of civil society will allow us to act effectively. The
Council can be assured of the ongoing commitment to
and total determination of France in this fight.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I would like to
thank the United States for introducing resolution
2396 (2017). We welcome its unanimous adoption
and recognize the new obligations that it creates.
We are pleased to have been a sponsor. We hope that
the implementation of the resolution will make a
meaningful contribution to our common commitment
to impede, impair, isolate and incapacitate the threat
of foreign terrorist fighters. Ensuring that States
cooperate in identifying suspected terrorist travel and
notify others when interventions are made is one of the
key deliverables of the resolutions.
We welcome the fact that the resolution underscores
that measures taken to counter terrorism need to comply
with international laws and that it so clearly underscores
the fact that respect for human rights, fundamental
freedoms and the rule of law is complementary and
mutually reinforcing with effective counter-terrorism
measures. Aggressive counter-terrorism operations
should not inadvertently fuel other conflicts and deepen
the disorder that terrorist actors so expertly exploit.
With this resolution, the Security Council is imploring
Member States to forcefully address the challenge of
foreign terrorist fighters in a way that builds resilience,
solidifies the rule of law and strengthens the legitimacy
of the State.
During the negotiations, we insisted on the need
to balance necessary security measures with preventive
action. We welcome the international momentum in
that regard. A range of United Nations agencies and
programmes are taking the lead in creating interventions
aimed at tackling the underlying causes. The SecretaryGeneral has spearheaded the Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism and the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy gives a clear mandate to
address the conditions conducive to terrorism.

S/PV. 8148

Some 300 Swedish citizens have joined various
terrorist movements in Syria and Iraq. Preventing
future radicalization to violent extremism is now a
Government priority, with the backing of all major
political parties. Our long-term view of that challenge
has led us to create a national centre for the prevention
of violent extremism, and we urge others to think in
similar terms.
Since the adoption of resolution 2178 (2014), many
States, including Sweden, have criminalized terrorist
travel. Today’s resolution emphasizes that obligation,
while also recognizing that the threat has evolved.
Children travelling with foreign terrorist fighters cannot
be doubly victimized when they return to their home
country. It is reassuring to note that the new mandate
given this week to the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate includes, for the first time, the
rights of children in its operative paragraphs.
Earlier this year, the Secretary-General told the
General Assembly that:
“As soon as we begin believing that violations
of human rights and democratic freedoms are
necessary to win the fight, we might as well have
lost the war” (A/72/PV.3, p.2).
For that reason, in all measures to combat terrorism,
States must comply with their obligations under
international law, in particular international human
rights law, international refugee law and international
humanitarian law, as well as the principle of the rule
of law.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption this afternoon of
resolution 2396 (2017), on foreign terrorist fighters. We
thank the United States for its leadership as penholder
on this important subject.
Foreign terrorist fighters are an international
problem that require an international solution.
These fighters do not consider national borders. The
international community can effectively address
that threat by acting in a coherent manner, including
through the Security Council. That becomes ever more
important as the terrorist threat adapts to become more
dispersed and well networked. The resolution reiterates
our resolve to unite, share solutions and adapt to
changing threats. It is a joint solution to a joint problem.
The measures we have adopted today address three
crucial areas.

17-457817/9

S/PV.8148

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

First, these measures address foreign terrorist
fighters who travel to, from and between areas of
conflict. That allows us to detect and apprehend them,
including through Advanced Passenger Information
and Passenger Name Records (PNR). Today, we have
called for the International Civil Aviation Organization
to work with its member States to establish a standard
for collecting, processing and protecting PNR data to
ensure that this capability is used with respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms. Member States are
further required to develop biometric data collection to
support our ability to pursue foreign terrorist fighters.
Collectively, the United Nations, Member States and
relevant organizations have a responsibility to support
each other in doing this.
Secondly, these measures address the threat we
face from would-be extremists who are no longer
encouraged to travel to Iraq and Syria, but whose
focus is on conducting inspired attacks in their home
countries. Many of those individuals have used the
Internet for terrorist purposes. That is why we welcome
the focus of the resolution on whole-of-Government
counter-terrorism strategies and on the importance of
working with civil society organizations and industry
to help prevent radicalization. Industry-led approaches,
such as the Global Internet Forum to Counter Terrorism,
are a good example of how industry can play a positive
role in preventing terrorist use of the Internet.
Finally, we would like to highlight the step we have
taken today in pushing forward action on rehabilitation
and reintegration. Those measures address the need to
collaborate with all parts of civil society to ensure that
reintegration is successful.
This is a shared endeavour. We are united in
ensuring implementation, and we remain committed to
working with other Member States to strengthen and
adapt our response.
Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
The phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters is a threat
that looms over the international community as a
whole. The commitment and cooperation of all States
are needed in the fight against terrorism, given its
global nature. Resolution 2396 (2017), which we have
just adopted, has 51 operative paragraphs containing
calls, in some cases urgent, for States to take action
in different areas, and in other cases requiring them
to act accordingly. These measures seek to achieve
an effective worldwide response in order to stop the
8/9

21/12/2017

movements and activities of foreign terrorist fighters.
For that reason, we believe that anything undertaken to
that end must be done with full respect for the Charter
of the United Nations and of international law.
We also believe that it is important to highlight that,
although the resolution is directed to all States equally,
not all States have the same capacities to implement its
provisions. There are undoubtedly countries that have
adopted many of these measures already. Others will
have no major difficulty in doing so. Others will need
technical assistance, training and financing for that
purpose, and will probably receive them. But there are
others that may also need to cooperate to strengthen
their capacity and to implement the provisions of the
resolution, but may not receive assistance as they are
not considered priority countries.
We thank the penholder and the delegations that
supported the resolution. While we note the difficulties
involved in implementation, we encourage States that
are able to do so and the competent bodies of the United
Nations to provide assistance to States that need and
request it in order to implement the provisions of the
resolution. Uruguay reiterates that it will continue to do
its utmost to adapt to the new requirements imposed by
the international context by joining in the shared effort
to fight the foreign terrorist fighters phenomenon and
its protagonists while respecting international law and
the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan welcomes
the adoption of the resolution 2396 (2017), which
supplements resolution 2178 (2014), on complex
measures to combat foreign terrorist fighters. We thank
the United States for its initiative to consolidate the
efforts of Member States with a view to preventing and
suppressing the activities of foreign terrorist fighters.
Resolution 2396 (2017) contains a number of new
and important aspects that all States Members of the
United Nations are called on to pay great attention
to in the framework of ongoing regional and national
activities in countering international terrorism. In the
wake of recent developments in the successful liberation
of the territories of Syria and Iraq from the terrorist
group the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, some
terrorists are considering how to implement their evil
intentions in their countries of origin or nationality or
third countries. The international community has to take
preventive, coordinated and effective countermeasures
in that regard.
17-45781

21/12/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

One timely and important measure is to strengthen
information exchange and the control of passenger
traffic in order to identify foreign terrorist fighters. In
that regard, the role of the International Civil Aviation
Authority, INTERPOL and other international and
regional organizations that have information on
individuals involved in terrorist activities is significant.
Kazakhstan, for its part, will take all the necessary
measures to implement the new resolution on foreign
terrorist fighters in order to counter the threat of
terrorism and radical ideologies.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Kazakhstan’s
strong commitment to working with all partners in our
region and with the international community to prevent
and combat the activities of foreign terrorist fighters.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.
I would like to express my gratitude to the United
States for its leadership in creating thw important
and timely resolution 2396 (2017), addressing foreign

S/PV. 8148

terrorist fighters (FTFs), in particular returning and
relocating FTFs. Japan is pleased to have co-sponsored
the resolution.
Resolution 2396 (2017) will promote the use of
Advanced Passenger Information, Passenger Name
Records and biometric data. It will also the promote
the connection of INTERPOL databases to airports
and border checkpoints. Sharing data not only among
countries but also among agencies within each country
will strengthen our collective ability to address FTFs.
I stress the importance of moving from adoption to
implementation. Japan is always ready to work closely
with other countries to enhance their capacities. We
must unite against FTFs, including returning and
relocating FTFs, by implementing this resolution.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 3.50 p.m.

17-457819/9
