S/2014/450

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 June 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 39 of Security Council
resolution 2147 (2014). It covers major developments in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo since my report of 5 March 2014 (S/2014/157), including with regard to
the implementation of national commitments under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region
and progress made by the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in implementing its mandate. It
also provides an update on the reconfiguration of MONUSCO and the transfer of
tasks to the United Nations country team.

II. Major developments
Political developments
2.
During the reporting period, the political environment was increasingly
dominated by the debate among key actors over the conduct of the electoral process,
in particular in the wake of the publication by the Independent National Electoral
Commission of a partial electoral calendar, which sets the time frame for the
organization of the local (municipal, urban, local) elections from June to October
2015. Implementation of other commitments under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework and the National Dialogue has also continued, albeit
haltingly.
3.
On 20 March in Kingakati, at a meeting of the presidential majority chaired by
the President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Joseph Kabila Kabange, the
possibility of amending some provisions of the Constitution to allow for the holding
of provincial elections by indirect suffrage, in order to elect provincial deputies,
governors and vice-governors and national senators, was discussed.
4.
On 3 April, Sauvons la République démocratique du Congo, an opposition
platform, concluded a four-day workshop in Kinshasa, urging the Congolese
population to resist any attempts to amend the Constitution. That message was
echoed on 10 April by Agir pour des elections transparentes et apaisées, a large civil
society umbrella platform.
14-56259 (E)

020714

*1456259*

S/2014/450

5.
On 11 April, in Mbandaka, Equateur Province, the Parti du peuple pour la
reconstruction et la démocratie held a two-day congress to discuss the restructuring
of the internal organs of the party ahead of the upcoming local elections. On
25 April, at a meeting chaired by its Secretary-General, Aubin Minaku, the political
bureau of the presidential majority reiterated the intention of the ruling coalition to
hold a referendum on the revision of some articles of the Constitution, with a view
to moving to indirect provincial elections.
6.
On 31 May, the President met all the ambassadors in Kinshasa and my Special
Representative for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head of MONUSCO,
Martin Kobler. He confirmed his commitment to implementing all the resolutions of
the National Dialogue, including the implementation of the amnesty legislation.
7.
At the legislative level, on 8 May the National Assembly rejected three bills
put forward by the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights owing to non-compliance
with the Constitution. One of the rejected bills proposed an amendment to the act of
11 April 2013 on the judiciary, with the aim of establishing specialized (mixed)
chambers to adjudicate cases relating to crimes of genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes committed by civilians. The other two were a bill to
modify the legislation governing the Military Justice Code and a bill on the
declaration of assets by the President and government officials. The first two bills
will be resubmitted, while the bill on the declaration of assets may be converted into
an administrative measure.
8.
On 14 and 18 April, the Ministry of Justice published a series of decrees
granting amnesty to 271 individuals, including former Mouvement du mars 23
(M23) elements, members of the Bundu Dia Kongo, Bakata Katanga and key
opposition figures. On 10 June, the Government reportedly released a third list of
109 beneficiaries, including former elements from M23, the Union des patriotes
congolais, Raia Mutomboki, Mayi Mayi Morgan and Bakata Katanga.
Progress on implementation of national commitments under the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the region
9.
On 30 April, the Minister of Planning hosted a meeting in Kinshasa on the
implementation of the Framework and the national strategic programme. The
meeting provided an opportunity to underscore the need for donors, chairs of the
thematic groups and senior Cabinet ministers to support efforts by the Government
to implement its national commitments.
10. From 10 to 15 May, the National Oversight Mechanism, with the support of
MONUSCO, the United Nations country team, civil society and the members of the
Donor Partner Coordination Group organized a five-day workshop to develop a
matrix of benchmarks and indicators pertaining to the six national commitments.
The workshop was preceded by awareness-raising sessions in Kinshasa and at the
provincial level in order to enhance national ownership of the process.
Security sector reform
11. Progress on army reform continued to be limited. In April and May, the
President informed my Special Representative that the Government would not be
seeking international assistance for army and defence reform. The battalions

2/18

14-56259

S/2014/450

designated by the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo — FARDC) to form the nucleus of
the rapid reaction force have not been redeployed from their operational zone in
North Kivu to the Tactical Training Centre in Kisangani. FARDC has not
participated in the coordination meetings chaired by MONUSCO that are designed
to advance the concept and practice of the rapid reaction force. Furthermore, the
President has yet to nominate around 200 generals to key command positions,
including for the military academies and training schools.
12. On 11 April, the Chief of the General Staff of FARDC, General Didier Etumba,
established a technical committee for army reform, composed of Congolese experts,
charged primarily with the task of advancing reforms and strengthening
coordination with international partners. The committee has yet to meet and
establish a workplan.
13. In contrast, police reform projects saw good progress taken forward by the
long-established Police Reform Monitoring Committee. The implementation of the
five-year reform plan of the Congolese National Police, adopted in late 2013, risks,
however, being postponed by a year because of a shortfall of $173 million for police
reform in the national budget for 2014.
Consolidation of State authority
14. On 14 May, the stabilization and reconstruction plan for war-affected areas
was extended until 2017. While the plan had previously covered areas recovering
from armed conflict, it has now been transformed into a national stabilization and
reconstruction programme under presidential authority, under which the country is
subdivided into six zones. Activities are aimed at the restoration of State authority in
areas formerly under the control of armed groups and improving governance;
facilitating the voluntary return and reintegration of internally displaced persons and
refugees in line with international humanitarian and refugee law; protecting
civilians and fighting sexual violence; linking the third national disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration plan and community recovery; promoting
socioeconomic reconstruction and infrastructure development; and boosting
agricultural activities and rural electrification to promote microindustries,
microfinance, vocational training and regional integration projects. Structures have
been established at the local, provincial and national levels. As part of the three-tier
national mechanism under the authority of the Prime Minister and the Minister of
Planning, a national coordinator and a team of experts were appointed on 16 May.
15. On 25 April, my Special Representative and the Governor of South Kivu
launched the Shabunda-Burhale road rehabilitation programme, implemented by the
United Nations Office for Project Services and with funding from the Government
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland under the joint
programme of the International Security and Stabilization Support Strategy and the
stabilization and reconstruction plan for war-affected areas. The road will allow
access to South Kivu, facilitating the restoration of State authority, security and
development in the eastern part of the country.
16. In April, the Government launched a three-month training course for 335
police officers from all eastern provinces, which included the mining police, special
police for the protection of women and children and the community police. In North
Kivu (Masisi, Walikale, Lubero and Butembo), 21 judicial clerks were deployed to

14-56259

3/18

S/2014/450

the magistrates’ courts and the military courts to reinforce the justice sector. The
new magistrates’ courts in Masisi and the prison in Manono in north Katanga
Province were opened in June.
Decentralization
17. Following the adoption in 2013 of a road map for the devolution of certain
powers from the national level to the provincial governments, the Government
embarked on a vast awareness-raising campaign. The organization act on the
demarcation of provincial entities and the draft programmatic act on the
establishment of new provinces remain under consideration by the National
Assembly. In addition, the draft organization act on public services at the central
level, provinces and decentralized entities was adopted on 12 June. Progress in the
electoral process, in terms of planning for future local and municipal elections, is
becoming increasingly linked to progress in the decentralization process.
Structural reforms of government institutions, including financial reforms
18. The Government held a second national conference on mining in Goma on
24 and 25 March, chaired by the Prime Minister. It was attended by senior government
officials, my Special Representative, my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region,
Mary Robinson, and representatives of the World Bank, the European Union and the
African Development Bank. The participants discussed ways of enhancing the
sustainable management of natural resources in post-conflict settings.
19. Regarding administrative reforms, the report of the Political, Administrative
and Judiciary Commission referring to the organization act on the organization,
functioning and powers of administrative courts was adopted by the National
Assembly on 16 May. The adoption and promulgation of that legislation will
establish the Conseil d’État as the highest administrative court in the country.
20. As part of efforts to move forward on financial reforms, four technical
assistance missions of the International Monetary Fund visited the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including from 14 to 27 May, for the development of a
medium-term budget framework. That framework aims to include, for the first time,
a consolidated budget for the provinces and the central Government. Challenges
remain regarding the budget preparation process at the provincial level.
Reconciliation, tolerance and democratization
21. The pace of implementation of key reforms remained slow, mainly owing to
delays in appointing the new Government of national unity. Consequently, few of
the 100 priority recommendations were implemented. The processing of bills put
forward for discussion in the parliament, in line with the National Dialogue, was
stalled. Some of those bills were intended to complete the judicial architecture and
the decentralization process and to support the protection of natural resources,
notably through the regulation of oil exploitation.
Electoral developments
22. The Independent National Electoral Commission held consultative meetings
with, and training courses for, national stakeholders to enhance the credibility and
transparency of the electoral process. On 21 April, in consultation with the

4/18

14-56259

S/2014/450

Government, the Commission finalized two separate budget proposals based on two
possible road maps for the electoral cycle, for either direct or indirect provincial
elections. International partners are currently awaiting a decision by the parliament
on its preferred option, including the budget and calendar. On 26 May, the
Commission published the calendar for local elections to be held in the second half
of 2015. The calendar sets the date of 14 June 2015 for the election of municipal
councillors and councillors for the secteurs and chefferies, by direct universal
suffrage; the election of urban councillors and bourgmestres and chefs de secteur by
indirect suffrage for 29 August 2015; and the elections for mayors and deputy
mayors by indirect suffrage for 15 October 2015. The opposition expressed concern
about the sequencing proposed and requested the Commission to publish a
comprehensive calendar, including the legislative and presidential elections.
23. On 6 June, the Commission entered an operational phase by mapping polling
sites and undertaking a limited operation throughout the country to update the voter
registry. Following an official request by the Commission, MONUSCO provided
logistical support with air and road assets.
Situation in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
24. The Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR) continued to pose
a significant threat in the east, in particular in northern Rutshuru, southern Lubero
and some parts of Walikale territory in North Kivu and Mwenga territory in South
Kivu. On 18 April, several clashes were recorded between FDLR and FARDC,
including in the Virunga National Park during which three soldiers were killed. In
late April, FARDC launched offensive actions against FDLR, during which the
leader of an FDLR splinter group, “Colonel” Kasongo, was killed on or around
25 or 26 April. The circumstances surrounding his death remain unclear. In southern
Lubero territory, FDLR strengthened its alliance with Mayi-Mayi Lafontaine owing
to renewed aggression by Nduma Defence of Congo/Cheka.
25. On 18 April, FDLR/Forces combattantes Abacunguzi published a communiqué
in which they announced their intention to surrender to the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) in North and South Kivu on 30 May, in exchange
for negotiations and an intra-Rwandan dialogue. As a result, MONUSCO established
plans to absorb a possible influx of FDLR elements and their dependants.
26. On 30 May, in the presence of MONUSCO and representatives of the
Government, 102 active FDLR combatants voluntarily disarmed in Katiku, North
Kivu, and handed over 102 weapons. On 9 June, 83 FDLR members disarmed in
Kigogo, South Kivu, laying down 83 weapons. They were accompanied by
223 dependants. The Government expressed its desire for the disarmament process
to be concluded within 30 days, but noted that it was flexible, should there be solid
technical grounds for an extension of the timeline.
27. The situation in North Kivu was otherwise dominated by continuing military
operations against the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) and the Alliance des
patriotes pour un Congo libre et souverain (APCLS). In Beni territory, FARDC
registered significant progress in its operations against ADF and seized several
important camps. However, the group remains active and scattered, with some
spillover effects in Ituri district. ADF also continued to lay ambushes for FARDC.
The heaviest loss occurred on 1 May when 26 soldiers were killed in an ADF
ambush north-east of Beni. On 8 May, the chief of the Uganda People’s Defence

14-56259

5/18

S/2014/450

Force, General Katumba Wamala, met his Congolese counterpart, General Etumba,
in Beni to discuss ways of enhancing collaboration between the two armies in
neutralizing ADF.
28. In Masisi territory, the security situation improved significantly throughout the
reporting period following joint operations by FARDC and MONUSCO against
APCLS.
29. In South Kivu, the security situation remained unpredictable, in particular in
Fizi, Mwenga, Shabunda, Walungu and Uvira territories. While elements from
Mayi-Mayi groups Yakutumba, Bede and Raia Mutomboki surrendered to join the
disarmament process, their leaders did not surrender and the armed groups continue
to represent a threat to the population, the enhanced military posture of FARDC
notwithstanding.
30. In southern and central Katanga, the security situation remained fragile, with
sporadic Bakata Katanga attacks in Mitwaba and Sakania territories. Cross-border
armed activities from South Kivu by Mayi-Mayi Yakutumba, armed bandits and
suspected FDLR elements were reported in Kalemie, Moba and Nyunzu territories.
The head of the National Security Agency-Kabalo and the Kabalo civil society
coordinator confirmed the presence of FDLR elements in several parts of Kabalo
territory (300 km west of Kalemie). The period under review witnessed an
escalation in the Pygmy-Bantu conflict, with increased inter-community violence in
Kalemie, Manono, Moba and Nyunzu territories and local leaders stressing that
there was a need for a political solution.
31. In Orientale Province, the security situation remained volatile owing to
renewed armed group activities in Niangara and South Irumu territories and
recurrent tensions between Mbororo herders and local civilians in Ango and Bondo
territories. Continuing operations against the Forces de résistance patriotiques en
Ituri (FRPI) in South Irumu territory by FARDC with support from MONUSCO
resulted in a gradual improvement in the security situation and the progressive
return of displaced populations. Members of the Mbororo community were
reportedly targeted by FARDC soldiers, who accused them of being armed and
supporting the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA).
32. Recent reports indicate small groups of LRA elements crossing the border
from the Central African Republic into the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
presumably under heavy military pressure from the Ugandan military operating
under the banner of the African Union Regional Task Force. Incidents of abductions
of civilians, looting and extortions attributed to LRA increased within the NiangaraBangadi-Ngilima triangle and in the wider Dungu area.
33. On 14 April, the leader of Mayi-Mayi Simba, Paul Sadala, alias Morgan, was
brought in a critical condition to the MONUSCO operating base in Komanda, where
he was pronounced dead. He had reportedly been fatally injured while surrendering
to FARDC. The military prosecutor in Bunia, with support from MONUSCO, has
opened an investigation into the matter.
34. In Maniema, spillover effects from the conflict in the Kivus contributed to a
degradation of the fragile security situation. Incursions by Raia Mutomboki
elements into Kabambare and Punia territories and Mayi-Mayi Cheka and Simba
elements into Lubutu territory were noted.

6/18

14-56259

S/2014/450

Humanitarian situation
35. The estimated number of internally displaced persons in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo stands at 2.6 million, a decrease from 2.9 million in the
previous period. With an increase from 400,000 to 500,000 internally displaced
persons, Katanga is the only province where their numbers have globally increased.
North Kivu witnessed substantial new displacements in Masisi territory owing to
fighting between APCLS and FARDC, while new internally displaced persons
arrived in Lubero territory fleeing the activity of armed groups in Walikale territory.
36. On 16 April, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees launched a $274 million regional refugee response plan for refugees from
the Central African Republic, of which $72 million is earmarked for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The number of refugees from the Central African Republic
in Equateur and Orientale Provinces, which had decreased from 62,000 to 56,000
between February and April, increased once again in mid-May.
37. On the basis of comprehensive response plans, the pooled fund allocated
$13 million in June to respond to new humanitarian needs in South Irumu territory
in Ituri district, Masisi territory in North Kivu and throughout Katanga. While the
European Community Humanitarian Office pledged 5 million euros for Katanga in
April, the 2014 humanitarian appeal for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, with
a funding level set at $832 million, is only 15 per cent funded.
Economic developments
38. The International Monetary Fund projected that the gross domestic product of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo would grow by 8.7 per cent in 2014.
Economic growth continues to be driven primarily by the agriculture and mining
sectors, and in particular by the demand for copper, cobalt and gold. While the
foundations of the economy strengthened, the human development index remains
one of the lowest in the world and the poverty rate is estimated at 70 per cent of the
population. Gross domestic product per capita is currently less than $200, compared
with $374 in 1970. The unemployment rate exceeds 50 per cent.
39. On 20 March, the World Bank approved $73.1 million in technical assistance
to fund cumulative impact assessment studies on the Inga III hydropower dam
project. On 16 May, the Senate demanded additional time to consider the bill
sponsored by the Minister for Foreign Affairs on the ratification of the Inga III
treaty, signed with South Africa in November 2011.
Regional developments
40. The relationship between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda
continued to be clouded by the presence of 621 former M23 fighters still in Rwanda
and the delays in Congolese military operations against FDLR. The Congolese
technical mission to Rwanda, undertaken within the framework of the Nairobi
Declarations to register former M23 fighters, was twice denied entry into Rwanda.
The Government of Rwanda has expressed scepticism to SADC about the FDLR
voluntary disarmament initiative. The Congolese authorities, however, while
confirming that the military option against FDLR remains on the table, intend first
to assess the outcome of the FDLR disarmament process.

14-56259

7/18

S/2014/450

41. Relations with Uganda evolved considerably during the reporting period, as
illustrated by the visit to Beni of a high-ranking delegation from the Ugandan army,
led by its Chief of the Defence Staff, and the cooperation of the Ugandan authorities
in facilitating a Congolese technical mission to Uganda in May to register former
M23 fighters.
42. On 2 and 3 June, my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region and her
counterparts from the United States of America, the European Union and the African
Union, as well as my Special Representative (the “team of Special Envoys”)
travelled to Kinshasa and held discussions with the Government, civil society and
international partners on the way ahead on the key objectives of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
region.
43. From 20 to 23 May, the seventh meeting of the Technical Support Committee
of the Regional Oversight Mechanism was held in Goma. It was the first time that
the meeting had been held in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Discussions
focused on progress in the implementation of the regional action plan, including the
work of the Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism, the Joint Intelligence Fusion
Cell and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration activities.
44. On 2 June, in Nairobi, the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and MONUSCO signed a memorandum of understanding, pursuant to the summit of
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region on 31 July 2013, directing
the Committee of Chiefs of Defence Forces of the Conference to create a link
between the security mechanisms, the Joint Intelligence Fusion Cell, the Expanded
Joint Verification Mechanism, the Committee of Chiefs of Defence Staff and the
Committee of Ministers of Defence.
45. Mass expulsions of citizens of the Democratic Republic of the Congo from
the Congo, reportedly stemming from the rise in crime in Brazzaville, began on
4 April and sharply increased throughout the reporting period. Since April, more
than 133,000 people have arrived in Kinshasa, Bandundu and Equateur; some
2,000 expulsions were confirmed, while other returns appear to have been triggered
by the deteriorating situation in Brazzaville. On 2 June, a mixed commission was set
up by the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Congo to find solutions to the
humanitarian concerns resulting from the expulsions. The two countries also signed
an agreement on the movement and establishment of persons and goods and agreed
to establish a joint team to investigate allegations of human rights violations
committed during the expulsions.

III. Implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo
Good offices of my Special Representative
46. My Special Representative continued to encourage the development of a
political environment conducive to the implementation of critical national reforms,
including security sector reform, progress in stabilization, the timely
implementation of the third national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
plan and the holding of free and fair elections in line with the Constitution. In

8/18

14-56259

S/2014/450

chairing the monthly ambassadorial meetings, he pursued efforts to strengthen the
coordination of international support and initiatives to engage the Congolese
authorities in the areas of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, elections,
security sector reform and stabilization. As part of that engagement, he met the
President on 17 April and shared a joint letter from MONUSCO and the
14 ambassadors who constitute the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
elections, security sector reform and stabilization mechanism, requesting a highlevel meeting on security sector reform.
47. On 3 June, in meetings with the President and other Congolese actors, the team
of Special Envoys requested the publication of the full electoral calendar, including
for the presidential elections in 2016.
48. My Special Representative initiated a series of round tables on elections with
political leaders from both the political opposition and the majority. The first, also
attended by diplomats based in Kinshasa, was held on 30 April with the leaders of
five opposition parties: Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social, Union pour la
nation congolaise, Mouvement pour la libération du Congo, Forces acquises au
changement and Union des forces du changement. A second round table was held on
14 May with political parties of the majority (Parti du peuple pour la reconstruction
et la démocratie, Mouvement social pour le renouveau, Parti lumumbiste unifié,
Alliance pour le renouveau du Congo, Alliance des forces démocratiques du
Congo), the Independent National Electoral Commission and members of the
diplomatic community. On 27 May, at a third round table, my Special
Representative brought together the leading members of the majority and the
opposition. The meeting was an opportunity for both sides to present their
respective positions. They agreed to continue their discussions facilitated by my
Special Representative.
49. On 31 May, addressing the diplomatic corps, including my Special
Representative, the President voiced objections to round tables on electoral matters
led by third parties, in particular those involving opposition parties, that had not
participated in the National Dialogue consultations in 2013.
Protection of civilians
50. The new paradigm of MONUSCO, focused on mobility and flexibility, yielded
positive results in effectively tackling threats to civilians. Coordination mechanisms
with humanitarian agencies were reinforced, with a focus on prevention and early
warning.
51. MONUSCO focused on prevention by strengthening civil and military
coordination at the operational and tactical levels. In March, it established an
operations planning team to enhance civil-military planning and reinforce
coordination of the protection and stabilization actions of the Mission. In May, the
Force Commander reissued guidance on the protection of civilians and launched
discussions on further enhancing protection measures and improving the
coordination of protection activities with civilian counterparts.
52. At the tactical level, the community protection committees, supported by
community liaison assistants in areas in which MONUSCO is based, played an
important role in providing early warning and ensuring a rapid and appropriate
response by MONUSCO. During the reporting period, community focal points

14-56259

9/18

S/2014/450

transmitted more than 500 early warning alerts through the community alert
network. The Congolese authorities responded to 79 per cent of the alerts and
MONUSCO to 17 per cent. MONUSCO police participated in 17 joint protection
missions in various localities.
Mission deployment and neutralizing armed groups
53. The Mission continued to provide support to FARDC operations launched on
16 January against ADF around Kamango. Those operations are continuing and have
been marked by heavy fighting, with significant casualties sustained by both ADF
and FARDC.
54. In a joint operation launched by FARDC and MONUSCO on 14 March,
APCLS was cleared from its stronghold and headquarters near Lukweti in North
Kivu. MONUSCO provided attack helicopter and ground troop support. Pressure
from the operation resulted in the surrender of more than 100 APCLS elements,
including several high-ranking officers. While weakened, the group remained active,
as illustrated by its attacks against FARDC and MONUSCO on 5 April, 30 April and
from 7 to 9 May. The attacks were all repelled with the support of MONUSCO
attack helicopters. Operations against APCLS continue.
55. The launch of joint operations against FDLR awaits the green light from the
President and the outcome of the voluntary FDLR disarmament process in North
and South Kivu. Day and night patrols on the ground and by air continued to apply
military pressure on FDLR. MONUSCO supported FARDC in response to attacks
by FDLR in Nyamilima on 20 May and close to Rwindi on 21 May. In addition,
radio and video awareness-raising and leaflet drops were used to encourage FDLR
elements to join the disarmament process. MONUSCO provided logistical support
for the transportation of the 102 FDLR elements who had been disarmed to a camp
in Kanyabayonga and the 83 elements from Kigogo in Mwenga territory to the
transit camp in Walungu territory.
Support to security sector reform and police reform
56. MONUSCO continued to pursue a three-tiered approach to security sector
reform at the political, technical and operational levels and convened regular
meetings with the international community to exchange information and ensure a
coordinated approach.
57. On 14 May, MONUSCO took the lead in convening and chairing a first
meeting with partners involved in assisting the Government with the training of the
rapid reaction force. Belgium, France, South Africa and the European Union
Security Sector Reform Mission participated, while the Government chose not to
attend. Participants discussed coordination of the training programmes for the rapid
reaction force and agreed to review the way in which bilateral programmes could be
tailored to create a unified training doctrine best suited to the needs of the force.
58. MONUSCO continued to work with a range of international partners on
security sector reform, including the European Union Security Sector Reform
Mission and the European Union Police Mission. MONUSCO co-chaired a monthly
working group with the European Union Security Sector Reform Mission on army
and defence reform. With the European Union Police Mission, MONUSCO was
active in bolstering the Police Reform Monitoring Committee charged with

10/18

14-56259

S/2014/450

overseeing the five-year reform plan for the national police, which began in 2014.
The committee is now seen as the main body for reform of the national police when
the mandate of the European Union Police Mission ends in September 2014.
59. During the reporting period, 695 officers of the national police in the
Provinces of Bas-Congo, Kasai Occidental and South Kivu, including 94 middlelevel personnel, 55 trainers and 58 female officers, benefited from a pilot training
project on community policing techniques facilitated by MONUSCO and funded by
the United Kingdom. In Bunia, 139 police officers, including a woman, were trained
in election security, while in Kalemie 72 officers, including 9 women, were trained
in traffic control and regulation.
Justice and corrections institutions
60. Through its prosecution support cells, MONUSCO continued to assist the
military justice authorities in investigating and prosecuting serious crimes. In May,
MONUSCO and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) supported
the North Kivu military court in conducting mobile courts in Beni, with a view to
ensuring military justice and accountability for serious crimes committed by
FARDC in Beni during military operations. Cases against 20 FARDC soldiers were
opened and are continuing.
61. MONUSCO continued to provide technical support to the Congolese prison
authorities. On 2 April, the Mission put into operation a laboratory in the Ndolo
military prison in Kinshasa to facilitate the early detection and treatment of inmates
infected with tuberculosis. In the same prison, MONUSCO and UNDP constructed
and equipped two courtrooms, which were handed over to the prison authorities on
16 April. MONUSCO also constructed a separate block to house women with
infants in Makala prison in Kinshasa, which was handed over to national partners on
13 June. The renovation of Bafwasende prison in Orientale Province through a
quick-impact project was completed on 13 May.
Stabilization and peace consolidation
62. The revised International Security and Stabilization Support Strategy entered
its operational phase early in 2014. Through a MONUSCO needs assessment, the
territories of Mambasa in Orientale Province, Kalehe in South Kivu and Rutshuru in
North Kivu were identified as priority geographical areas where the new approach
would be piloted. The Peacebuilding Fund will support two of the pilot initiatives.
63. MONUSCO established four islands of stability as a step towards stabilization
in areas recently cleared of armed groups to pave the way for the return of State
authority and development. In Kiwanja-Rutshuru, units of the national police were
deployed, supported by MONUSCO police, with tents, rations and fuel. The
Territorial Administrator and civil servants have returned to the area. In
coordination with the newly reinstalled authorities, MONUSCO is developing a
package of activities that bridge protection and stabilization issues. It is focusing on
the opening of humanitarian access, the establishment of a democratic dialogue, the
planning of priority stabilization needs and the restoration of the social contract in
those areas where an improvement in the security situation is expected.
64. MONUSCO has developed support options to rehabilitate police, justice and
administrative buildings in the islands of stability. The Rutshuru prison has

14-56259

11/18

S/2014/450

reopened and its personnel have been trained by MONUSCO. The North Kivu
authorities have identified seven additional areas that are ready to be turned into
islands of stability.
Extraction and trade of natural resources
65. Together with the International Organization for Migration, MONUSCO has
monitored and evaluated the traceability of the supply chain for conflict-free
minerals through missions to North Kivu, South Kivu and Maniema Provinces. In
North Kivu, in March and April, the cooperative of the artisanal miners in Masisi
territory sold some 100 tons of conflict-free or “green” minerals through the Tin
Supply Chain Initiative tagging process of the International Tin Research Institute.
A tagging system is expected to begin by 30 June for 10 other conflict-free mine
sites in Masisi territory. Some 21 other mining sites were evaluated in April in North
Kivu for future validation. A second phase of validation of mining sites was
implemented in June for northern Katanga Province, also covered by the responsible
minerals trade project.
Support to disarmament, demobilization and reintegration; and disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and reintegration
66. Following the adoption of the third national disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration plan in December 2013, an operational plan was drafted. That plan sets
out the general principles and operating procedures for implementation of the
national plan. On that basis, a team of World Bank experts, in partnership with
MONUSCO, developed a project document for the plan, which was presented to the
international community on 21 June 2014. Reinsertion activities led by MONUSCO,
scheduled to last up to a year, will aim to bridge the gap between demobilization
and reintegration.
67. Between 1 April and 24 June, 305 combatants and dependants from Congolese
and foreign armed groups participated in the MONUSCO programme for
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and reintegration. That
included a total of 161 members of Congolese armed groups and 101 children
associated with armed groups. Some 150 elements of foreign armed groups have
surrendered to MONUSCO since 1 April, of whom 75 were fighters (59 from
FDLR), 2 were children associated with armed groups and 41 were dependants (in
addition to 28 civilian refugees). In addition, 90 FDLR elements were repatriated,
along with 34 dependants.
Electoral support
68. On 4 April, the Independent National Electoral Commission conveyed a
request for logistical support by MONUSCO for the second phase of mapping the
polling sites and a limited operation to update the voter registry. Following an
evaluation of the needs of the Commission and its own capacity, MONUSCO
responded favourably to the request. To ensure proper planning, identification of
support needs and coordination, my Special Representative reinvigorated the
electoral integrated task force, comprising MONUSCO, the United Nations country
team and the national structures involved in electoral logistics operations. The
UNDP project document on support to the electoral process was submitted to donors
in May. A decision on the level of funding is pending.

12/18

14-56259

S/2014/450

Human rights
69. Serious human rights violations and abuses, including rape and abductions,
continue to be committed by armed groups and the Congolese security forces. On
12 April, at least 60 civilians, including women, were reportedly abducted by FDLR
combatants in Buleusa village in Walikale territory. They were reportedly targeted
for refusing to take part in forced community labour imposed by FDLR leaders in
the area. MONUSCO was also informed of retaliatory acts, including mass rape and
lootings, reportedly carried out by Mayi-Mayi Simba and Mayi-Mayi Manu
elements against the local population in Mambasa territory between 14 and 21 April,
following the death of the Mayi-Mayi leader, Paul Sadala, alias Morgan, on
14 April. According to the preliminary findings of a human rights investigation
mission, during the period from 20 February to 18 May, at least 106 women,
including 33 minors, were reportedly raped, at least 100 individuals were abducted
and 3 civilians were summarily executed by Mayi-Mayi elements during attacks on
villages in Mambasa territory in Orientale Province.
70. Following investigations, MONUSCO confirmed the rape of at least 11 women
on 12 and 13 April and other serious human rights violations committed in Masisi
territory, North Kivu, by soldiers belonging to the 8th Military Region of FARDC.
High-level advocacy was undertaken with the leadership of FARDC to hold the
perpetrators accountable, in line with the human rights due diligence policy on
United Nations support to non-United Nations security forces, urging action and
warning that MONUSCO support to the regiment involved would be cut, should no
action be taken. MONUSCO is also concerned about allegations of violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law committed by FARDC and ADF
fighters in Beni territory.
Sexual violence
71. Armed groups and the Congolese defence and security forces have continued
to commit crimes of sexual violence. In April and May, such crimes were allegedly
committed against at least 139 women and 128 girls by elements of armed groups
and State agents. Members of FARDC were reportedly responsible for the rape of,
and other forms of sexual violence against, 56 women, including 22 girls. Elements
of the Mayi-Mayi group Patriotes résistants congolais were responsible for such
crimes against 21 women, including 12 girls, and other armed groups for such
crimes against 179 women, including 87 girls.
72. On 5 May, a military court in Goma ruled on cases against 39 FARDC soldiers
charged with rape and other serious human rights violations committed in Minova in
South Kivu in November 2012. The court convicted 26 soldiers, including 2 for
rape, 1 for murder and the rest for looting and military offences. The court acquitted
13 officers charged with command responsibility. In coordination with international
partners, MONUSCO provided technical and logistical support to the investigation,
assistance with security at the trial and for the protection of victims and witnesses.
Although the decision of the court is not subject to appeal, in line with the military
justice code, counsel for the victims decided to take the matter before the military
high court to defend their constitutional right to appeal against a judicial ruling.

14-56259

13/18

S/2014/450

Child protection and armed conflict
73. During the period under review, 21 children (4 girls and 17 boys) were
recruited into armed groups, including 8 under 15 years of age. The perpetrators
were FRPI (6), LRA (5), FDLR/Forces combattantes Abacunguzi (3), Raia
Mutomboki (3), APCLS (2), Union des patriotes congolais pour la paix (1) and
Mayi-Mayi Yakutumba (1). The children were used as porters, cooks, escorts and
fighters. MONUSCO, the United Nations Children’s Fund and other partners
identified 233 children (12 girls and 221 boys) who had escaped, surrendered or
had been separated from armed forces and groups during the period. That included
131 children between 13 and 17 years of age formerly associated with armed
groups, who were separated from the FARDC triage centres in Kitona (Bas-Congo),
Kamina (Katanga) and Kotakoli (Equateur) between 1 and 10 April.
74. Progress was made in the implementation of the action plan to prevent child
recruitment and other grave human rights violations against children. Following the
directive of the Ministry of the Interior to provincial governors dated 17 March, two
provincial joint technical working groups were established in North Kivu and South
Kivu. In the context of efforts to combat impunity for grave child rights violations,
five FARDC elements and one from the national police were convicted by the
Bukavu military court of raping children.
Monitoring the implementation of the arms embargo
75. MONUSCO continued to gather information on the movement of, and support
to, illegal armed groups. MONUSCO military observers conducted patrols in the
border areas, while the riverine radar monitored traffic moving across Lake Kivu. In
addition, MONUSCO unmanned aerial systems assisted with identifying crossborder smuggling routes. The unmanned aerial systems programme attained full
operational capability on 8 April, comprising a total of five aircraft, an enhanced
ground control station and a wide range of sensor functionalities.
Support for the disposal of explosive ordnance
76. Following the transfer of tasks to the United Nations country team, the United
Nations Mine Action Service continued to support the explosive ordnance disposal
team integrated within the MONUSCO structure in Goma and continued to carry out
humanitarian mine action activities within the United Nations country team and in
support of the national mine action authorities. During the reporting period,
4,217 items of unexploded ordnance were destroyed in North Kivu, ensuring the
safe movement of United Nations personnel and the local population, while
facilitating access for humanitarian agencies throughout the province.

IV. Safety and security of United Nations personnel
77. Security threats to United Nations staff, premises and operations remained
high in the northern part of North Kivu Province owing to ADF directly targeting
United Nations staff and installations. In Beni, an integrated operational strategy
was implemented in May by MONUSCO police, the national police and the
Department of Safety and Security of the Secretariat to reduce security risks in the
area. Three MONUSCO peacekeepers were injured by APCLS elements on 30 April
during military operations in Nyabiondo, North Kivu, in support of FARDC.

14/18

14-56259

S/2014/450

MONUSCO also recorded 28 crime-related incidents and 28 hazard-related
incidents. Those included the burglary of staff members’ residences, theft of United
Nations property and road accidents.

V. Mission reconfiguration and road map for the transfer
of tasks
Mission reconfiguration
78. MONUSCO continues to implement its reconfiguration to the east, in support
of the transition to a field-based mission focused on operations. By the end of
August 2014, some three quarters of all civilian staff will have redeployed to the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. A subsequent consolidation of premises
in Kinshasa is planned as the reconfiguration advances.
79. During the initial reconfiguration phase, by the end of February 2014,
204 headquarters personnel had moved from Kinshasa to Goma and established the
Mission hub for eastern operations, focused on fulfilling its mandated tasks for the
protection of civilians and for stabilization in the area. An additional
139 substantive, 186 support, 44 police and 112 Force headquarters personnel are
planned to reinforce the MONUSCO presence in Goma and the coordination of its
eastern operations, with staff reassignments carried out in phases between May and
August 2014.
80. Field offices in the east are being reinforced through the redeployment of some
130 civilian staff. The additional capacity will reinforce the ability of the Mission to
deliver its mandated tasks in the east and to enhance support in areas freed from
armed groups and the subsequently emerging islands of stability.
81. To maintain minimum monitoring and reporting functions in the west, antenna
offices comprising 10 staff members are being established in Bandundu, Kananga,
Kindu, Matadi, Mbandaka and Mbuji-Mayi, each composed of substantive, support
and police personnel. Planning is under way to co-locate the remaining MONUSCO
presence in each location with the United Nations country team and share support
functions.
82. The operational implications of the reconfiguration of MONUSCO for the
United Nations country team are significant. The United Nations Humanitarian Air
Service will continue to provide air transport services, based on available capacity,
once MONUSCO ceases its aviation services to the antenna locations on 30 June
2014. MONUSCO will, however, retain responsibility for aviation-related ground
services in all the antenna locations for a transitional period of a year, during which
time such responsibilities will be gradually transferred to the Government.
Similarly, MONUSCO will continue to support the security system in the antenna
locations by placing a security officer in each location for a year. Other elements of
the security system will be subject to cost-sharing arrangements managed by the
Department of Safety and Security.
Transfer of responsibilities
83. The implementation of the road map on the transfer of responsibilities is
moving forward. The transfer of electoral assistance and the consolidation of peace

14-56259

15/18

S/2014/450

and democracy tasks, however, pose significant challenges in the absence of
adequate funding by the Government and donors. The implementation of the
transfer road map has highlighted the urgent capacity needs of the United Nations
country team before it can fully take over MONUSCO responsibilities. The country
team currently has 209 staff in areas not affected by conflict, of which 15 are
internationals and 194 nationals.
84. The assessment of capacity needs was followed by the development of a
resource mobilization strategy. The country team drafted short briefs to be presented
to donors, which explain how responsibilities will be programmed, including
justification and estimates of financial resource needs.
85. The identification of additional programmatic responsibilities to be transferred
to the Government, the United Nations country team and donors is under way. My
Special Representative agreed with the Prime Minister on 21 April to convene a
joint task force on the transfer of responsibilities and reconfiguration.

VI. Observations
86. Since my previous report and the adoption of Security Council resolution 2147
(2014) extending the mandate of MONUSCO, some progress has been made in the
overall implementation of the United Nations strategy to address the recurring
cycles of violence in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and promote
stability in the Great Lakes region. Following the defeat of M23, military operations
against ADF have continued and the first steps towards the disarmament of FDLR
have been taken. The Government’s presence in areas cleared of armed groups,
including in the islands of stability supported by MONUSCO, is gradually
increasing. That progress, while welcome, is still too slow and remains extremely
fragile. ADF has been significantly weakened, but not defeated. The heavy losses
that it incurred during its operations against ADF notwithstanding, FARDC, with the
support of MONUSCO, needs to persist in its efforts to dismantle the command and
control structure of ADF.
87. The disarmament of FDLR, initiated on 30 May, needs to be completed
without delay. I would welcome a process that would achieve that result without
resorting to military action, but it must be credible and time bound. The engagement
of all partners, from the Government and MONUSCO to SADC and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, together with key Member
States in the region, is needed to ensure that there is no ambiguity and that there are
no preconditions for the disarmament of FDLR. A serious assessment of the process
to date, which has not yielded the expected results after the initial surrender of close
to 200 FDLR combatants, must be undertaken without delay. Military operations
against FDLR remain an option and should be seriously considered again if the
negotiated process produces inadequate results.
88. Armed groups continue to operate in the four eastern provinces and pose a
serious threat to civilians. In the wake of the defeat of M23, some 6,000 elements
belonging to armed groups surrendered to the Congolese authorities and to
MONUSCO. With the release of the project document for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme, it is incumbent upon the Government,
MONUSCO and the international community to ensure that the programme is now
made operational and adequately funded. Such a programme not only would help to

16/18

14-56259

S/2014/450

prevent those elements from returning to armed groups, but also would constitute an
important incentive for other members of armed groups to abandon their destructive
way of life. Concomitant progress on restoring the authority of the State in the east
and support for stabilization measures is also needed to ensure that no security
vacuum exists, that the population receives essential services and that economic
recovery can take root. I urge the Government to assign adequate resources, in
particular human resources, to this important objective. I also urge donors to
redouble their efforts in support of those initiatives in the east.
89. It remains essential that, while addressing the threat of armed groups in the
east, the Government, with the support of the international community, tackle the
root causes of the conflict through the implementation of key reforms, as it
committed to do under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region. I remain concerned by the slow
progress in the implementation of national commitments, in particular those relating
to army reform and the establishment of a rapid reaction force, a key element in the
exit strategy for MONUSCO set out in resolution 2147 (2014). However, the
national commitments are interlinked and progress on all fronts is required to
change the conflict dynamic. That will demand, first and foremost, strong
leadership. The international community, and in particular the United Nations,
stands ready to work in close partnership with the Government to ensure that those
fundamental reforms move forward. The upcoming electoral process, while of
seminal importance for the durable consolidation of democracy, should not distract
the Government from those key objectives.
90. Regarding preparations for the elections scheduled for 2015 and 2016, I
welcome the good offices undertaken by my Special Representative to help to
promote an inclusive and transparent political dialogue among all Congolese
stakeholders, in particular in view of the apprehensions over possible amendments
to the Constitution. I encourage the Congolese authorities to reinforce the
inclusiveness of the process so as to ensure that the coming elections are as widely
supported as possible. The timely publication of the full electoral calendar, in
particular, would contribute to that objective and help to ensure that the
international community lends its full support to the process.
91. In accordance with Security Council resolutions 2098 (2013) and 2147 (2014),
MONUSCO has transferred its technical support tasks for the elections to the United
Nations country team, namely UNDP. However, the electoral support project
developed by UNDP to provide technical assistance to the Independent National
Electoral Commission, complementing the good offices mandate of my Special
Representative and the Mission’s logistical assistance, remains largely unfunded. I
therefore call upon the international community to consider providing immediate
funding for the start-up of the electoral support project, although with the proviso
that any logistical and technical support will be continually assessed and reviewed.
92. The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the region remains central to the consolidation of peace and
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region. I welcome the
technical work under way at the regional level to implement its provisions. The
hosting by the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo of the seventh
meeting of the Technical Support Committee of the Regional Oversight Mechanism
in Goma in May was an important event for confidence-building and cooperation

14-56259

17/18

S/2014/450

between the countries of the Great Lakes region. At the same time, I wish to remind
all signatories to the Framework that they must abide fully by their regional
commitments, including respecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
neighbouring countries. I wholeheartedly welcome the continued involvement of the
team of Special Envoys from the African Union, the European Union and the United
States, under the leadership of my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region,
working in close collaboration with my Special Representative for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and head of MONUSCO. I also commend the President of
Angola for the important role that he is playing as Chair of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region in pursuing the work of his predecessor, the
President of Uganda, and fostering greater collaboration between key stakeholders
in the region.
93. Efforts to combat impunity and the promotion of accountability for
perpetrators of violations of human rights remain at the core of the MONUSCO
mandate. While recognizing the sovereignty of Congolese national institutions, I am
disappointed at the judgements rendered in the Minova trials, which fell short of the
expectations of the victims. Those verdicts also underscore the need for progress in
reforming the judiciary and strengthening its independence in order to enhance
efforts to combat impunity.
94. I am grateful to my Special Representative and Head of MONUSCO, Martin
Kobler, my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes region, Mary Robinson, and the
Special Envoys of the African Union, the European Union and the United States for
their tireless efforts. I am deeply appreciative of the work being done by the
MONUSCO personnel and the United Nations country team in what continues to be
a dangerous and unpredictable environment, in particular in the east. I especially
wish to thank the many national staff members who have been helping to advance
peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo through their work for
many years.

18/18

14-56259
