United Nations

Security Council

S/PV.3392/Corr.1
Provisional

Forty-ninth Year

3392nd Meeting
Wednesday, 22 June 1994, 1 p.m.
New York

Corrigendum

Page 7, second column, et seq.
Should read
Mr. Yañez-Barnuevo (Spain) (interpretation from
Spanish): My delegation voted in favour of resolution
929 (1994), which the Security Council has just adopted,
because we consider it imperative to act immediately to
contribute to putting an end to the massacres that continue
to take place in Rwanda, despite recent action by this
Council.
In this regard, the Government of Spain expresses its
appreciation to the French authorities for their courageous
and generous offer to cooperate with the Secretary-General
with a view to achieving the humanitarian objectives of the
United Nations in Rwanda.
The resolution we have just adopted spells out this
initiative in clear and precise terms by authorizing a
temporary operation -under national command and control,
and acting under Chapter VII of the Charter - aimed at
making an impartial contribution to the security of
displaced persons, refugees and the civilian population at
risk. In so doing, it attempts to achieve the humanitarian
objectives set forth in subparagraphs (a) and (b) of
paragraph 4 of resolution 925 (1994), adopted by the
Council a few weeks ago.
This exceptional action has become necessary in view
of the delays experienced by the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) in deploying the personnel
authorized in resolutions 918 (1994) and 925 (1994). As
indicated by the Secretary-General in his letter dated
19 June 1994, UNAMIR will probably not be in a position
for about three months to fully carry out the tasks entrusted

94-85957 (E)

to it in those resolutions. Given the deterioration of the
situation in Rwanda and the continuing massacres there,
as well as the danger that this situation may also affect
neighbouring countries, the international community
cannot remain idle for so long. We must act on the
ground as long as efforts by the United Nations, the
Organization of African Unity and neighbouring countries
to arrive at an effective cease-fire and a political solution
to the conflict are in progress.
My delegation considers it vital for an operation of
this magnitude, which carries obvious risks, to have the
cooperation of the parties. Resolution 929 (1994)
specifies the limited objectives of the mission, as well as
its interim nature, and it should dispel any doubt
concerning its status as a strictly humanitarian operation
that will be carried out in an impartial and neutral
manner. The operation, as the resolution specifies, will
not constitute an interposition force between the parties.
Much less will it be aimed against any one of them.
Also, given the fact that the multinational operation
is aimed at bridging the gap until the full deployment of
an expanded UNAMIR and for a two-month period, it is
also essential to attain and to maintain close and constant
cooperation with UNAMIR, in accordance with the
mechanisms to be established by the Secretary-General to
that effect. It would be regrettable if, due to a lack of
adequate coordination, the cure were worse than the
disease. That is why we are pleased to note that, in the
event of danger to the security and safety of UNAMIR
personnel, the Secretary-General, as he emphasizes in his
letter of 19 June 1994, would immediately assess the
situation and would formulate the appropriate
recommendations to the Security Council.

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
My delegation has repeatedly expressed the horror felt
by the Government and people of Spain at the atrocities
being carried out against the civilian population of Rwanda,
as well as the firm determination of my authorities to do
everything possible to contribute to bringing an end to this
situation.
In the European framework, Spain has been stressing
the need to coordinate joint action to assist the United
Nations in attaining its humanitarian objectives in Rwanda.
As a result of the French initiative, the necessary
consultations are being conducted within the Western

2

3392nd meeting
22 June 1994
European Union to coordinate the possible contributions
of its member States, always on the basis of the relevant
decisions of the Security Council.
In this context, the Government of Spain is prepared
to contribute logistic support to the operation being
authorized in resolution 929 (1994) and is also
considering the possibility of lending, from within
available resources, similar cooperation to assist in the
deployment of an expanded UNAMIR.
