United Nations

S/PV.6734

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6734th meeting
Monday, 12 March 2012, 9.50 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hague . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Juppé
Mr. Westerwelle
Mr. Caballeros
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Haroon
Mr. Portas
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Menan
Mrs. Rodham Clinton

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-25973 (E)

*1225973*

S/PV.6734

The meeting was called to order at 9.50 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General, Ministers and other representatives
participating in this meeting. Their collective presence
is an affirmation of the importance of the subject
matter to be addressed.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: It is a great pleasure to
welcome the Ministers attending this important
meeting. I thank Foreign Secretary Hague for using the
United Kingdom’s presidency of the Security Council
to focus on the dramatic developments that have taken
place in the Middle East and that are still in motion as
we speak.
The remarkable events of the past year have
transformed the region and changed the world. We see
a newly democratizing Tunisia — the country that
produced the initial spark that has since spread far and
wide. We see Libya putting decades of dictatorship
behind it. We see Yemen with a newly elected
President. And we see people across the region —
women and young people in the vanguard —
continuing to call for freedom and human rights, for
dignity and opportunity, for accountable Government,
and for an end to corruption and monopolies of wealth
and power. The spontaneous and home-grown
democratic movements are a credit to the Arab people.
But we must also recognize that the cost in
human suffering and loss of life has been large. We
have reached a sober moment. In Egypt, we continue to
urge a peaceful and early transfer of power to a civilian
Government. In Bahrain, there remains a need for an
all-inclusive dialogue and meaningful reform process.
In still other countries, people are standing up and
battling their fears to call for more political
empowerment and social justice.
In Syria, what started as a peaceful, popular call
for long-denied democratic rights has turned into a

2

dangerous spiral of violence leading both Syria and the
region into uncertainty. The Syrian Government has
failed to fulfil its responsibility to protect its own
people, and instead has subjected citizens in several
cities to military assault and disproportionate use of
force. These shameful operations continue. Sustained
attacks against Idlib, Homs and elsewhere in the
country have killed scores of people over the past
couple of days, including women and children.
I thank the Security Council for supporting
United Nations humanitarian efforts. The UnderSecretary-General
for
Humanitarian
Affairs,
Ms. Valerie Amos, continues her efforts, following her
visit to the country, to gain the unhindered access
needed to respond to the devastation. The International
Commission of Inquiry for Syria concluded that Syrian
Government forces have committed widespread,
systematic and gross human rights violations
amounting to crimes against humanity.
And still the conflict deepens. Increasing
numbers have fled internally or sought refuge in
neighbouring countries. More groups are picking up
arms. It is urgent for the international community to
stop the violence. The General Assembly has spoken
clearly in supporting the calls of the League of Arab
States for a cessation of violence and a peaceful
political solution. Together with Arab League
Secretary-General Elaraby, I have asked former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan to be our Joint Special
Envoy and to use his good offices to facilitate urgent
achievement of these goals. He will be assisted by
Deputy Special Envoy Nasser Al-Kidwa.
As members will have followed closely, the Joint
Special Envoy has just visited Syria over the weekend.
Prior to that, he had intensive consultations with me
and others in New York, as well as in Cairo with
Secretary-General Elaraby and a wide range of
ministers attending the Arab League ministerial
meeting there. In Damascus, he met twice with
President Al-Assad, with part of the opposition and
with Syrian civil society, business and religious
leaders. All interlocutors in Syria welcomed
Mr. Annan’s mission.
Mr. Annan held frank and comprehensive
discussions with President Al-Assad, and put concrete
proposals to the President. He urged President
Al-Assad to take immediate steps to bring an end to
violence and abuses, address the humanitarian crisis,

12-25973

S/PV.6734

and embark with Mr. Annan’s facilitation on a
peaceful, inclusive, Syrian-led political process that
would meet the legitimate and democratic aspirations
of the Syrian people.
I add my voice to that of Mr. Annan in urging
President Al-Assad to act swiftly, within the next few
days, in response to the proposals put forward by the
Joint Special Envoy. I appeal to the Security Council to
unite strongly behind ending the violence and
supporting Mr. Annan’s mission to help Syria pull back
from the brink of a deeper catastrophe. This is vital for
the Syrian people and for the entire region.
I appreciate the recent initiatives of the Russian
Federation and China, including their engagement with
Syria and with the League of Arab States. At this
crucial juncture, it will be essential for the Council to
speak with one voice, and I hope that the Council can
find its way towards adopting consensus resolution that
sends a signal of strong resolve.
Let me also say a few words about the broader
picture in the region going forward. I see five crucial
points to bear in mind.
First, leaders must choose the path of meaningful
reform, or make way for those who will. People do not
want cosmetic changes that give only the merest taste
of democracy. They want accountable governance and
firm measures against corruption and cronyism.
Secondly, we must promote pluralism and protect
the rights of minorities. Inclusive Government should
be the watchword in the region’s new democracies.
Thirdly, women have stood in the squares and
streets demanding change, and now have a right to sit
at the table, with real influence in decision-making and
safe from violence, intimidation and abuse. The deficit
in women’s empowerment has held back the Arab
region for too long.
Fourthly, we must create opportunities for young
people. To absorb young entrants into the workforce,
Arab countries need to create 50 million jobs within
the next decade.
Fifthly, there must be regional peace. A regional
awakening based on the ideals of freedom, dignity and
non-violence cannot be complete without a resolution
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Yet, the past year has not brought about new
momentum. The peace process continues to stagnate.

12-25973

The situation in Gaza is yet again proving its
unsustainability. I am gravely concerned about the
latest escalation between Gaza and Israel. Once again,
civilians are paying a terrible price. Rocket attacks
from Gaza against Israeli civilian areas are
unacceptable and must stop immediately. I reiterate my
call on Israel to exercise maximum restraint.
I have appealed to Israeli and Palestinian leaders
to embrace regional changes and to show the courage
and vision needed to reach a historic agreement.
Together with my Quartet partners, with whom I met
this morning, we will remain engaged to assist the
parties in forging a way ahead. We must create the
conditions for meaningful negotiations that will resolve
the core permanent status issues — namely, with
regard to territory, security, refugees and Jerusalem —
and end the occupation that started in 1967. That is the
only way to achieve a just and lasting peace that will
realize the vision of two States living side by side in
peace and security.
The region would also benefit from an end to
tensions rooted in concerns over Iran’s nuclear
programme. I urge all sides to exercise the utmost care
and restraint, commit to diplomatic efforts in good
faith and comply with all relevant resolutions of the
Council.
Two decades ago, a previous generation rebelled
against tyranny in Eastern Europe. The international
community was quick to help. Today, the international
community should engage once again. As we do so, it
will be crucial to move beyond some of the
assumptions that have often governed relationships
between Arab countries and their partners. One
damaging notion is that the Arab world is not ready for
democracy; another is that security must take
precedence over human rights.
Those assumptions have had the effect of keeping
unrepresentative Governments in power, with little to
show for democracy or security. The United Nations,
too, must update its approach to the region. We are
placing the full spectrum of our expertise and best
practices at the disposal of the countries in transition.
We are strongly committed to doing our part to enable
a profoundly changing region to achieve peace and
realize its potential.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.

3

S/PV.6734

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
I am grateful to the Secretary-General for his
briefing.
It is an honour to preside over this special
meeting of the Security Council on the Middle East.
The United Kingdom has convened this meeting for
two important reasons. The first is to call for
intensified international efforts to support political and
economic freedom in the Middle East while respecting
the sovereignty of Arab nations. That includes
meaningful assistance to Egypt, Tunisia, Yemen and
Libya and they strive to make a success of their
transitions. The second is to call once again for urgent,
essential Security Council action to stem the bloodshed
in Syria.
The Arab Spring, as it has become known, is
already the most significant event of the early twentyfirst century, with deep implications for international
peace and security. It is therefore right that it is
debated by the Security Council. Some people regard it
with fear and consternation, but in Britain we view it in
a strongly positive light. It raises the prospect of the
greatest enlargement of human freedom since the end
of the Cold War, and of a Middle East that in 20-years’
time could be made up of open, prosperous and stable
societies. If this scenario were also to include peace
between Israelis and Palestinians — a need underlined
by the events in and around Gaza over the past few
days — and include a negotiated settlement of the
nuclear crisis with Iran, then the case for helping it
become a reality is even stronger.
But if, instead, we turn away from the region, if
we downgrade our expectations and allow pessimism
to prevail, if we send a signal that repression and
violence will be tolerated, or if we allow Syria to
descend into civil war or to remain convulsed by
violence, then immense opportunities will be
squandered and some of the worst fears about the
region’s future could be realized.
We can see today positive developments that
seemed unthinkable two years ago — such as in
Tunisia, the first democratically elected Parliament
since the 1950s, with 24 per cent of the seats held by
women; in Libya, a new Government after 40 years of
one-man rule; and in Morocco, freer elections under a

4

new Constitution. Some of those countries face
immense challenges, and there will be setbacks as well
as progress in the years ahead.
But that strengthens the case for helping Arab
nations to build their institutions, open up their
economies and create strong civil societies, where such
assistance is requested. Britain is doing its part in that
regard. Our Arab partnership initiative is supporting
projects in 10 different countries. The international
community can do more on an even greater scale,
through international financial institutions, the Group
of Eight and regional organizations. The European
Union has made a bold offer of support to the region,
which must now be implemented in full.
We believe that, as we build on those efforts, we
should be guided by three clear principles. The first is
that demands for human rights and freedom are
universal and will spread by themselves over time,
because they are fundamental human aspirations. That
is not a new concept; it was enshrined in the Preamble
to the Charter of the United Nations and in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted by
the General Assembly 64 years ago. It is a truth that
Governments ignore at their peril. And it is proven by
the experience of many countries.
The Arab Spring reconfirms what history warns,
that when Governments respond with an iron fist to the
irrepressible dreams, legitimate demands and
unconquerable hopes of their citizens, they are doomed
to fail in the long term. Repression is a policy of
failure, and it cannot build stability. All Governments
in the region should embrace peaceful reform and
make decisive moves in the direction of greater
political and economic freedom. If not, we may see
more of the violent ruptures that can follow when
people demand rights that no amount of coercion will
ever persuade them to abandon.
The second fundamental principle is that we
cannot dictate change from the outside, nor would we
want to. There is no one model of democracy, and so it
is for the people of each country in the region to
determine their future in accordance with their
different cultures, traditions and political systems. But
no Government anywhere in the world can justify
violence against its people or say that the fundamental
democratic principle — the right of citizens to chose
and to change their representatives — does not apply in
its country.

12-25973

S/PV.6734

In Britain we will always stand for that vital
principle. And so we must also respect the choices that
Arab citizens make through the ballot box. That
includes being prepared to work with new elected
groups that draw their inspiration from Islam, while
holding them to the same high standards of
non-violence, respect for human rights and willingness
to respect the outcome of future elections that are
expected of others.
The third principle is that economic and political
reform go hand-in-hand. Economic success is essential
to support stability and prosperity. But, equally, there
can be no long-term stability without greater political
openness.
Finally, the Arab Spring will be the work of a
generation. We must show strategic patience in not
turning away from the region.
But all those good intentions will count for
nothing if we cannot stand by our values or meet our
responsibility in the most urgent crisis today. The
situation in Syria casts a long shadow over this debate.
In the eyes of the overwhelming majority of the world,
the Council has so far failed in its responsibilities
towards the Syrian people. It has failed to address the
brutal oppression of peaceful protesters by the Syrian
regime. It has not yet put its weight and authority
behind the efforts of the League of Arab States. It is
time for the Security Council to show unity and
leadership.
It should be possible for the Council to call for an
immediate end to the brutal repression and violations
of human rights. It should be possible for the Council
to demand an end to all violence and to call for
immediate and unhindered humanitarian access; to call
on the Syrian Government to implement its own
commitments to the League of Arab States by stopping
military action, withdrawing its forces from towns and
cities, releasing all political prisoners and allowing
access to the media; to endorse the work of the Arab
League and of Kofi Annan in his role as United
Nations-Arab League Joint Special Envoy; and to
support United Nations and Arab League facilitation of
a Syrian-led political transition. I call again on the
Council to adopt a resolution containing those essential
elements.
Beyond this Chamber, British experts are
working in Jordan, Turkey and Lebanon to help
document crimes against the Syrian people. I urge

12-25973

other nations represented here to join us in that effort
so that the regime knows it cannot proceed down its
path with impunity.
Not all countries here regard the Arab Spring in
the same light, but we have a shared responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security, and an
immense common interest in working together. That
was the very reason the United Nations was first
created, and we should act together in that spirit now,
not only in stemming bloodshed in Syria but also in
long-term support to that vital region.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor the other members of the Security
Council.
Mr. Juppé (France) (spoke in French): The
United Nations Charter entrusts to the Security Council
the primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security. The Organization also recognizes
the sovereignty of nations and non-interference as
fundamental principles. In 2005, the evolution of our
work led us to recognize that the Council had the
obligation to act when the responsibility to protect was
not assured and when gross violations of human rights
took place before our eyes, and that Governments were
accountable for acts of commission and omission alike.
That is the context in which we hold today’s
meeting, and I thank the United Kingdom for its
initiative in calling it. It is an opportunity for us to
consider what the Council can and should do to help
make the Arab Spring a force for peace and security in
the region and the world.
For more than a year, the Arab world has seen
unprecedented sweeping changes. With extraordinary
courage Tunisians, Egyptians, Libyans, Yemenis and
Syrians have braved oppression to demand their rights.
With admirable determination they have arisen to call
for their legitimate rights to freedom, human dignity
and democracy. France sees that thrust attests to the
universal aspiration to democracy, confirming yet
again the lessons of history that regimes that squelch
their people’s voices have no future, and that sooner or
later Governments that stifle human rights end up
crumbling.
The Security Council would not have known
about the situations in question but for the fact that a
number of them had degenerated under the obstinacy

5

S/PV.6734

of archaic Governments. In Tunisia and Egypt, the
people themselves gained the ouster of discredited
authorities and the beginnings of democratic
processes — not without difficulty, but nevertheless
without unleashing bloodbaths. In Jordan and
Morocco, the political authorities bravely chose
dialogue, reform and elections. I was in Morocco only
a few days ago, and that country is a hopeful example
for the entire region.
Of course, nothing has been settled once and for
all. Of course, as we all know, every democratic
revolution carries in itself the risk of disappointment
and retrogression. We all know that democratic
transitions take time. But history is on the march, and
the changes sweeping the Arab world are an
opportunity for the region — and for peace.
Libya, meanwhile, was not as fortunate, and the
Council’s obligation immediately became clear. The
Libyan people rose up against a dictator and a regime
determined to drown its hopes for freedom in blood.
On 26 February 2011, in an expression of universal
condemnation, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 1970 (2011), imposing sanctions
and calling on the International Criminal Court to deal
with the brutal repression, which its Prosecutor
classified as a crime against humanity. In the face of a
dictator threatening to massacre the population of
Benghazi, regional organizations, led by the League of
Arab States, but also including the African Union,
called on the Security Council to act. That was the
reason for resolution 1973 (2011), which France fought
tirelessly for.
France is proud to have played a part in the
adoption of that resolution. We strongly believe that in
it the Council collectively made the only right and
honourable decision. With that resolution, we saved
thousands of lives and protected the Libyan population.
Because of it, Benghazi will go down in history not as
a town of martyrdom but as a symbol of freedom. I
want to affirm unequivocally that to call into question
the legitimacy and legality of our actions, and to
insinuate that they themselves were tantamount to
criminal acts — despite all evidence to the contrary, as
the Human Rights Council’s Commission of Inquiry
confirmed yet again — is an utter distortion of history
and an insult to all Libyans who bravely fought to win
their freedom. Today, in adopting resolution 2040
(2012) to extend the mandate of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, the Council has continued to

6

shoulder its responsibility for helping the country to
build the rule of law and the foundations of its progress
towards democracy.
In Yemen, the Council has also met its
obligations. The unanimous adoption of resolution
2014 (2011) last October led to a peaceful transfer of
power, based on the initiative of the Gulf Cooperation
Council. After months of crises and conflicts, a
national unity Government was established, a new
President was elected with wide support, and tensions
were eased. Of course, not all problems have been
solved, but a new era of Yemeni history has dawned. In
both cases, the Council acted effectively because it
answered not only the calls of populations but also
those of regional organizations, which provided clarity
and pointed the way to political solutions.
Today, the Council is faced with a tragedy in
Syria. For the past year, ever since the first large
peaceful demonstration took place in Dar’a on
18 March 2011, the situation has grown more
unacceptable every day. Deaf to the voice of its people
and to all the appeals of the international community,
including those of the Arab League and its close
partners, the regime has plunged into ever more bloody
repression and ever more brutal violence. That
headlong rush has been unequivocally condemned in
the strongest possible terms by the General Assembly,
the Human Rights Council and the report of the
Commission of Inquiry, whose indictment of the
regime is overwhelming, and which again today
confirms that crimes against humanity are taking place.
The urgent necessity is clearly to stop the
violence and to secure the population’s access to
humanitarian aid. Ms. Amos will soon give the Council
an account of her visit, and she has already said that
she is horrified by what she has seen. We are already
familiar with the criminal acts, violence and horrors
that Syrian civilians live with every day. Like Hama
30 years ago, Homs will live in human history as a
town whose martyrdom haunts our memory.
Only a political response to the legitimate hopes
of the people and the enactment of the reforms so
loudly called for will lead to a resolution of the Syrian
crisis. That will be possible by means of a transition
based on the plan proposed by the League of Arab
States on 22 January, with the broad support of the
international community, as evidenced by General
Assembly resolution 66/253 of 16 February and the

12-25973

S/PV.6734

4 February Security Council vote. No other peaceful
solution is possible.
As I stressed before the Human Rights Council a
few days ago, the Syrian regime’s crimes must not go
unpunished. The day will come when that country’s
civil and military authorities will have to answer for
their actions in court. We should set in motion an
action by the International Criminal Court.
Let us make no mistake. The Council has a
historic responsibility for the crisis in Syria. We have
the obligation to put an end to the gross violations of
human rights and the downward spiral that threatens
the peace in Lebanon and the region. By failing to act,
we are abandoning the oppressed to their oppressors
and the Syrian people to violence and brutality. Every
day we fail to act, we are letting civil war gain yet
more ground over a peaceful solution. To be a member
of the Council is to be firmly engaged in the cause of
world peace and security. It is also to place the
common good above all other considerations. It is our
responsibility to act — and to act now — to finally put
an end to the martyrdom of the Syrian people and
allow them to regain control of their own future.
A draft resolution is being discussed to respond to
the emergency and to find a credible solution to the
ever worsening crisis. I say again today what I said on
31 January (see S/PV.6710). It is unacceptable for the
Council to be prevented from assuming its
responsibilities. Let us all support Kofi Annan’s
mission and the Arab League plan. After months of
deadlock, I call on China and Russia to heed the voices
of the Arab people and the global conscience, and to
join us.
Acting in favour of freedom for the Libyan,
Yemeni and Syrian peoples puts in sharp relief the
issue of the impotence of the Security Council in the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
In the Middle East there is another people whose
aspirations must be recognized. Are the claims of the
Palestinians not as legitimate as those expressed in the
rest of the region? Is it not natural for Palestinians to
wish for a Palestinian State to emerge? The security of
the Israeli State must also be ensured. France will
always stand by Israel to guarantee its security and will
not compromise. Today, we all know that the solution
of two States living side by side in peace and security
is the only viable one and the best guarantee of Israel’s
security.

12-25973

After so many repeated failures of the peace
process and so many years of suffering and
disappointed hopes, the time has come to change
method. That is the very direction of the appeal to the
General Assembly launched by President Sarkozy on
21 September 2011 (see A/66/PV.11). We are
convinced that we can no longer continue to do without
a multilateral forum as such, that of the Council, and
the support of all partners, in particular regional and
European. In the coming months, France will do
everything in its power so that a just and lasting peace
is at last established in the Middle East.
In talking of peace and security in that region of
the world, how can we not mention Iran? In that
country, the situation is becoming a little more
worrying every day with a regime that is pursuing a
nuclear programme that is clearly military, in violation
of the decisions of the Council and the International
Atomic Energy Agency, that vows to erase Israel from
the map, that undermines freedom of movement in the
Strait of Hormuz, that is of concern to its neighbours,
that oppresses the aspirations of its people to freedom
and democracy, and that daily isolates itself a little
further from the international community.
The Council has spoken firmly and must remain
resolute, as we know that there are two equally
unacceptable outcomes: a nuclear Iran or a bombed
Iran.
In recalling the peaceful revolutions and
developments under way on the southern shores of the
Mediterranean, what the tragedy taking place in Syria
proves to us is that the principle of legitimacy is
fundamental to any Government. The day when a
Government loses its legitimacy in the eyes of its
people, it is doomed. In that region of the world, one of
the major questions being asked is that of the
possibility of ensuring that communities and minorities
live together in national unity, respectful of the mutual
rights of the individual and human rights for all. The
promise of the Arab Spring is the universal right to
freedom, and I have confidence in its achievement.
Mr. Caballeros (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the United Kingdom for having organized
this meeting and we appreciate your gesture,
Mr. President, in presiding over it. We are also grateful
to the Secretary-General for his presentation to us.
I must say that the theme chosen for our debate
today, while captivating, poses a great challenge.

7

S/PV.6734

Unlike other very specific topics that we have
discussed in the past and that give rise to more or less
definite reactions, on this occasion the United
Kingdom has proposed to us a more general topic that
runs the risk of diluting any message that we would
wish to convey.
It would be presumptuous on our part to offer
interpretations on the significance of what has come to
be called the Arab Spring, whose model vision, which
captured the world’s attention, took place in Cairo’s
Tahrir Square in January 2011. The people’s
extraordinary courage, their calmness, their solidarity,
the persistence of their demands and their peaceful
nature, in particular, were a source of inspiration for all
humankind. While taking note of the huge difference
between those singular events compared to the
transitions that occurred in my own region between
1980 and 1990, from authoritarian regimes to
democratically elected civilian Governments, I would
like to respond to the challenge that you have posed to
us, Mr. President, with a brief comment on lessons
learned from our own experiences that may contribute
some tangible inputs to today’s debate. With a certain
modesty and aware of the great historical, cultural,
religious and political differences existing between our
respective regions, even within them, I draw on the
changes in my own country to mention seven points.
First, each case in Latin America was unique, and
certainly each situation in the Middle East will also be
so. For example, in my own country, we faced the need
to adopt a project for a multi-ethnic, pluricultural and
multilingual nation, responding to the specific realities
of Guatemala, which are not necessarily the same as
those of other countries in Latin America. That is why,
although it sounds trite to say that there are no
universally valid formulas for transitions, while
democratic values are similar everywhere, their
concrete expression in terms of internal organization,
juridical and institutional arrangements and forms of
popular participation can vary greatly from one
situation to another.
Secondly, cultural values matter, in particular in
multi-ethnic societies that seek to build a nation where
mutual respect and tolerance prevail. Such cultural
values must be compatible with democratic societies
and commitments to economic and social development.
By way of example, it is important that everyone,
regardless of their gender, ethnicity, local affiliation,
race or creed, has access to the same opportunities. I

8

am pleased to affirm that such values have been
established and strengthened in our region, and trust
that the same will happen in the countries that are the
subject of our debate.
Thirdly, progress is clearly not linear. It is not
easy to build plural and participatory systems of
governance where there is no fully established
democratic culture. It requires the strengthening, and
sometimes the creation, of institutions in various areas,
including a firm constitutional and legal basis, the
development of representative political parties and the
guarantee of freedom of expression. The agenda is
complex. It involves vested interests, often gives rise
to unforeseen consequences and from time to time
requires changes of direction. What is important is to
persevere and trust that age-old cultures that have
contributed so much to the civilized world will find the
strength, creativity and leadership to bring their
democratization to fruition.
That brings me to my fourth point.
Democratization processes must respond to the
aspirations, and have the consent of, the peoples and
national societies concerned. They must be the product
of a sense of ownership akin to national consensus, not
something imposed from outside. Achieving a model
with which the citizenship feels comfortable often
involves long periods of trial and adjustment, which
only confirms my previous points that we are dealing
with long-term processes. Those processes only
respond to the wishes of their own citizens. Also,
representative democracy requires that citizens have
confidence in the Governments that they elect.
Fifthly, today it is fashionable in the United
Nations to talk about the rule of law — a topic that did
not figure as prominently on our agenda a few years
ago. From the perspective of my own country, I would
like to affirm the crucial importance of having solid
institutions that combat impunity and lack of
transparency in the management of public finances
and, in general, the administration of justice. We
foresaw that in our peace accords, but state it more
directly in addressing the threat posed to the rule of
law in our country by the appearance of transnational
criminal cartels. Combating that scourge requires
strengthening our capacity in criminal prosecution, our
judicial system, our civil police and even our prison
system. The same will certainly be true for the
democratization processes under way in the Middle
East.

12-25973

S/PV.6734

Sixthly, in the case of Latin America, in general,
and Central America, in particular, the transition to
democracy was accompanied by a strong boost to
interregional
cooperation. The
emergence
of
Governments with shared values facilitated agreements
and fostered regionalism. In our case, cooperating to
resolve common problems and promoting mutual
support strengthened democracy in each country and
contributed to its joint defence. We believe that that
phenomenon of cooperation is relevant to the countries
that are the subject of our debate today, which is
already taking shape in the increasing role played by
the League of Arab States.
Lastly, let us not forget the imperative of
promoting economic and social development. It is true
that people seek freedom and dignity, but they also
demand greater well-being, in particular in societies
marked by high levels of inequality. It is interesting to
note that, in accordance with the main source of public
opinion polling in our region, Latinobarómetro, there is
a close correlation between economic performance and
the level of satisfaction with democracy. Seemingly,
the population not only aspires but also demands that
more plural and representative Governments generate
tangible benefits for the citizens. When that does not
happen, the rate of satisfaction with democratic
institutions falls dramatically.
The so-called Arab Spring evokes feelings that
are, overall, of a positive nature. That is why I have
concentrated more on the opportunities than on the
challenges in my statement. That is also why I have
deliberately avoided touching on other topics that some
would consider obligatory when discussing the Middle
East, such as the imperative of ending the conflict
between Israel and Palestine or the situation in Syria,
since we have addressed those matters in other
meetings of the Council.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The transformation processes that have
agitated the Middle East and North Africa reflect the
understandable aspirations of the peoples of those
countries, which deserve our support, for a better life,
increased opportunities for self-expression, participation
in political life and greater economic and social benefits.
Those processes are still far from over, and it is difficult
to make clear predictions about their prospects, since
sometimes they are accompanied by painful
civilizational, ethnic, religious, economic and political
rifts that create problems in terms of regional security.

12-25973

The goal for the international community is to
help ensure that those transformations do more good
than harm to the Arab world. The priority is to ensure
that the changes are peaceful and democratic and that
fundamental freedoms, human rights and the rights of
ethnic and religious minorities, including, of course,
the rights of Christians, are respected. We follow with
empathy the process of democratic State-building in
Egypt, Tunisia and Morocco; the efforts of the
Government of Yemen to stabilize the situation in
combating terrorism; and the efforts of the transitional
Government of Libya to restore normal life to the
country, prepare for elections and disarm insurgent
groups. We are providing valued humanitarian
assistance and stand ready to help in economic
recovery. For all members of the Council, the
international dimension of the continued Arab Spring is
of primary interest.
We believe that we can already draw some
conclusions. First of all, whatever goals might be set in
any given situation, they cannot be achieved by
misleading
the
international
community
or
manipulating Security Council decisions. Otherwise,
the credibility of the Council is diminished and trust
among its members eroded, which undermines the
ability of the Council to take decisions in the future.
Secondly, those organizations or countries that
take it upon themselves to implement Security Council
mandates must give a full account of their actions to
the Council. That also applies to NATO, which, as all
members know, offered to secure a no-fly zone in
Libya, but in reality engaged in massive bombings. It is
sad that there has as yet been no investigation
following up information about civilian casualties
caused by those bombings. We believe that the
Secretary-General should bring clarity to the matter by
invoking the 2008 Joint Declaration on United
Nations/NATO Secretariat Cooperation.
Thirdly, interference from the outside using brute
military force increases the threat of the illicit spread
of arms, thus jeopardizing the stability of the region.
We will need to take serious decisions regarding the
situation in Syria. It remains a cause for grave concern
to Russia and the entire international community.
Making hasty demands for regime change, imposing
unilateral sanctions designed to trigger economic
difficulties and social tensions in the country, inducing
the opposition to continue its confrontation with
authorities instead of promoting dialogue, and calling

9

S/PV.6734

for support of armed confrontation and even for foreign
military intervention are all risky recipes for
geopolitical engineering that can only result in the
spread of conflict.
There is no doubt whatsoever that the Syrian
authorities bear a huge share of responsibility for the
current situation. But one should not ignore the fact
that for a long time now they have been fighting not
unarmed men, but combat units, including the so-called
Free Syrian Army and extremist groups, including
Al-Qaida, which have recently committed a series of
murderous terrorist acts. If our absolute priority and
sincere wish is to immediately put an end to the
violence and provide humanitarian assistance to the
civilian population, then at this stage we should not be
talking about who started the conflict, but rather
discuss realistic and feasible approaches that would
allow us to achieve a ceasefire as a priority.
From the outset our approach has been clear and
consistent, aimed at finding an early solution to the
Syrian crisis without violence, through Syrian-led
inclusive political dialogue and the implementation of
long-due reforms. The following five principles of
settlement that Russia and the League of Arab States
agreed upon on 10 March are based on that same spirit:
first, the end of violence on the part of all sides;
secondly, an impartial monitoring mechanism; thirdly,
no outside interference; fourthly, unimpeded access for
humanitarian assistance to all Syrians; and, fifthly,
strong support for Kofi Annan’s mission aimed at
launching political dialogue between the Government
and all opposition groups, as mandated by the terms of
reference endorsed by the Secretary-General and the
Arab League. On that basis, we are prepared to agree to
a Security Council resolution, as we were ready to do
last autumn when our draft resolution was put forth.
Sadly, it was not supported by all Security Council
members.
The Arab Spring should in no way be used as a
pretext to diminish attention to the Palestinian issue.
We are convinced that the potential for conflict in the
Middle East and North Africa will remain high until a
comprehensive settlement is achieved in the Middle
East within the existing international legal framework.
This is a truly historic obligation for the international
community and the Security Council.
Unfortunately, the trends we have been
witnessing lately delay rather than hasten this prospect,

10

both in political terms — when the settlement
parameters that have been repeatedly endorsed by the
Security Council, the Quartet and the parties
themselves are called into question — and in practical
terms too, when the settlement activity of Israel in the
West Bank is literally shrinking the area available for
the necessary agreements.
A particular concern is the violation of the
ceasefire following the resurgence in strikes between
Israel and the Gaza Strip, in which civilians are
suffering on both sides. Under those circumstances, the
international community must step up its efforts. That
applies above all to the Quartet, which, as we discussed
with our colleagues before the start of today’s meeting,
should start working in a focused manner and on a
regular basis to create an environment conducive to
continuing direct Israeli-Palestinian contacts aimed at
full-fledged negotiations. We all welcome the initiative
of Jordan, which held a series of very useful meetings
between the Israelis and the Palestinians in Amman
this January, and we want that initiative to be
continued.
Russia also confirms our proposal for closer
cooperation between the Quartet and the relevant
structures of the League of Arab States. We are
confident that the Arab Peace Initiative remains
relevant and that its comprehensive implementation
will ensure the creation of a Palestinian State,
guarantee the security of Israel and establish peace and
stability throughout the Middle East. Russia is
prepared to engage in close cooperation with all
responsible members of the international community in
order to attain those goals.
Mrs. Rodham Clinton (United States of
America): Today we gather to discuss the wave of
change that has swept the Middle East and North
Africa. While each country’s experience has been
unique, all of those democratic movements have
sprung from a common desire for rights, freedom,
economic hope and human dignity. Those universal
aspirations are enshrined in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and in the Charter of the United
Nations, and they are fundamental to my country’s
identity and history and to those of many countries.
Those principles and the people who struggle to realize
them in their own societies deserve and demand our
collective support. We are inspired by the courage of
the people of the region, as they have shown their

12-25973

S/PV.6734

determination to move forward, and we believe that
their efforts should be supported.

Libya will not be the death of a dictator, but the birth
of a successful, stable and free nation.

Now I approach these conversations with a
healthy dose of humility, because we know that those
revolutions are not ours. They are not by us, for us or
against us. But we also know that as the international
community, we have the resources and capabilities to
support those who seek peaceful, meaningful
democratic change. We must also have the will.

The second case is Yemen. As Yemen unravelled
into violence last year, the Security Council stood
behind the efforts of the Gulf Cooperation Council and
Yemeni stakeholders to find a peaceful solution. In the
face of setbacks, we held firm.

Of course, change is unfolding in different ways
and in different places, and in each unique case our
tools have to be matched with the circumstances. Here
at the Security Council, three cases in particular
demand our attention today. Let me start with Libya
and the encouraging vote this morning (see S/PV.6733)
to renew and update the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya. Last year the Council, backed by the
Arab League and countries around the world, acted to
support the Libyan people at the hour of their greatest
need. Today’s vote reflects our continued commitment
to Libya and its transitional Government, which has
made tremendous strides. It also reflects the
recognition that our work is not yet done.
We will continue to aid UNSMIL’s efforts to
support the Libyan Government as it reintegrates those
who took up arms in the name of change into a
professional national army and a peaceful society. We
will continue helping Libya secure its borders against
proliferation, trafficking and extremism, while treating
refugees and migrants humanely. After so much
courage and sacrifice from the Libyan people, we are
proud to help Libya build a new foundation for the rule
of law and respect for human rights.
Just last week, Prime Minister El-Keib was here
in the Security Council (see S/PV.6731), where he
forcefully and eloquently defended the Security
Council’s assistance on behalf of the aspirations of the
Libyan people to chart their own futures.
I do not think there is any additional comment that
any of us need to add to the record as to the appropriate
measures taken by the Security Council in furtherance
of the resolutions authorizing action. We also met with
Prime Minister El-Keib in Washington, D.C., where we
discussed Libya’s progress in paving the way for fair
and free elections, as well as our work together on
security, student exchanges, civil society and medical
care for Libya’s war-wounded. Ultimate success for

12-25973

Many challenges lie ahead. But last month’s
successful presidential election and inauguration were
promising steps on the path towards a new democratic
chapter in Yemen’s history. As Yemen continues its
multi-year transition, reforms its Constitution,
convenes a national dialogue and continues to grapple
with its security and humanitarian challenges, we must
remain engaged and supportive.
The third case is Syria. Five weeks ago, the
Council was unable to stand united against the horrific
campaign of violence that has shocked the conscience
of the world — one that continues unabated as we
meet. We were blocked from even condemning the
violence and endorsing a peaceful plan developed by
Syria’s own neighbours.
The United States believes firmly in the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all Member
States. But we do not believe that sovereignty demands
that the Council stand silent when Governments
massacre their own people, threatening regional peace
and security in the process. We reject any equivalence
between premeditated murders by a Government’s
military regime and the actions of civilians under siege
who have been driven to self-defence. How cynical it
was to see that even as Al-Assad was receiving former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan, the Syrian army was
conducting a fresh assault on Idlib and continuing its
aggression in Hamah, Homs and Rastan.
We took note of the fact that this past weekend, in
Cairo, the Arab League and Russian Foreign Minister
Lavrov agreed on the need for an end of violence, for
full, unimpeded humanitarian access and for a political
process led by Kofi Annan and based on the terms of
the Arab League and General Assembly resolutions.
We believe that now is the time for all nations,
even those that have previously blocked our efforts, to
stand behind the humanitarian and political approach
spelled out by the Arab League. The international
community should say with one voice, without
hesitation or caveat, that the killings of innocent

11

S/PV.6734

Syrians must stop and a political transition must begin.
The Syrian people deserve the same opportunity to
shape their future that the Tunisians, Egyptians,
Libyans and Yemenis now enjoy. Our work here in the
Security Council is just one part of what the
international community must do to assist democratic
transitions all across the Middle East and North Africa.
We must support calls from within the region to
strengthen each of the building blocks of stable,
thriving
societies:
a
responsive,
accountable
Government, an energetic, effective economy and a
vibrant civil society. Politically, many countries,
including a number seated at this table, have unique,
first-hand expertise in how to build durable
democracies. And I appreciate the comments of the
Foreign Minister of Guatemala. Those are lessons we
can and should share.
Where countries are making gradual reforms, we
should offer our support and everywhere we must
safeguard, in word and action, the basic principles of
democracy and universal human rights.
I know that today there are those who question
whether Islamist politics can really be compatible with
democratic and universal principles and rights. The
people of the Arab Spring have a chance to answer that
question. Our policy is to focus less on what names
parties call themselves by and more on what they
choose to do. All political parties, religious and secular
alike, have a responsibility to their people to abide by
the basic tenets upon which this body is founded: to
reject violence; to uphold the rule of law; to respect the
freedoms of speech, association and assembly; to
safeguard religious freedom and tolerance; to protect
the rights of women and minorities; to establish
independent judiciaries; to promote a free press; to
surrender power if defeated at the polls; and to avoid
inciting conflicts that pull societies apart. Those are
standards against which we should all be measured,
and we need to commit to upholding them together.
Our experience elsewhere in the world has taught
us that successful political transitions are those that
quickly deliver economic results, especially job
opportunities and the hope for a better future. To
succeed, the Arab political awakening must also be an
economic awakening.
Governments across the region that share those
priorities will need to keep making the sometimes

12

difficult policy choices required to build a foundation
for inclusive, private sector-led growth.
As President of this year’s Group of Eight,
America is continuing the work of the Deauville
Partnership, which was started by France, to promote
regional integration, economic participation, job
creation and stabilization.
The last of these is especially pressing. The
international community must provide strong support
for the International Monetary Fund so as to quickly
conclude an economic reform and stabilization
programme with Egypt. We call on Egypt’s friends in
the region and around the world to be prepared to use
bilateral assistance to reinforce an IMF programme
with Egypt. Those efforts, both economic and political,
must, of course, include women. I thank the SecretaryGeneral for making that one of the five points he cited.
No transition can succeed with half of the population
left behind.
Durable democracy depends on civil society, and
we are proud to support individuals and organizations
seeking to improve their own societies.
Again, I know that there are those who say that
the concept of civil society is a Western imposition.
But after 2011, how can anyone honestly say that civil
society is not indigenous to the Middle East and North
Africa and, I would add, everywhere. We know that
lasting change comes from within. Societies must be
the authors of their own futures. But the international
community can provide tools that will help societies
reach those goals.
As new elected legislatures abolish old laws
intended to control civil liberties, we should continue
our collective support for measures that will protect
and nurture civil society, consistent with the
international human rights norms of free association,
assembly and expression. No one in the region is
exempt from the demands for change we have seen.
When a country like Iran claims to champion those
principles in the region and then brutally suppresses its
own people and supports suppression in Syria and
other places, its hypocrisy is clear to all.
President Obama and I have been consistent in
our belief that the Palestinian people, like their Arab
neighbours, Israelis and all people, deserve dignity,
liberty and the right to decide their own future. They
deserve a viable, independent Palestine alongside a

12-25973

S/PV.6734

secure Israel. We know from decades in the diplomatic
trenches that the only way to get there is through a
negotiated peace, one that cannot be dictated from
outside and one that we will continue to pursue through
every productive avenue, including a Quartet
consultation this morning.
Let me also condemn in the strongest terms the
rocket fire from Gaza into southern Israel, which
continued over the weekend. We call on those
responsible to take immediate action to stop those
attacks. We call on both sides — all sides — to make
every effort to restore calm.
Finally and crucially, we have to recognize that
the most consequential choices are the ones that will be
faced in the months ahead. It is up to the people and
leaders of the region to resist the calls of demagogues,
to compromise and build coalitions, to keep faith in
their system even when they lose at the polls, and to
protect the principles and institutions that ultimately
will protect them. Every democracy has to guard
against those who would hijack its freedoms for their
own ignoble ends. Building prosperous democratic
societies is not the job of a day, a week or even a year.
It is a continuous commitment and one we share. We as
a community of nations must help the people of the
Middle East and North Africa to make the most of the
rights and freedoms for which they have risked so
much.
Mr. Portas (Portugal): Thank you, Sir, for
organizing this very important, appropriate and timely
debate. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
important statement.
The popular uprisings that led to the so-called
Arab
Spring
represent
the
most
powerful
transformation in world politics since the fall of the
Berlin wall. Although unpredicted, those changes prove
an old rule of politics — failure to reform leads to
revolution. Political leaderships that lose the sense of
history are bound to be on the wrong side of history.
For too long, the world condoned autocratic regimes,
looked away from the repression of their own citizens,
and turned a deaf ear to the calls for freedom and for
the respect of basic human rights.
The upheavals in Tunisia and Egypt shook the
foundations of that paradigm, and the notorious
massacre in Benghazi stirred the international
community into action in defence of the values and
objectives of the United Nations. Those were popular-

12-25973

led processes. Coming 10 years after 9/11, they were
not instigated from the outside, or by Al-Qaida, which
is politically very significant.
What is happening across the Arab world offers a
unique opportunity both for the countries of the region
and for the world at large. Those countries have the
chance to elect democratic Governments, foster the
rule of law, protect and promote human rights, value
the role of women, respect minorities and achieve
widespread economic and social progress.
The international community must also seize this
opportunity to advance the principles of the United
Nations that we all share, and thus to strengthen the
conditions for a more peaceful, prosperous and stable
international order. In order to do so, we must be clear
in our aims and principles, while striving to avoid old
mistakes. Let me mention some of the principles that
frame Portugal’s perspective.
First, continued ownership of the process by the
peoples concerned is essential. We are witnessing
home-grown, popular-led processes that are the result
of the courage and the will for change of those
societies. We should be humbled by their example and
we should listen, understand and offer our help where
and when support is required from us.
Secondly, each country is an individual case and
must respond to different challenges. We must
recognize existing differences. There is no one-sizefits-all model.
Thirdly, we must resist the temptation to try to
export political models. Human rights are universal;
political models are specific. It is up to voters in each
country to choose their own future, and we must accept
without reservation the results of credible, fair and
transparent electoral processes.
Fourthly, we must recognize the participation of
Islamic parties in Governments as natural to the
political process. In democratic societies, parties will
be judged by the people according to their performance
and capacity to deliver on the expectations of their
citizens.
Fifthly, religious freedom is essential to human
dignity. We must not judge others on the basis of our
own religious, social or cultural beliefs, and we expect
the same from others. We must distinguish faith from
fanaticism.

13

S/PV.6734

Sixthly, building a democratic society takes time
and patience. It is a path paved with tensions and often
with contradictions. We Portuguese learned that
through our own experience some decades ago.
Finally, the broad institutional, cultural, ethnic
and spiritual diversity of several of the societies
currently experiencing such historical and profound
change may give rise to specific tensions and security
concerns. Therefore, the social cohesion and territorial
integrity of those countries must be constantly at the
forefront of our concerns.
Regrettably and flagrantly, one country has
become a tragedy: Syria. As in Tunisia, Egypt, Libya
or Yemen, the Syrian people peacefully demanded the
legitimate fulfilment of their basic rights. Nevertheless,
as we speak, the ruthless campaign of repression
against the civilian population of Syria is continuing.
For a year now, women, men and children have been
massively and indiscriminately killed by their own
State security forces. Human rights, including the basic
right to humanitarian assistance, are being
systematically violated on a large scale.
The international community has clearly voiced
its strong condemnation of those actions through the
General Assembly, the Human Rights Council and the
Group of Friends of Syria, which enjoys large and
widespread participation. Al-Assad’s regime remains
deaf to all those calls. Reforms were promised; none
was credibly implemented.
We regret that the Security Council has not yet
been able to take a forceful, unified position to end the
violence and make way for a Syrian-led political
process reflecting the Arab League proposals. How
many more thousands of dead will it take for the
Council to meet its responsibilities? How long will we
sit silent while the Syrian regime pushes the country
into bloody sectarian conflict and civil war?
The unprecedented appointment of Mr. Kofi
Annan, a former Secretary-General and a Nobel
laureate, as Joint Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations and of the SecretaryGeneral of the League of Arab States represents the
will of the international community to put an end to the
suffering of the Syrian people. His mission represents
the last opportunity to prevent Syria from spiralling
into civil war.

14

I therefore urge the Council and appeal to all its
members to unite in public and full support of
Mr. Annan and the objectives he has outlined, in
accordance with the General Assembly resolution
(resolution 66/253) for an end to all violence, full
access to humanitarian aid and the launching of a
Syrian-led inclusive political process.
The profound changes taking place around the
Arab world render the solution of the IsraeliPalestinian question even more urgent. Palestinians
have the right to their independent State, living in
peace and security alongside Israel. Palestinians have
prepared themselves to fully and efficiently run their
own State, and that has been acknowledged by the
international community at large. Fulfilling the
legitimate ambitions of both sides can only be attained
through serious and credible negotiations between the
two parties that take into account the rightful concerns
of each side.
We all know that the solution lies in the
framework of the parameters; what is lacking is
political will. We need concrete and tangible actions
that bring Israelis and Palestinians back to the
negotiation table to engage in the substance and to
accept a precise calendar, as proposed by the Quartet
on the Middle East and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Europeans have a particular responsibility in this
context, and we must play an active role to break the
present deadlock. Tensions are mounting and time is
quickly running out. If a new surge in violence is to be
avoided, both parties and the international community
must act promptly.
Rampant settlement activity, demolitions of
Palestinian homes and displacement of innocent people
continue. They are illegal. They undermine the
Palestinian institutions and leaders. They increase
frustration and create an explosive mix. We appeal to
Israel to stop those activities, as they fatally threaten
the viability of any mutually agreed political solution.
Israel has legitimate security concerns, but they can
only be fully addressed in an efficient way through a
negotiated settlement.
Portugal is committed to working together with
our Arab neighbours and friends, to whom we are
linked by centuries of mutual acquaintance, shared
history and common purpose. We will do it bilaterally
and within the framework of the United Nations and
the European Union. The work ahead is immense but I

12-25973

S/PV.6734

believe that, collectively, we will prevail in on path to
freedom, justice and democracy.

society, to respect for minorities, to religious tolerance
and to domestic and external peace.

Mr. Westerwelle (Germany): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for this initiative and for
your leadership. I also thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.

Women have been a driving force for change in
the region; we urge all partners in transition to
strengthen their rights.

Change has come to the Arab world. It has come
because the peoples in the region, especially the youth,
have stood up for freedom, participation and dignity. I
want to congratulate the peoples of Tunisia, Egypt and
Libya, as well as those of Morocco, Yemen and Jordan,
on the progress they have made, each in their own way.
The League of Arab States has responded to calls
for reform. We applaud the constructive role it has
played over the past 12 months.
The changes in the Arab world reflect a beginning
globalization of values. People all over the world are
demanding their universal human rights. The values of
the United Nations are gaining ground. We are still
only at the beginning but, in the long term, all the
people of the region will benefit. And so will we, as
their neighbours in the European Union. As
neighbours, we are ready to help.
Germany took an early decision to assist the
countries in transition. Our support is guided by three
principles. First, reform must come from within. We
stand ready to support countries that choose democratic
change. Secondly, no two countries in the Arab world
are alike. Each country must choose its own path and
find its own pace. Finally, we know that the road to
democracy is not linear. It is a difficult passage, which
requires patience and persistence.
Liberty and democracy require a promising
economic perspective. We have offered transformation
partnerships to all countries in question. We stand
ready to support them with know-how, investments and
open markets in Europe. A focus of our international
support should be on education. A good education for
the youth is the key for any future economic success.
Many in the West fear the rise of political Islam.
But the notion that Islam and democracy are
incompatible is wrong. We have engaged in dialogue
with democratic Islamic parties.
We are ready to respect cultural transitions. At the
same time, we are looking for clear commitments to
human rights and to the rule of law, to a pluralistic

12-25973

The changes in the region have made it even
more urgent to make progress towards a two-State
solution for Israel and Palestine. I therefore welcome
the meeting of the Quartet principals today. All parties
must do everything to ease tensions and to avoid an
escalation on the ground. I am deeply worried about
the flare up of violence around Gaza. The shelling with
rockets of innocent people is unacceptable and must
stop.
The Iranian nuclear programme challenges the
stability of the region and the international
non-proliferation regime. A nuclear-armed Iran is not
acceptable.
The E3+3 and Iran have expressed their
willingness to engage in talks. We want, and we work
for, a political and diplomatic solution. There is still
time for diplomacy. Irrespective of the nuclear issue,
we will not forget how the Iranian regime has failed to
respond the legitimate demands of its people.
In Yemen, the election of President Al-Hadi
marks an important milestone in the political transition.
I visited Sana’a two days ago. Yemen continues to face
tremendous challenges, but it is in a much better
situation today than it was a year ago. Today, there is a
genuine chance to achieve national reconciliation. The
people of Yemen deserve our full support.
We are all grateful for the peaceful transfer of
power. The Gulf Cooperation Council played a key
role. So did the Security Council and SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon. Those joint efforts made the
Yemeni-led transition process possible. In many
regards, the case of Yemen may serve as a model for
political transition and for conflict resolution for this
Council.
This week marks an anniversary for the
beginning of peaceful protests in Syria. From the start,
Germany has called for the Security Council to act.
There has been much discussion on Syria in the
Chamber, but the Council has failed to live up to its
responsibility. Peaceful protest has been put down with
horrific violence and murder. Among the 8,000 dead,

15

S/PV.6734

there are hundreds of children. That violence must end,
and it must end now.

here today, have demonstrated the importance they
attribute to the matter before us.

We have been watching with admiration the
growing number of Syrians who risk life and limb
every day for a better future. The people in Syria
overcome fear every day, in the face of overwhelming
repression and violence. Their courage arises from both
hope and despair. Let us here in the Security Council
give them more reason for hope than for despair.

A little more than a year ago, reacting to a police
officer’s action that could be described as
unremarkable, a young Tunisian chose to set himself
on fire in order to express his anger, or rather his
despair, at continuing to live in a society where
inequality was increasingly prevalent and where
shameless displays of wealth existed side by side with
rampant poverty.

Germany has been working tirelessly for a
political solution. We must prevent further escalation.
Too much time has been wasted. We see three
priorities: first, an end to violence; secondly,
immediate and unhindered access for humanitarian aid;
and thirdly, a process of peaceful transition led by the
Syrians and based on the decisions of the Arab League.
It is my firm conviction that only the Syrian
people themselves can decide their future. They have
been expressing their will throughout the past 12
months, and no one can doubt their desire for change.
We extend our hand to all those working for peaceful
and democratic change, in particular the Syrian
National Council. In a new Syria, all Syrians must be
able to enjoy their full rights regardless of affiliation,
ethnicity, belief or gender.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, the Arab League,
Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan, High Commissioner
for Human Rights Navanethem Pillay, and Ms. Valerie
Amos for their untiring efforts. Germany will continue
to push for action in the Council, in other United
Nations bodies, in the European Union and with likeminded partners in the Group of Friends of the Syrian
People. Sending a strong signal and taking effective
action is what we owe to the people of Syria. We owe it
to the people, to the children, to the families, and to the
victims. Upon it depends the credibility of the Council;
it is the only way the Council can live up to its
responsibility under the Charter.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I wish to
begin by thanking the United Kingdom for having
organized today’s debate, which provides us with a
special opportunity to consider the situation in the
Middle East through the prism of the demands of the
people and the changes taking place there. I should like
to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and
welcome the presence of Ministers who, by travelling

16

That act was the trigger for the far-reaching
change that is shaking several Arab States. In fact, it
was a revolution comparable to the French Revolution
of 1789, which Hegel described as a splendid dawn.
From Tunisia to Bahrain, from Egypt to Libya to
Yemen and Syria, young people rose up with a single
voice to demand more justice, more equality and a
better distribution of the wealth of their countries.
They were asking, in a word, for democracy.
Surprised by the scope of the unprecedented
rebellion, some Heads of State were forced out of
power. However, that was not enough to re-establish
calm because, in reality, the aim of the youth
movement was the establishment of a new democratic
society. While a leader may be ousted in a few months,
establishing such a democratic society requires more
time and greater sacrifices.
The challenges of the current situation in the
Middle East are legion, but they also provide major
opportunities for the peoples of the region. The
challenges involve rebuilding countries where justice,
equality and human rights will now be the
cornerstones. From that point of view, re-establishing
peace, security and national unity are the first
challenges to be met. The situation is complicated
further by the uncontrolled movement of weapons, the
emergence of armed militias, acts of vengeance and the
settlement of accounts, refusal to disarm — all of
which exacerbate insecurity and the lack of stability in
the countries and regions involved.
Another challenge to be met is the humanitarian.
In countries where revolution has taken place,
thousands of people have had to flee their homes and
seek refuge in the interior of their countries or in
neighbouring countries. The situation calls for
emergency humanitarian aid, which is not always easy
to mobilize or deploy in isolated areas where access is
difficult. This is where the concept of the responsibility

12-25973

S/PV.6734

to protect comes in. The concept must be clearly
defined so that it may be implemented in situations
where human rights are violated on a massive scale.
Beyond those challenges, it must be said that the
convulsions in the Arab world offer opportunities.
These include, most importantly, freedom of
expression, the ability of people to choose their
leaders, and the participation of all stakeholders in
society in the management of public affairs. The
revolutions in the Middle East remind us of the
importance of establishing good economic and political
governance to foster development.
Because
such
revolutions
arise
from
unemployment among highly educated and trained
young
people,
uncontrolled
poverty,
soaring
commodity prices, the failures of systems of justice,
the abuse of power and corruption, they offer
opportunities to the new leaders of the countries in
question and elsewhere to position the human being at
the heart of development. They must work in a spirit of
openness and complementarity in order to create
conditions conducive to development.
However, new democratic countries and those on
the way to becoming democratic cannot rebuild alone.
They must be assisted with substantial economic aid
that can help them to offer their societies a new way of
life in which young people no longer have to resort to
acts of despair. Indeed, building democratic societies
must go hand in hand with better living conditions for
people. The claims of the people of the Arab world
have now become part of history. Like any impetus for
freedom, they are a wager, and like any wager, they
must be well supported.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Sir, for having
organized today’s ministerial-level discussion of the
challenges confronting the Middle East and the
opportunities being offered to its peoples to live in
dignity, peace, stability, and respect for human rights
and the rule of law. We also welcome the attendance
and participation of Secretary-General Mr. Ban
Ki-moon in today’s meeting.
The changes that the Arab region has seen
recently have launched a new era in which the peoples
of the region have regained their ability to control their
destiny, influence political decision-making and
contribute to building their present and their future.
The changes have been diverse in scope, depth and

12-25973

methodology. They have engendered many advantages
and gains, the most important of which is the birth of
genuine hope that the past has been overcome and that
a future awaits in which all sectors and strata of society
shall participate in the building of institutions that
respect the will of people and involve them in the
founding of democracy.
No one should underestimate the challenges
facing the Middle East. In discussing those challenges,
we cannot fail to tackle the crisis that has cast a dark
shadow across the entire region and has dangerously
escalated in recent days. The greatest and most
dangerous threat to the stability and security of the
Middle East is embodied in the policy of occupation
and settlement that Israel continues to espouse, in
violation
of
international
legitimacy,
signed
agreements and the founding principles of the peace
process.
The dead end reached in the Palestinian-Israeli
negotiations, despite repeated international efforts, and
Israel’s continued acceleration of its settlement
activities, especially in Jerusalem, the construction of
the wall and the siege of the Gaza Strip have bred
frustration and despair that threaten the security and
stability of the entire region. The immediate and urgent
challenge facing the Security Council is the creation of
openings to resume negotiations and moving them
towards a just and comprehensive solution, which it
must seek to achieve as soon as possible.
The international community, and particularly
influential States thereof, has a big and decisive role to
play in influencing the parties and activating the twoState solution in the context of a just, comprehensive
and full peace that would guarantee the emergence of a
viable Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, and the entrenchment of peace and security for
peoples throughout the region, without exception.
In the Arab Maghreb region, a new dawn has
broken over sisterly Tunisia and the wheel of change
has turned towards democracy and a State of legal
institutions, with the participation of all sectors of
society. Tunisia has become a new and active
participant in building the Arab Maghreb coalition that
we all desire.
As for sisterly Libya, and regardless of the
difficulties and challenges facing its Arab Maghreb
people in their transition, no one can deny that the
Libyan people are now much better off than they have

17

S/PV.6734

been at any time during the past 40 years. They are
now endowed with the resolve, resources and skills
that will allow Libya to turn a new leaf in its modern
history and build a democratic State that is unified and
consolidated. The Libyan people have emerged
victorious and liberated, thanks not only to the courage
and resolve they displayed in trying times, but also to
the unwavering and timely support of the international
community, and especially the League of Arab States
and the Security Council.
It is with great optimism and determination to
overcome all obstacles that the brotherly Egyptian
people are moving forward through a series of
transformations endorsed by their national forces. We
trust that the genius and history of that people will
enable them to resolve all difficulties and to achieve
their aspirations to liberty, democracy and social
justice.
In that regard, we welcome the peaceful approach
adopted by sisterly Yemen in order to ensure the
organized transfer of power pursuant to the successful
implementation of the initiative of the Arab Gulf
countries, with United Nations assistance.
At the same time, we regret the tragedy endured
by the brotherly Syrian people over the past year,
which threatens to erupt into a civil war with
unwelcome consequences. Morocco welcomes the
appointment of Mr. Kofi Annan as Joint Special Envoy
of the United Nations and the Arab League. We hope
that his efforts will contribute to halting the violence,
facilitating humanitarian access, and laying the
necessary groundwork for launching a national
dialogue with a view to implementing the Arab
resolutions and guaranteeing the territorial integrity
and unity of sisterly Syria. Morocco reiterates that the
Council must speak with one voice in addressing the
situation by implementing the relevant resolutions of
the Arab League.
The reforms launched in Morocco more than
10 years ago under the leadership of His Majesty
Mohammed VI have given historic momentum to the
drive towards democracy and the democratic progress
that the Kingdom has already achieved. They have also
contributed to creating more individual and collective
freedoms. On the basis of strictly internal dynamics
born of national political resolve, Morocco has adopted
important measures, including profound constitutional
reforms, and held transparent elections leading to the

18

formation of a new Government committed to
combating corruption, reforming the judiciary and
focusing on the enhancement of women’s role in all
fields. We are ready to continue sharing our experience
with our brethren in all fields of endeavour, including
political pluralism, the role of civil society and
capacity-building in the service of a State of law and
order.
Whatever its internal capacities, no State of our
region can stand along against the challenges of
terrorism, secession and development, or guarantee
openness and democracy. Any national effort and
outcome will therefore be limited if not complemented
and nourished by regional cooperation based on shared
history, current needs, and aspirations to a common
future. Such cooperation would strengthen the people
of the region, enabling them to achieve economic
integration to the benefit of all States. That is what we
hope to accomplish in the Arab Maghreb region, which
has seen positive and unprecedented movement in
recent months that is cause for optimism. We will work
tirelessly to maintain these dynamics in order to
confront many of the challenges we continue to face
and the dangerous threats to our security and territorial
integrity. We hope that these efforts will enjoy the
active support of all countries of the region.
In closing, no one can underestimate the
difficulties and obstacles to be surmounted in
achieving the objectives of democratic transition.
Similarly, no one should underestimate the energy of
the Arab peoples or their ability to overcome these
challenges, each according to its own specificities,
historical assets, and particular experience. The road
towards strengthening and building democracy is long
and wearisome and calls for wisdom and foresight in
entrenching the foundations of stability, without which
true democratic institutions and structures cannot be
established. The international community has a great
responsibility and role to play in guaranteeing the
success of these efforts and in offering support and
encouragement of all kinds throughout every stage of
democratic transition. We hope that the international
community will not disappoint the peoples who are
waiting for and aspiring to that transition.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China welcomes the presence of Mr. William Hague,
Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs of the United Kingdom, to preside over today’s

12-25973

S/PV.6734

meeting. I also wish to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his statement.
The situation in the Middle East is undergoing
unprecedented changes. In some countries the situation
is turbulent. That has of course caused widespread
concern throughout the world. Developments in the
situation in the Middle East have a major impact on
world political and economic affairs. Without stability
and development in that region, the recovery of the
world economy will remain elusive and world peace
will remain in serious jeopardy.
At a time when the consequences of the
international economic and financial crisis are still
being felt, the people of the Middle East and North
Africa, like the people of other regions of the world,
also have demands for change and for the safeguarding
of their self-interests. The reasons for the turbulence
and changes in the Middle East and North Africa are
multifaceted. In order to properly address those
changes, we must engage in rational thinking and adopt
a comprehensive and integrated approach to ensure the
peace and stability of the region, in order that the
people’s demands will be met in a better and more
orderly fashion.
I should like to focus on four points. First, we
must respect the desires and demands of the peoples of
the countries concerned for change and development,
as well as respect their ownership over the
management of their internal affairs and selecting their
political systems and routes to development. The
primary responsibility for resolving issues in the
Middle East lies with the people of the Middle East
themselves. They are the masters of their own destiny.
Secondly, we hope that countries of the region
will express their political aspirations through legal
and non-violent means, resolve their differences
through dialogue, consultation and other peaceful
means, and achieve proper solutions through inclusive
political processes. We call on all parties to avoid
violence and military conflict and to restore stability
and normal social order as soon as possible.
Thirdly, we must adhere to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the
basic norms governing international relations, and
respect the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of the countries of the region. The
international community can provide necessary
constructive assistance for the efforts of countries to

12-25973

solve their internal crises through political means.
China is against any attempt by external forces to
engage in military intervention or push for regime
change. Sanctions or the threat thereof are not
conducive to a proper solution of these problems.
Fourthly, Security Council resolutions must be
strictly and comprehensively implemented. No party is
to interpret them in any way it wants, let alone take
action that exceeds Council mandates. The protection
of civilians must follow international humanitarian law
and other related international law, without any
political motivations or purposes. China is against any
interference in internal affairs in the name of
humanitarianism.
As always, China remains firmly committed to
just Arab causes, including the just demands of the
Palestinian people for the restoration of their legitimate
national rights. China supports the establishment of a
Palestinian State on the basis of the 1967 borders, with
full sovereignty and independence, with East Jerusalem
as its capital and with eventual peaceful coexistence
between the two countries of Palestine and Israel.
The peace process in the Middle East is currently
at a stalemate. There was another increase in tension in
Gaza last week. China is deeply worried about that
development. Any stagnation or setback to the
Palestinian-Israeli peace talks can only bring about
more turbulence and conflict. The more conflict there
is and the more grim the situation becomes, the more
that the international community should intensify its
diplomatic efforts and push for an early resumption of
talks between the two parties. China appreciates the
efforts made by the Middle East Quartet. We support a
greater role by Mr. Annan in achieving peace in the
Middle East.
China recently put forward a six-point proposal
for a solution to the Syrian issue. We call on the Syrian
Government and all parties concerned to cease all
violence, immediately launch an inclusive political
dialogue, and adopt through consultations, and put into
practice as soon as possible, a detailed and
comprehensive reform road map and time frame. The
parties concerned in the international community must
respect Syria’s sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity, and create conditions for talks
among the Syrian political parties.
The crisis in Syria is very complex. Political
mediation efforts will not succeed overnight. But we

19

S/PV.6734

must persevere with tireless efforts. To that end, China
has repeatedly deployed special envoys to engage with
Syrian parties and to push for political talks.
China supports a constructive role by United
Nations-League of Arab States Joint Special Envoy
Annan in finding a political solution to the Syrian
crisis. We support the vigorous efforts by Arab
countries and the Arab League in promoting a political
settlement in the Syrian crisis. We value and welcome
Mr. Annan’s recent visit to Syria. We call on the
international community to create and support
favourable conditions for Mr. Annan’s good offices.
No Chinese self-interests are involved on the
issue of Syria. We do not favour any particular party,
nor do we go out our way to oppose any party. China
adheres to the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and respects Syrian’s sovereignty
and the choices of the Syrian people. No external
parties should engage in military intervention in Syria
or push for regime change.
China supports a leading role by the United
Nations in coordinating humanitarian relief to help to
alleviate the humanitarian situation in some regions of
Syria. Through the International Committee of the Red
Cross, China will provide $2 million in emergency
humanitarian relief to the Syrian people.
As a permanent member of the Security Council,
China stands ready to shoulder its full responsibilities,
engage in patient and full consultation with all sides on
an equal basis, and push for an early political
settlement of the Syrian crisis.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Let me begin
by welcoming you, Foreign Secretary Hague, and the
other Ministers to the Security Council. I would like to
thank the delegation of the United Kingdom for
organizing today’s debate to discuss developments in
West Asia and North Africa over the past year. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General, you
Mr. President, and the other speakers for the valuable
statements made here today. We have listened carefully
to the views expressed and hope that today’s
deliberations will help the international community to
develop a more coordinated and consensual outlook to
the serious challenges posed by developments in the
region and beyond.
For more than a millennium now, societies in
West Asia and North Africa have played an important

20

role in world history. By virtue of the genius of their
peoples, their strategic location and, more recently,
their natural resources, those societies have attracted
considerable interest from far and wide. Over
centuries, countries in the region have built
multifaceted socio-economic and strategic linkages
with the rest of world. Developments in the region
have implications within and beyond the region, and
they naturally are of interest to the international
community.
The relationship between India and the Arab
world is unique, with age-old historic and cultural
connections. The impact of the Arab and Islamic world
on India itself has been profound and far-reaching,
giving rise to a composite culture that is rich in its
diversity and enduring in its essential unity. The region
is home to over 6 million Indians, with some of our
largest economic and trade linkages. It is also the most
important source for our energy needs and, being in our
extended neighbourhood, vitally important to India.
The unrest in West Asia and North Africa, which
began more than a year ago, has its roots in the desire
of people to play a greater role in shaping their destiny,
politically and economically. Those aspirations will not
be met through violence or armed struggle, and a
solution cannot be reached through prescriptions from
outside. In fact, given the history of foreign
interference, such prescriptions will not only be
suspect in the eyes of various segments of society, but
may also have the potential to exacerbate the problem.
In dealing with developments in West Asia and
North Africa, the international community needs to use
all the tools of diplomacy at its disposal and be there to
assist the concerned countries in transitioning to an
inclusive and participatory polity while maintaining
social stability and cohesion. Since the exact nature of
grievances varies from country to country, there is no
one set of measures that can be applied to all of them.
The solutions of the problems in each country have to
take into consideration the society’s particular
circumstances and the genius of its people. However,
what is certain is that solutions cannot include
intervention through military force or arming the
civilian population. Such a course of action will only
fuel further bloodshed and instability and create new
marginalized groups. It also risks breeding extremism
and intolerance, whose adverse consequences will be
felt in the region and beyond.

12-25973

S/PV.6734

I would like to recall that the Father of the Indian
nation, Mahatma Gandhi, said that “non-violence is the
greatest force at the disposal of mankind”. Even during
the course of the past year, we have seen that wherever
changes have taken place without violence, not only
has normalcy returned faster but the changes have been
accepted by society as a whole. We are therefore of the
considered view that the political leaders of the
concerned countries in West Asia and North Africa
should resolve their problems through inclusive
internal political processes that meet the aspirations of
their people, in an atmosphere free of violence and
bloodshed. The principles of national sovereignty,
political independence and territorial unity and
integrity must be respected.
The international community should — including
through the auspices of the United Nations — use
diplomatic leverage and make available technical
assistance in fields such as political, security and
justice sector reforms, the drafting of new constitutions
and legal frameworks, electoral institutions and the
conduct of elections, among others. Actions based on
selective or partial interpretations of a mandate of the
United Nations must be avoided to ensure that longterm political reconciliation is achieved among various
sections of society through peaceful, inclusive political
processes.
The international community also needs to be
galvanized to expeditiously resolve the long-pending
problem of the West Asian and North African region,
namely, the Arab-Israeli conflict, including the IsraeliPalestinian problem. That problem cannot be allowed
to be lost in the din and preoccupations of other
developments in the region. Quite apart from the fact
that without a resolution of that conflict, developments
in West Asia and North Africa cannot be adequately
addressed, we seriously run the risk of violence if the
people of Palestine feel marginalized and sense a
complete loss of attention to their plight. Their protests
may get radicalized unless concrete action is taken to
end the occupation of Arab lands, so that all peoples in
the region can live in peace in their respective
homelands and build cooperative relations. Moreover,
the call of the international community for democratic
and political reforms sounds hollow to Palestinians and
other people in the region living under occupation. In
that connection, some important and immediate
measures need to be taken, including putting an end to
all settlement activities and favourable consideration

12-25973

by this Council of the Palestinian application for
membership in the Organization.
As the world’s largest democracy, India supports
measures taken by the countries in the region to
address the grievances of their people in an atmosphere
free of violence and bloodshed. India stands ready to
share its experiences with the concerned countries in
building democratic and plural political institutions and
to partner with them in such fields as the drafting of
new constitutional and legal frameworks, judicial and
security sector reforms, the creation of impartial and
independent electoral institutions for the conduct of
elections, and human resource development, including
training and technical assistance.
India will continue to support the Council in
meeting the challenge of assisting the countries of West
Asia and North Africa in implementing required
political reforms without recourse to violence or
violations of fundamental human rights, and in
building an inclusive political system that enables the
participation of all people. Only that will create longterm peace, security and stability within the region and
beyond.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa
expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his briefing to the Council. We
thank the delegation of the United Kingdom for
organizing this important debate. It is indeed important
that we reflect on the momentous events that have
resulted in significant political changes in the Arab
world. More importantly, this is an opportunity to share
ideas on how to deal with those countries that are still
embroiled in conflicts and those that are going through
a post-conflict phase. The year 2011 will forever be
ingrained in the memory of the world as the year of
Arab uprisings, characterized by, inter alia, mass
protests and armed insurgencies.
Our assessment of the uprisings in the Arab
States, many created as colonial constructs resulting
from the Sykes-Picot Agreement, shows that those
protests, were, among other things, a cry for political
emancipation from decades of totalitarianism, a cry for
proportionate distribution of wealth and power, and a
call for participation in democratic processes,
including governance, and access to economic
opportunities.
It is clear that the patience of those peoples, who
had lived under repressive regimes for many years, had

21

S/PV.6734

been tested to the maximum. Indeed, the social
contract in those societies had broken down
irretrievably. The Arab Spring is a clear indication of
how much the people of those countries yearn for
freedom, democracy and other basic human rights.
The five volumes of the United Nations
Development Programme’s Arab Human Development
Report provide relevant insights into the causes and the
warnings of the Arab revolutions. The first edition,
published in 2002, noted that the freedom deficit in the
Arab world undermined human development and was
one of the most painful manifestations of lagging
political development.
Subsequently, seven years later, the 2009 edition
further noted that approximately 30 per cent of young
people in Arab countries were unemployed, that more
than 50 per cent of the population was under the age of
24, and that 51 million new jobs needed to be created by
2020 in order to avoid an increase in the unemployment
rate. Those and other similar reports should have raised
alarms in the Arab world and compelled Governments to
realize that the socio-economic and development needs
of the people — particularly young people — needed to
be addressed. The fact that most if not all of the
uprisings were initiated by young people should not be
surprising.
Obviously, in today’s rapidly globalizing and
integrated world, the turmoil in the Arab world does
not only affect Arab peoples and is not limited to the
Arab world. The rest of the world has been affected in
many ways, including through rising oil prices, the
growing number of refugees, the rise in the number of
illegal weapons, and increased tensions between
nations. Given the umbilical cord that connects Africa
to the Arab world, the African continent has been
adversely affected as a result of the undesirable
spillover effects of the Arab revolutions. In that regard,
we humbly offer the following thoughts for
consideration.
First, South Africa strongly believes that it is
essential that Governments should respect the will of
the people. It is therefore essential that the peoples of
the region gain the opportunity to determine their
future. That can happen only if the systems established
reflect the aspirations of the people of the various
countries in the region, including of women and youth.
Secondly, security and development are
interlinked. As the Security Council acknowledged in

22

its presidential statement of February 2011
(S/PRST/2011/4), development can no longer be
divorced from deliberations and interventions that are
traditionally security-related. The Council also
recognized that that is an essential element of its work
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
We emphasize that that does not necessarily mean that
the Council has to usurp developmental functions
undertaken by other bodies within the United Nations
system, but rather that it should take social and
development issues into account in relevant
deliberations within its Charter mandate. Given the
nature of the developments in the Middle East and
North Africa in the past year, more focus should be
placed on the relevant developmental challenges that
the people of that region face.
Thirdly, South Africa reiterates its view that the
Council should strengthen its conflict prevention
mechanisms by elaborating a comprehensive
prevention strategy. At the centre of that strategy
should be the strengthening of the United Nations and
regional early warning apparatus. In our view, it is vital
that developmental aspects should also be integrated
into our efforts at conflict prevention, resolution,
management and post-conflict peacebuilding.
Fourthly, related to what I have just mentioned,
partnerships with international financial institutions, in
particular the World Bank and regional development
structures, are critical in buttressing peace efforts in
countries in transition. Equally, we emphasize the
importance of context-specific and nationally owned
interventions.
Fifthly, as those countries transition into
democracy, there is a need to address the wrongs of the
past through efforts aimed at reconciliation and
transitional justice. Reconciliation efforts should be
undertaken and supported by the Council. We would
warn against prescribing how such efforts should be
undertaken, as each conflict is unique, but the
international community should support the people of
the region in that important area.
Related to reconciliation efforts is the need to
ensure adherence to the rule of law. In January, the
Council emphasized the need for universal adherence
to, and implementation of, the rule of law, and that the
promotion of the rule of law and justice was an
indispensable element for peaceful coexistence (see
S/PV.6705). The discussions underscored the

12-25973

S/PV.6734

inextricable link between the promotion of justice and
the attainment of peace in conflict and post-conflict
situations.
Lastly, we should warn that it is not in the
interests of international peace and security for the
international community, including the Security
Council, to use the plight of the Arab peoples to pursue
self-interest and execute regime change. As the United
Nations, we should abide by the same international law
of which we purport to be the master protagonists.
Therefore, the United Nations itself and countries
implementing its mandates should at all times adhere
to international law.
In dealing with those many challenges, it is
important that we work together with regional and
subregional organizations, which, more often than not,
have the relevant insights into the dynamics of a given
conflict and often what solutions to employ. We have
seen such collaboration produce positive results
recently in Yemen, and we hope that it will equally
assist with respect to the situation in Syria.
Whereas the Arab Spring has brought a glimmer
of hope to many in the Arab world, it has unfortunately
left some of the long-standing issues of human rights
abuses and colonization unresolved. In that regard, we
are reminded of the plight of the people of Western
Sahara and Palestine, who still yearn for freedom
despite the seismic political and economic shifts that
have engulfed the region.
In conclusion, the observation of former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan, the current envoy to
Syria, remains valid today when he stated that:
“We will not enjoy development without security,
or security without development. We will not
enjoy either without respect for human rights.
Unless all these causes are advanced, none will
succeed.”
Flowing from those words, we offer our support to the
peoples of the Arab world as they chart a better future
for themselves. We hope that, at the centre of our
efforts to improve the lives of those peoples, we will be
guided by the notion of creating an environment within
which citizens can live in harmony, fulfil themselves
and enjoy life in greater freedom.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank the United Kingdom for convening
this debate on the situation in the Middle East. We

12-25973

welcome His Excellency Secretary of State William
Hague, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the other
distinguished participants in this very important
meeting.
Finding a point of departure for discussions on
the pending challenges that the Middle Eastern
societies have found themselves facing, and
extrapolating on prospective opportunities ensuing
from those challenges, could be an onerous task.
Suffice it to say that the wave of changes that has
encompassed the region since last year has
dramatically altered the security situation and the
political and societal status quo in many Middle
Eastern societies and beyond. The upheavals that set
some countries of the region on the path of
transformation have fundamentally reshaped the
typical set of features that once characterized the
region.
The changes reflect the natural aspirations of
people for greater freedom and wider political
participation. Against that backdrop, the will and
tenacity of people to write their own future within
democratic States, with functioning State institutions
and respect for the rule of law and human rights,
should be commended and supported. We believe that
consistency and incessant efforts will lead to the
achievement of targeted objectives.
At the same time, in spite of the promises brought
by the process of democratic transition, one should not
forget that it is an extremely responsible stage in the
history of the Middle East that demands the highest
vigilance and laborious work in order to rule out
miscalculations and unpredictability as to the region’s
future. The method of violence as a means of achieving
political objectives is not itself a democracy, which
cannot be propagated by the sword and imposed from
outside. Any process within either an individual State
or a region as a whole should be built on a sound
legitimate basis, while progressive economic and
democratic development should be an objective for all
Governments. Azerbaijan commends the reconciliation
efforts of the national authorities in a number of
countries of the Middle East to find negotiated and
effective solutions, with the participation of all strata
and political forces of their societies.
We regret seeing the lack of progress in the
Middle East peace process. At the same time,
Azerbaijan commends and highly values the consistent

23

S/PV.6734

efforts of Jordan to revive the dialogue and resume the
negotiations towards the achievement of a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution.
Azerbaijan is deeply concerned about the
continuing illegal settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territories. Apart from the impact on the
rights, freedoms and everyday lives of the Palestinians,
settlements cause serious damage to the peace process
and, more dangerously, threaten a two-State solution
and the emergence of a viable Palestinian State.
In that regard, I would like to stress once again
that, in contrast to some other well-known situations
involving groundless and illegitimate territorial claims,
including those under the concocted pretext of care for
ethnic minority groups, the right to self-determination
and statehood of the people of Palestine has been
recognized.
With respect to the occupied Palestinian
territories and similar situations in other parts of the
world, we proceed from the importance of reaffirming
the continuing applicability of all relevant international
legal norms, achieving the invalidation of activities
aimed at the consolidation of military occupations,
initiating urgent measures towards removing the
adverse effects of such activities and discouraging any
further practices of the same or a similar nature.
The Security Council cannot remain indifferent to
situations involving serious violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law and, in performing
its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, must react adequately
in order to put an end to illegal practices and policies
and to ensure that human rights and fundamental
freedoms are observed and respected. It is also
important to fully utilize the advantage of cultural
diversity through promoting inter-communal dialogue
and reconciliation, while categorically rejecting and
invalidating any manifestation of ethnic and religious
intolerance.
The situation in Syria remains worrisome, with
rampant violence and human rights abuses that have
resulted in increasing the civilian death toll. We are of
the strong view that the only solution to the crisis in
Syria is through an all-inclusive and Syrian-led
political process, where all national stakeholders
demonstrate determination to solve the crisis
peacefully. Azerbaijan encourages all parties in Syria
to fully cooperate with the Joint Special Envoy of the

24

United Nations and the League of Arab States,
Mr. Kofi Annan. We hope that his mission will
contribute to ending violence and facilitating a
peaceful solution.
As has been pointed out during this debate,
repression does not deliver stability, peace or security,
and Governments that suppress basic freedoms will
always be unstable. As a country that suffers from
prolonged occupation of its territories and the resulting
massive population displacement, Azerbaijan believes
that the same understanding should apply equally to
inter-State relations. The behaviour of Governments
that resort to force to capture the territory of another
sovereign State and authorize attacks on civilians and
ethnic cleansing cannot be tolerated. It is of paramount
importance that the international community unite its
efforts and speak with one voice to reject repressive
policies in inter-State relations, overcome mutual
mistrust and double standards, and achieve the uniform
application of international law and democratization of
international relations.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Please pass on, Mr. President, to Secretary of State for
Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Mr. William Hague, how much we appreciated him
being with us here today for the debate, as well as to
the other Ministers for Foreign Affairs who came to be
with us. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia
was not able, for unexpected reasons, to participate as
she had intended to. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his interesting analysis of the
subject at hand, which illustrates very well how things
are developing.
Several common features can be found in what
has happened during the past year in countries of the
Middle East and North Africa, events that are part of
what we have been calling the Arab Spring: a primarily
young population, affected by high rates of
unemployment and exclusive political systems that are
not able to adequately represent the interests of the
various sectors of society. We must also add the impact
of new information technologies on the cohesion and
leadership of popular movements. Under those
conditions, where profound inequities and political,
economic and social exclusion converge, a process
aimed at transforming the prevailing order emerges and
seeks economic and political changes and alternatives,
allowing participation and the opening of new spaces

12-25973

S/PV.6734

and means of expression, which imply, in short,
demands for fundamental rights.
Notwithstanding those common elements, the
transformations and processes have followed very
different courses in the various countries of the region,
and this is why we need to analyse each case on its
own merits. The response of the international
community to the challenges and opportunities that
arise from that process have been centred around
prevention and the cessation of violence and violent
repression against civilian populations crying out to
have their fundamental human rights and freedoms
respected. That includes the freedoms of election and
association, the recognition of the rights of women and
gender equality, the rights of minorities, as well as
access to economic opportunities.
In a region that is as complex as it is vital for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
authorities encounter major difficulties and limitations
in their response to the demands and expectations of a
population eager for reforms. In order to overcome a
past of authoritarianism and sectarianism, it is not
enough to simply hold periodic elections. There needs
to be a gradual establishment of political parties, a
strengthening of civil society organizations and
ideological pluralism, free access to information and
the exercise of fundamental freedoms and human
rights. That requires time for learning and the decisive
support of the international community for national
efforts. The transition towards societies that are more
democratic and representative requires the convergence
and participation of all sectors of society around
common principles and purposes. Sound and suitable
institutional arrangements are required in order to
channel the various social demands and, at the same
time, avoid polarization, while building the institutions
and legal framework that will encompass relations
between citizens and their Governments.
The international community is astonished to see
how disproportionate force is being used against the
civilian population in Syria. Systematic violations of
fundamental freedoms and human rights have been
witnessed, and extremes have been reached that must
be qualified as crimes against humanity. That is
unacceptable and must be categorically condemned,
particularly by the Security Council, using the means
that it has at its disposal.

Colombia has resolutely supported and
participated in the efforts of the international
community aimed at putting an end to this unheard of
situation and all forms of violence and violations of
human rights and at promoting a transition to a
democratic and pluralistic system. In order to avoid
situations such as this the Security Council should
stress the use of the instruments of preventive
diplomacy that it has at its disposal in order to reduce
the threats posed by armed conflicts and their
associated human costs. We must use all the peaceful
means available to us to protect civilians from
violence, in accordance with the principles and
objectives of the Charter of the United Nations and in
full respect for the principles of territorial integrity,
national unity, sovereignty and the political
independence of States.
The Council must maintain close cooperation
with regional organizations and give priority to
strategies aimed at preventing conflicts through
mediation and good offices. The League of Arab States,
the African Union, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and the Gulf Cooperation Council have a
privileged position, with unique access to key players
and with knowledge and experience of the situation in
the region that are exceptional, and their participation
as strategic partners is, therefore, key for developing
actions that are appropriate for the particular
circumstances and needs of each country of the region.
My country naturally gives all of its support to the
actions of those organizations.
Our support and that of the international
community in such situations will be more effective
and sustainable if we are able to recognize political and
cultural contexts and if the Governments and peoples
continue working together towards consolidating the
progress achieved. The spontaneous movement that is
the Arab Spring opens the way for the progressive
establishment of States and Governments based on
respect and the genuine implementation of democratic
principles and the rule of law. Those recently formed
Governments should anchor their legitimacy in respect
for the rights of the population, the provision of basic
social services, the generation of employment and the
creation of conditions promoting sustainable economic
development, the benefits of which will be a tangible
reality for all citizens without distinction.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): I would like to extend a
very warm welcome to Mr. William Hague and the

12-25973

25

S/PV.6734

Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom for
convening today’s high-level debate. I would also like
to take this opportunity to welcome the SecretaryGeneral and the honourable Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the United States, France, Russia, Germany,
Guatemala and Portugal.
Sitting in this Chamber today, Sir, I shall start off
by referring to your distinguished compatriot in
Cambridge, Mr. Stephen Hawking, and his fraternity
who are with him in surveying the universe, and
specifically in demarcating dark space/spaces. Those
dark spaces constitute the vast majority of the universe
today, and in this Chamber today I have witnessed
those spaces in many long diatribes in which so much
has been said and yet not said. Hawking has cautioned
all of us that the dark spaces that constitute the vast
majority of the universe are not dormant spaces. The
majority of those vast spaces will one day unleash their
silent fury, and he cautions us to be prepared. I believe
that we should be so prepared with respect to so much
that we do not say, or dare to say, in this house today.
In North Africa and the Middle East, under
discussion today, we have witnessed important
developments. My country firmly believes in the
fulfilment of the aspirations of the people and their
rights to be masters of their own destiny, to speak and
to be heard, and to pursue their legitimate aspirations.
No effort should be spared in accommodating those
efforts. We therefore strongly condemn the use of force
against peaceful protestors, as well as violations of
human rights wherever they occur and irrespective of
who the perpetrators may be, as a matter of principle.
As one of the bigger democratic countries, we are
firmly committed to the ideals, values and principles of
the United Nations and believe that the legitimate
aspirations of people should be accommodated
peacefully, without external interference and in a
matter consistent with the sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity of States.
Today, in support of those embattled societies, I
again urge the Council to please remember that no
movement in the world, including the great
revolutions, has succeeded without external help. They
cannot be stroked out with a pen. Anyone who seeks to
rationalize a principled position by riding the high
horse of morality very truly needs to narrow the
distances by treading slowly on what might be referred
to as lowly grounds.

26

But the support that we extend to the legitimate
wishes of people has to be within the confines of
international law and the Charter of the United
Nations. Interference in the internal affairs of
sovereign States and supporting such concepts as
regime change are alien to the ethos of international
good-neighbourliness.
The changes in the region under discussion today
have often been referred to as the Arab Spring. The
concept of spring evokes images of rebirth, change,
renewal, warmth and beauty. It should have an air of
tranquillity and harmony about it. More than anything
else, it is a natural process than can neither be forced
nor be abrupt. This has to be understood. Winter
evolves into spring and spring brings an end to winter’s
hardness. That natural process of evolution must
therefore be allowed to take its course uninterrupted.
So we welcome change when it is locally led, peaceful
and an expression of the aspirations of the people.
Solutions to problems have to be found by the people
themselves and not, I repeat, not imposed from outside.
The Foreign Minister of Jordan, Mr. Nasser
Judeh, made a remarkable statement on 29 February to
the Foreign Affairs Committee of the European
Parliament that I keep going back to time and time
again. He told the Committee that there can be no
complete Arab Spring or Arab awakening without
peace in the Middle East. And there will never be
peace in the Middle East without a solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. This, then, is the context of
my speech — the winter of Arab discontent. Can we
usher in a vast spring with that winter consistently
raising its head? I do not think so. The denial of the
Palestinian right to self-determination is at the heart of
unrest in the region. If peace in the Middle East is to be
lasting, progress on the Syria-Israel and Lebanon-Israel
conflicts is necessary as well. Israel must withdraw
completely from the occupied Lebanese lands and the
occupied Syrian Golan, in compliance with relevant
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions.
With the continuation of Israeli settlement
activity, hope for the Palestinians to have a viable State
of their own is fading fast. We have had grim
reminders of that delivered to the Council in the recent
briefings by representatives of the Department of
Political Affairs and a number of Member States. There
is a general belief that the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory is becoming increasingly volatile.
Given such factors as the ever-increasing settlement

12-25973

S/PV.6734

activity and settler violence, the continued blockade of
the Gaza Strip, diminished economic prospects for the
population, vandalization of the holy sites, the plight of
Palestinian prisoners, and so on, it is understandable
that the people should be on tenterhooks. A small spark
could turn into a big fire.
We also condemn any pipe bombs being fired
from the Gaza Strip, but we believe that the biggest
threat to international peace and security arises from
one particular aspect. Yet the Council continues to do
nothing cogent for the Palestinians. Each time that
Council members meet, we are told that the Quartet is
now discussing the matter. I await the day that the
Quartet will produce a result that will substantially
change the plight of these people.
One of the best things to do, and we have so
moved, is that if it is agreed that Gaza should be given
provisions, we should take a flotilla, land on the
beaches and deliver to the inhabitants, through the
United Nations, the security and the food that they
require. We strongly feel that now is as appropriate a
time as any to send a strong, unified signal to the
occupying Power to stop its activities, specifically in
land-grabbing.
There continuously arises a matter here that I
would like to dispel once and for all. I may or may not
succeed. It is basically that, whenever anyone queries
whether Islam and democracy are incompatible, the
answer is that they are not incompatible. Only
Huntington really believes that they are incompatible. I
believe that it is a question of time even there. But I
would like to say very emphatically that our prophet
basically called all our brothers in Islam as brothers
and asked them to share their surpluses as well as their
shortcomings. In my opinion, there is no better
manifestation of democracy. Furthermore, he asked
Muslims to reach out to the world in peace. For reasons
of learning, he told them to go to China, which was not
a Muslim brother State. That does not matter. It shows
the vastness of the vision of the person of the prophet.
When he found that things were not good for Muslims
in Mecca, where he started out, he told them to go to
the brotherly king of Ethiopia, who happened to be a
Christian, and said that he would look after them. That
vast outreach shows the beauty of what is already
available. We need not confer too much distinction on
Huntington.

12-25973

I will conclude this segment by reiterating our
support for the Palestinian people in their just struggle
for peace and the right to self-determination and their
membership, as was said by my Indian colleague, in
the United Nations at the earliest. We feel that
Palestine will remain the biggest challenge of the
Middle East. That opportunity is being afforded by this
wave of fulfilment of aspirations in the name of the
people of the Middle East through the Arab Spring. I
feel that the Palestinians should also benefit, and not
lose. I reiterate that without resolution of this core
issue, as was said by the Foreign Minister of Jordan,
we will not be able to see real peace in the region.
I would also like to address five crucial points
raised by the Secretary-General in his statement. I
believe that those are crucial points, as he himself says.
He first speaks of leaders choosing the path of
meaningful reform and says that people do not want
cosmetic changes that give only the merest taste of
democracy. I believe that a great American president,
many years ago, spoke of the four freedoms. I believe
that there must be a basic intent on the part of the
United Nations for fundamental legislative action by
the General Assembly and the Security Council with
respect to the basic democratic requirements of
statehood in which those freedoms should be
enshrined. Everyone who wishes to be a Member here
must at some stage be able to resolve and come to this
particular aspect. I believe that just naming them as a
pillar would not be enough; it would be important to
have a minimum legislated induction into all the
documents in the world where such elements such as
promoting pluralism and the rights of minorities would
be the minimum requirement.
We just celebrated International Women’s Day.
Women get that once a year and they happen to be a
majority in the world. I feel that we have to rectify
those matters first. We have to understand that women
have a crucial role to play, without which we will never
get anywhere.
I also take very strongly his third aspect, that
women have stood in the squares and streets
demanding change and now have the right to sit at the
table with real influence in decision-making, and safe
from violence, intimidation and abuse. That is
happening even now in the Arab Spring. Last week,
eight members of the Council met with women from
Tunisia, Libya, Egypt, Syria, Lebanon and Yemen, and

27

S/PV.6734

we heard those women and were shocked. One of the
things they said, which I think we should support very
strongly here, is that 25 per cent of all financing
through the United Nations must be earmarked for
delivery into the hands of women. Do not forget, they
constitute 75 per cent of the world. Women end up
feeding, clothing and looking after children, not only
doing all the work but having to do it; yet they do not
get the benefit of their husbands’ employment,
especially not in the Third World. In addition, 25 per
cent of all delegations visiting, calling on or meeting
with the United Nations should be made up of women.
We need to make it necessary that they be part. They
have made more sacrifices than anyone in this Spring,
as we call it, so then let them be able to be a part of
that complete change.
When we speak about the fourth pillar,
opportunities for young people, there are 200 million
more in Asia. I think that takes on an importance that
cannot be denied.
There must be regional peace for the Palestinians.
If there was a Balfour Declaration that brought the
State of Israel to where it is today, then let us have a
Balfour Declaration for the Palestinians as well.
In conclusion, in the context of world peace and
the Middle East, I would like to stress that while we
understand all sorts of needs arising on security, it
would be better for that region and the whole world if

28

the situation of Iran could be stopped from moving
towards conflict, because it will be the sort of conflict
that might have a very unfortunate impact on the world
and that might be the proverbial last straw that breaks
the camel’s back on world peace. I hope not. We
understand the seriousness of it. We also hope that with
the accumulated diplomacy here we can do better.
The President: The representative of Morocco
has asked to take the floor to make a further brief
statement.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
shall be very brief. Earlier, a delegation thought it was
a good idea to refer to a situation that has absolutely
nothing to do with today’s debate. It made comparisons
that are as baseless as they are inopportune. I intend
neither to follow nor to entertain that attempt to disrupt
our debate, much less to detract from the positive
message of support and encouragement that we hope
will emerge from this high-level meeting. That is our
goal and should be the goal of all delegations. I would
like each and every one of them to adhere to that
premise and to contribute in a positive manner.
The President: There are no more names
inscribed on the list of speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12:30 p.m.

12-25973
