143

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

3. Reaffirms once again its conviction that ratification of or accession to the Convention on a universal basis and implementation of its provisions are
necessary for the realization of the objectives of the
Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination;
4. Requests States which have not yet become
parties to the Convention to ratify it or accede thereto;
5. Appeals to States parties to the Convention to
study the possibility of making the declaration provided for in article 14 of the Convention;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
submit to the General Assembly annual reports concerning the status of the Convention, in accordance
with Assembly resolution 2106 A (XX) of 21 December 1965.
86th plenary meeting
16 December 1978

the Committee in order to give effect to article 7 of
the Convention,
Noting the decisions adopted and the recommendations made by the Committee at its seventeenth and
eighteenth sessions,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of
the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination on its seventeenth and eighteenth sessions;
2. Draws the attention once again of the relevant
United Nations bodies to the opinions and recommendations of the Committee relating to Trust and
Non-Self-Governing Territories and to all other Territories to which General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV) of 14 December 1960 applies and stresses the
necessity of providing the Committee with sufficient
information in order to enable it to discharge fully
its responsibilities under article 15 of the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination;

33/102.

3. Supports the continued efforts of the Committee to focus attention on the just cause of peoples
struggling against oppression practised by the colonial
and racist regimes in southern Africa;

Report of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973 and 33/98 of 16 December 1978 on the
Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, 32/13 of 7 November 1977 on the report
of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and 33/101 of 16 December 1978 on the
status of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
Having considered the report of the Committee
on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination on its
seventeenth and eighteenth sessions49 submitted under
article 9, paragraph 2, of the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 50
Emphasizing the need for Member States to intensify,
at the national and international levels, their struggle
against acts or practices of racial discrimination and
the vestiges or manifestations of racist ideologies
wherever they exist,
Stressing the importance of complying with the
undertaking of States parties to the Convention not
to engage in any act or practice of racial discrimination against any person, groups of persons or national
or ethnic minorities, and to ensure that all public
authorities and public institutions, national and local,
shall act in conformity with this obligation, in accordance with relevant provisions of the Convention,
Noting with appreciation the valuable work done by
the Committee, in particular its contribution to the
World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, held at Geneva from 14 to 25 August
1978, and to the realization of the objectives of the
Programme for the Decade for Action to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination, 51
Welcoming the co-operation of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization with
4 9 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/33/18).
50 Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
51 Resolution 3057 (XXVlll ), annex.

4. Welcomes the Committee's intention to resume
the consideration of the implementation of article 7
of the Convention at its nineteenth session with a
view to formulating general guidelines that might assist
the States parties to implement article 7 of the
Convention;
5. Reiterates its grave concern that some States
parties to the Convention, owing to reasons beyond
their control, arc being prevented from fulfilling their
obligations under the Convention in parts of their
respective territories and endorses the relevant decision
of the Committee adopted at its eighteenth session;
6. Invites the States parties to the Convention to
co-operate with the Committee by submitting in due
time their reports under article 9 of the Convention,
taking into account the relevant recommendations and
requests of the Committee;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to have printed
and circulate to Member States the study on the work
of the Committee"~ prepared pursuant to Economic
and Social Council resolution 2057 (LXII) of 12 May
1977 and the pamphlet on the Convention prepared
by the Committee as its contribution to the World
Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, with the suggestion that these documents be given
the widest possible dissemination;
8. Urges all States which are not yet parties to
the Convention to ratify or accede to it and, pending
such ratification or accession, to be guided by the basic
provisions of the Convention in their internal and
foreign policies:
9. Invites the States parties to the Convention to
observe fully the provisions of the Convention and
other international instruments and agreements to
which they are parties concerning the elimination of
all forms of discrimination based on race, colour,
descent or national or ethnic origin.

86th plenary meeting
16 December 1978
02 See

A/CONF.92/8.
