15

ResolutioJ18 adopted on the nporh of the Firat Committee

and elaboration of international instruments or United
Nations arrangements relative to direct television
broadcasting.
2 081 st plenary meeting
9 November 1972

2930 (XXVII). World Disarmament Conference

The General Assembly,
Conscious of the responsibility of the United Nations
under the Charter for the maintenance of international
peace and for disarmament,
Convinced that all peoples of the world have a vital
interest in the success of disarmament negotiations,
Believing it imperative that all States exert further
efforts for the adoption of effeotive measures of disarmament and, more particuJa.rly, nuclear disarmament,
Believing also that a world disarmament conference
could promote and facilitate the realization of such
aims,

5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twen-ty-eighth session the item entitled "World
Disarmament Conference".
2093rd plenary meeting
29 November 1972

•

•

•

The President of the General Assembly subsequently informed the Secretary-Genera[H that, in pursuance of paragraph 3 of the abuve resolution, he had "decided to appoint
the following thirty-one Member States to serve on the Special Committee on the World Disarmament Conference:
ARGENTINA, BELGIUM, BRAZIL, BULGARIA, CANADA, CHILE,
COLOMBIA, CzECHOSLOVAKIA, EGYPT, ETIUOPIA, HUNOARY,
INDIA, INDONESIA, IRAN, ITALY, ]APAN, LIBERIA, MEXICO, MON·
OOLIA, MOROCCO, NETHERLANDS, NIGERIA, PAXISTAN, POLAND,
ROMANIA, SPAIN, SRI LANKA, SWEDEN, UNION OF SovIBT SoCIALIST REPUBLICS, YUGOSLAVIA and ZAMBIA". He added that

"In accordance with the widely expressed wish, the remaining

four seats will be reserved for the nuclear States which may
wish to become members of the Special Committee in the
future".

Deeply convinced that substantial progress in the
field of disarmament can be achieved only by ensuring
adequate conditions of security for all States,

2931 (XXVII). lmplementation of the results of
the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon
States

Convinced also that all States should contribute to
the adoption of measures for the achievement of this
goal,
Recalling resolution 2833 (XXVI) of 16 December 1971, in which the General Assembly expressed the
conviction that it is most desirable to take immediate
steps in order that careful consideration be givcn to the
convening, following adequate preparation, of a world
disarmament conference open ,to all States,

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2664 (XXV) of 7 December
1970,
Having considered the report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency for the year 1971/1972, 15
A ware of the steps taken in amending article VI of
the statute of the International Atomic Energy Agcncv
to expand the membership of the Board of Governors,
Noting that the International Atomic Energy Agency
is carrying out a survey of the market for nuclear
power in selected developing countries to assess the
extent of the market for various types and sizes of
nuclear reactors,
Noting further that the number of countries and international organizations participating in the International Nuclear Information System has increased and
that the system is to operate with full subject scope
by the end of 1972,
Notiug with satisfaction that the Intcrnational
Atomic Energy Agency is continuing its efforts to
ensure the supply to its member States, when requircd,
of special fissionable materials, including materials for
power reactors,
Taking note of the increasc in the target for voluntary contributions to the programme of technical assistance of the International Atomic Energy Agcncy to
$US 3 million,
1. Expresses appreciation for the action taken by
the International Atomic Energy Agency on the recommendations of the Conference of Non-NuclearWeapon States;
2. Hopes that, in the context of development goals,
the over-all expansion in resources available to the
International Atomic Energy Agency for technical cooperation will continue;

Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,13
containing the views and suggestions of States on the
questions relating to the holding of a world disarmament conforence,
Noting also all the views and suggestions expressed
by Member States during the debate in plenary meeting
and in the First Commititee at the current session,
l. Invites ,the Governments of all States to exert
further efforts with a view to creating adequate conditions for the convening of a world disarmament conference at an appropriate time;

2. Considers it necessary to set up a special committee to examine aH the views and suggestions expressed by Governments on the convening of a world
disarmament conference and related problems and to
submH, on the basis of consensus, a report to the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session;
3. Decides to establish a Special Committee on the
World Disarmament Conference consisting of thirtyfive Member States, to be appointed by the President
of the General Assembly after consultation with all
the regional groups and taking due consideration of
the necessity to ensure adequate political and geographical representation;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to render all
necessary assistance to the Special Committee in its
work;
13 A/8817 and Add.1.

14 A/8990.
1r; International

Atomic Energy Agency, Annual Report,
1 July 1971-30 Junt 1972 (Vienna, July 1972); transmitted to
the members of the General Assembly by a note of the Secretary-General (A/8774).

16

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

3. Invites the International Atomic Energy Agency
to keep under review ways and meaos of allowing the

developing countries to benefit fully, and in accordance
with their respective stages of nuclear industrialization,
from the technical assistance provided by international
organizations;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Director General of the lnternational Atomic
Energy Agency the records of the twenty-seventh session of the General Assembly relating to the recommendations of the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon
States;
5. Invites the lnternational Atomic Energy Agency,
in consultation with the specialized agencies and othcr
bodies concerned, to submit, in its annual report to the
General Assembly, information on further action concerning the implementation of the results of the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States.
2093rd plenary meeting
29 November 1972
2932 (XXVII). General and complete
disarmament
A

The General Assembly,
Conscious that ali armed conflicts and the use of any
weapons bring suffering and that the only effective
meaos of eliminating this suffering is through the
elimination of armed confl.icts and through general and
complete disarmament,
Recalling the general rules of international law that
the use of weapons that cause unnecessary suflering is
especially forbidden and that only military targets are
legitimate objects of attack,
Convinced that the widesprcad use of many weapons
and the emergence of new methods of warfare that
cause unnecessary suffering or are indiscriminate call
urgently for renewed efforts by Governments to seek,
through legal meaos, the prohibition of the use of such
weapons and of indiscriminate and cruel methods of
warfare and, if possible, through measures of disarmament, the elimination of specific, cspecially cruel or
indiscriminate weapons,
Conscious that incendiary weapons have always constituted a category of arms viewed with horror and that
the International Conference on Human Rights, held
at Teheran in 1968, in its resolution XXIII on human
rights in armed conflicts 16 considered napalm bombing
to be among the methods and meaos that erode human
rights,
Noting that complete proposals for both elimination
and non-use of incendiary weapons were advanced at
the disarmament negotiations in 1933 and that proposals have recently been made to prohibit or restrict
their use,
Recalling that the Secretary-General, in bis reports
on human rights in armed conflicts of 20 November
1969 and 18 September 1970, stated the view that the
legality or otherwise of the use of napalm would seem
to be a question calling for study that might eventua11y
16 Final Act of the lnternational Conference on Human
Ri¡:hts (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2),
p. 18.

be resolved in an international document that would
clarify the situation, 17
Recalling f urther that, in response to an exprcss suggestion made by the Secretary-Gencral1 8 in bis report
of 18 September 1970, the General Asscmbly, by paragraph 5 of resolution 2852 (XXVI) of 20 Decembcr
1971, requested him to prepare as soon as possiblc,
with the help of qualified governmental consultant cxperts, a report on napalm and other inccndiary wcapons and al] aspects of their possiblc use,
Noting that thc report of the Secrctary-Gcncral cntitled Napalm ami Other Incendiary Weapon.s and All
Aspects of Their Possible Vse 19 concludes that the
massive spread of fire through incendiary wcapons is
largely indi~criminatc in its cffects on military and
civilian targets, 20
Noting further thc conclusion that burn injuries,
whether sustained directly from the action of incendiaries or as a result of fires initiatcd by them, are
intcnsely painful and requirc exceptional resourccs for
their medica\ treatment that are far bcyoncl the reach
of most countrics, ~1
Noting finally the conclusion that the rapid increase
in the military use of these weapons is but one aspect
of the more general phenomenon of the incrcasing
mobilization of science and technology for purposes
of total war, alongside which the long-upheld principle
of the immunity of the non-combatant appears to be
receding from the military consciousness, and that
these trends have grave implications for the wor1d
conununity / 2
1. W elcomes the report of the Secretary-General
entitled Napalm and Other lncendiary Weapons and
Ali Aspects of Their Possibk Use and expresscs appreciation to him for having submitted it without
delay;
2. Takcs note of the views expresscd in the rcport
regarding the use, production, development and
stockpiling of napalm and other incendiary weapons;
3. Deplores thc use of napalm and other inccndiary
weapons in all armed conflicts;
4. Commends the report to the attention of ali
Governments and pcoples;
5. Requests the Secretary-Gencrnl to publish the
report for wide circulation;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate the
report to the Governments of Member States for their
comments and to report on these comments to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session.
2093rd plenary meeting
29 Novembcr 1972

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2602 A (XXIV) of 16
December 1969, whereby it appealed to the Governments of the Union of Soviet Socialist Rcpublics and
the United States of America, which on 17 November
1969 had initiated bilateral ncgotiations on thc limita11 A/7720, para. 200; A/8052, para. 125.

1s A/8052, para. 126.
19 A/8803/Rev.1 (United Nations publication, Sales No.:
E.73.1.3).
20 /bid., para. 186.
21 /bid., para. 187.
22 /bid., para. 190.
