18

General Assembly-Twelfth session

1162 (XII). Participation of women in community development

The General Assembly,
Having noted with satisfaction that community development programmes are being carried out or are
being planned on a long-term basis with international
collaboration,
Recognizing that, in order to accelerate community
development, which depends basically on the human
element, women should be encouraged to play an even
greater and more effective part in it, both in their
own interest and in the interest of the community,
Noting that the reports on this question do not state
to what extent women are participating in community
development programmes,
I. Recommends to Member States in which community development programmes are being carried out
that they should, by every means in their power, encourage the full participation of women in the development of their respective communities;
2. Recommends to the Secretary-General and the
specialized agencies concerned that, in giving assistance
to Governments, they should collaborate with those
Governments in achieving this purpose;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to include, in his
future reports to the Economic and Social Council on
the progress of community development, a brief description of the methods used to achieve this purpose,
the results obtained and the progress made as regards
the participation of women in community development.
723rd plenary meeting,
26 November 1957.
1163 (XII).

Seminars on the status of women

The General Assembly,
Taking note of chapter VII, section XI, of the report
of the Economic- and Social Council,3
Noting with appreciation the work of the Commission on the Status of Women and the progress achieved
in the field of women's rights,
Noting also with satisfaction the success of the seminar held in August 1957 at Bangkok (Thailand) on
the civic responsibilities and increased participation of
Asian women in public life,
1. Invites the Commission on the Status of \Vomen
to pursue its efforts aimed at the improvement of the
status of women throughout the world, in accordance
with its terms of reference,
2. Expresses the hope that seminars on the status
of women will be held as frequently as possible in the
future under the programme of advisory services in
the field of human rights.
723rd plenary meeting,
26 November 1957.
1164 (XII). Development of international cooperation in the fields of science, culture
and education

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1043 (XI) of 21 February
1957 on international cultural and scientific co-operation,
• Ibid., Supplement No. 3 (A/3613).

Having regard to Economic and Social Council resolution 663 I (XXIV) of 31 July 1957 urging the extension of international co-operation in the social field
through the development of personal contacts and the
exchange of experience among experts,
Attaching great importance to a further development
and expansion of relations in the fields of science, including applied science, culture and education, which
will assist the promotion of economic and social welfare as well as better mutual understanding among nations and the maintenance of peace,
Noting with satisfaction the results already achieved
in the development of such international co-operation
and considering it desirable that there should be opportunities for further development in this respect,
Recognizing the positive contribution in this matter
by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and other specialized agencies and
by other international bodies,
l. Reiterates the view expressed in its resolution
1043 (XI) of 21 February 1957 that wider international cultural and scientific co-operation should be
promoted by mutual agreements or by other means, and
that no effort should be spared in trying to achieve
the implementation of these peaceful objectives;
2. Urges all States Members of the United Nations
or members of the specialized agencies to develop
further all measures for the encouragement of exchanges and co-operation among peoples in the fields of
science, culture and education, which is one of the
basic purposes of the United Nations;
3. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the other specialized
agencies concerned to include in their annual reports
to the Economic and Social Council a statement of their
views and activities and any information which they
may have as to the views and activities of Governments
in the field of international educational, scientific and
cultural co-operation;
4. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
give special attention at its twenty-sixth session to the
above-mentioned statements of the specialized agencies,
and to include, in its report to the General Assembly
at its thirteenth session, a section on this subject for
consideration by the Assembly.
723rd plenary meeting,
26 November 1957.
1165 (XII). Prolongation of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees

The General Assembly,
Having taken note of the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,4
Having regard to its resolution 727 (VIII) of 23
October 1953 in which it decided to review, not later
than at its twelfth session, the arrangements for the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees with a view to determining whether the
Office should be continued beyond 31 December 1958,
Considering the continuing need for international
action on behalf of refugees,
Considering the valuable work which has been performed by the Office of the High Commissioner both
• Ibid., Supplement No. 11 (A/3585/Rev.l).
