United Nations

A/RES/63/242

General Assembly

Distr.: General
22 January 2009

Sixty-third session
Agenda item 62 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 24 December 2008
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/63/428)]

63/242. Global efforts for the total elimination of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and
the comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 52/111 of 12 December 1997, in which it decided to
convene the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia
and Related Intolerance, and its resolutions 56/266 of 27 March 2002, 57/195 of
18 December 2002, 58/160 of 22 December 2003, 59/177 of 20 December 2004 and
60/144 of 16 December 2005, which guided the comprehensive follow-up to and
effective implementation of the World Conference, and in this regard underlining
the importance of their full and effective implementation,
Noting its resolution 61/149 of 19 December 2006, in which it decided to
convene in 2009 a review conference on the implementation of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action, 1 hereinafter referred to as the Durban
Review Conference, to be conducted within the framework of the General
Assembly, and its resolution 62/220 of 22 December 2007,
0F

Noting also, in the above context, the decisions adopted by the Preparatory
Committee for the Durban Review Conference at its organizational session 2 and its
first 3 and second 4 substantive sessions, including decision PC.1/13 on the objectives
of the Durban Review Conference and decision PC.2/8 on the structure of the
outcome document,
1F

2F

3F

Noting further all the relevant resolutions and decisions of the Commission on
Human Rights and of the Human Rights Council on this subject, and calling for
their implementation,

_______________
1

See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.
See A/62/375.
3
See A/63/112.
4
See A/CONF.211/PC.3/11 and Corr.1; see also A/63/112/Add.1.
2

08-48531

A/RES/63/242

Noting Human Rights Council decision 3/103 of 8 December 2006, 5 by which,
heeding the decision and instruction of the 2001 World Conference, the Council
established the Ad Hoc Committee of the Human Rights Council on the Elaboration
of Complementary Standards,
4F

Reiterating that all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights
and have the potential to contribute constructively to the development and
well-being of their societies, and that any doctrine of racial superiority is
scientifically false, morally condemnable, socially unjust and dangerous and must
be rejected, together with theories that attempt to determine the existence of
separate human races,
Convinced that racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance manifest themselves in a differentiated manner for women and girls and
may be among the factors leading to a deterioration in their living conditions,
poverty, violence, multiple forms of discrimination and the limitation or denial of
their human rights, and recognizing the need to integrate a gender perspective into
relevant policies, strategies and programmes of action against racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance in order to address multiple
forms of discrimination,
Underlining the primacy of political will, international cooperation and
adequate funding at the national, regional and international levels for the successful
implementation of the Durban Programme of Action,
Alarmed at the increase in racist violence and xenophobic ideas in many parts
of the world, in political circles, in the sphere of public opinion and in society at
large, inter alia, as a result of the resurgent activities of associations established on
the basis of racist and xenophobic platforms and charters, and the persistent use of
those platforms and charters to promote or incite racist ideologies,
Underlining the importance of urgently eliminating continuing and violent
trends involving racism and racial discrimination, and conscious that any form of
impunity for crimes motivated by racist and xenophobic attitudes plays a role in
weakening the rule of law and democracy, tends to encourage the recurrence of such
crimes and requires resolute action and cooperation for its eradication,
Welcoming the continued determination of the former United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to profile and increase the visibility of the struggle
against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and the
intention of the High Commissioner to make this a cross-cutting issue in the
activities and programmes of her Office,
I
General principles
1.
Acknowledges that no derogation from the prohibition of racial
discrimination, genocide, the crime of apartheid or slavery is permitted, as defined
in the obligations under the relevant human rights instruments;

_______________
5
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/62/53),
chap. II, sect. B.

2

A/RES/63/242

2.
Expresses its profound concern about and its unequivocal condemnation
of all forms of racism and racial discrimination, including related acts of racially
motivated violence, xenophobia and intolerance, as well as propaganda activities
and organizations that attempt to justify or promote racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance in any form;
Expresses deep concern at the attempts to establish hierarchies among
3.
emerging and resurgent forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance, and urges States to adopt measures to address these scourges
with the same emphasis and vigour with a view to preventing this practice and
protecting victims;
Stresses that States and international organizations have a responsibility
4.
to ensure that measures taken in the struggle against terrorism do not discriminate in
purpose or effect on grounds of race, colour, descent or national or ethnic origin,
and urges all States to rescind or refrain from all forms of racial profiling;
Recognizes that States should implement and enforce appropriate and
5.
effective legislative, judicial, regulatory and administrative measures to prevent and
protect against acts of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance, thereby contributing to the prevention of human rights violations;
Also recognizes that racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
6.
related intolerance occur on the grounds of race, colour, descent or national or
ethnic origin and that victims can suffer multiple or aggravated forms of
discrimination based on other related grounds, such as sex, language, religion,
political or other opinion, social origin, property, birth or other status;
Reaffirms that any advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that
7.
constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence shall be prohibited by
law;
Emphasizes that it is the responsibility of States to adopt effective
8.
measures to combat criminal acts motivated by racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance, including measures to ensure that such
motivations are considered an aggravating factor for the purposes of sentencing, to
prevent those crimes from going unpunished and to ensure the rule of law;
Urges all States to review and, where necessary, revise their immigration
9.
laws, policies and practices so that they are free of racial discrimination and
compatible with their obligations under international human rights instruments;
10. Calls upon all States, in accordance with the commitments undertaken in
paragraph 147 of the Durban Programme of Action,1 to take all necessary measures
to combat incitement to violence motivated by racial hatred, including through the
misuse of print, audio-visual and electronic media and new communication
technologies, and, in collaboration with service providers, to promote the use of
such technologies, including the Internet, to contribute to the fight against racism, in
conformity with international standards of freedom of expression and taking all
necessary measures to guarantee that right;
11. Encourages all States to include in their educational curricula and social
programmes at all levels, as appropriate, knowledge of and tolerance and respect for
all cultures, civilizations, religions, peoples and countries, as well as information on
the follow-up to and implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action;

3

A/RES/63/242

12. Stresses the responsibility of States to mainstream a gender perspective
in the design and development of prevention, education and protection measures
aimed at the eradication of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance at all levels, to ensure that they effectively target the distinct situations
of women and men;
II
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination
13. Reaffirms that universal adherence to and full implementation of the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination 6
are of paramount importance for the fight against racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance, including contemporary forms of racism and
racial discrimination, and for the promotion of equality and non-discrimination in
the world;
5F

14. Expresses grave concern at the fact that universal ratification of the
Convention was not attained by 2005 in accordance with commitments under the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action,1 and calls upon those States that
have not yet done so to accede to the Convention as a matter of urgency;
15. Urges, in the above context, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to maintain on its website and issue regular
updates on a list of countries that have not yet ratified the Convention and to
encourage such countries to ratify it at the earliest;
16. Expresses its concern at the serious delays in the submission of overdue
reports to the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, which
impedes the effectiveness of the Committee, makes a strong appeal to all States
parties to the Convention to comply with their treaty obligations, and reaffirms the
importance of the provision of technical assistance to the requesting countries in the
preparation of their reports to the Committee;
17. Invites States parties to the Convention to ratify the amendment to
article 8 of the Convention on the financing of the Committee, and calls for
adequate additional resources from the regular budget of the United Nations to
enable the Committee to discharge its mandate fully;
18. Urges all States parties to the Convention to intensify their efforts to
implement the obligations that they have accepted under article 4 of the Convention,
with due regard to the principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 7 and
article 5 of the Convention;
6F

19. Recalls that the Committee holds that the prohibition of the
dissemination of ideas based on racial superiority or racial hatred is compatible with
the right to freedom of opinion and expression as outlined in article 19 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and in article 5 of the Convention;
20. Welcomes the emphasis placed by the Committee on the importance of
follow-up to the World Conference and the measures recommended to strengthen
the implementation of the Convention as well as the functioning of the Committee;
_______________
6
7

4

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 660, No. 9464.
Resolution 217 A (III).

A/RES/63/242

III
Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action
21. Expresses its appreciation for the commitment of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights to contribute to the successful outcome of
the Durban Review Conference, including her appeal to all Member States and other
stakeholders to participate in the Durban Review Conference;
22. Acknowledges that the outcome of the World Conference against Racism,
Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance is on an equal footing
with the outcomes of all the major United Nations conferences, summits and special
sessions in the human rights and social fields;
23. Also acknowledges that the World Conference, which was the third world
conference against racism, was significantly different from the previous two
conferences, as evidenced by the inclusion in its title of two important components
relating to contemporary forms of racism, namely, xenophobia and related
intolerance;
24. Emphasizes that the basic responsibility for effectively combating
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance lies with States,
and to this end stresses that States have the primary responsibility to ensure full and
effective implementation of all commitments and recommendations contained in the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action;1
25. Reaffirms its commitment to eliminating all forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and other forms of related intolerance against
indigenous peoples, and in this regard notes the attention paid to the objectives of
combating prejudice and eliminating discrimination and promoting tolerance,
understanding and good relations among indigenous peoples and all other segments
of society in the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples; 8
7F

26. Emphasizes the fundamental and complementary role of national human
rights institutions, regional bodies or centres and civil society, working jointly with
States towards the achievement of the objectives of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action;
27. Welcomes the steps taken by numerous Governments, in particular the
elaboration and implementation of national action plans to combat racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, and steps taken by national
human rights institutions and non-governmental organizations, towards the full
implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, and affirms
this trend as a demonstration of commitment to the elimination of all scourges of
racism at the national level;
28. Calls upon all States that have not yet elaborated their national action
plans on combating racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance to comply with their commitments undertaken at the World Conference;
29. Calls upon all States to formulate and implement without delay, at the
national, regional and international levels, policies and plans of action to combat
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, including their
gender-based manifestations;
_______________
8

Resolution 61/295, annex.

5

A/RES/63/242

30. Welcomes the adoption of the laudable initiative led by the States
members of the Caribbean Community and other Member States for the
establishment of a permanent memorial at the United Nations to the victims of
slavery and the transatlantic slave trade as a contribution towards the fulfilment of
paragraph 101 of the Durban Declaration, expresses its appreciation for
contributions made to the voluntary fund established in this regard, and urges other
countries to contribute to the fund;
31. Urges States to support the activities of existing regional bodies or
centres that combat racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance in their respective regions, and recommends the establishment of such
bodies in all regions where they do not exist;
32. Recognizes the fundamental role of civil society in the fight against
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, in particular in
assisting States to develop regulations and strategies, in taking measures and action
against such forms of discrimination and through follow-up implementation;
33. Reaffirms that the General Assembly is the highest intergovernmental
mechanism for the formulation and appraisal of policy on matters relating to the
economic, social and related fields, in accordance with Assembly resolution 50/227
of 24 May 1996, and that, together with the Human Rights Council, it shall
constitute an intergovernmental process for the comprehensive implementation of
and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, and further
reaffirms that the Council shall continue to have a central role in the follow-up to
the implementation of the Declaration and Programme of Action within the United
Nations system;
34. Expresses its appreciation for the continuing work of the mechanisms
mandated to follow up the World Conference, bearing in mind the assessment of the
effectiveness of those mechanisms to be undertaken at the Durban Review
Conference;
35. Acknowledges Human Rights Council resolution 9/14 of 24 September
2008, 9 by which the Council decided to extend for three years the mandate of the
Working Group of Experts on People of African Descent;
8F

36. Takes note of the convening of the first part of the first session of the
Ad Hoc Committee on the Elaboration of Complementary Standards from 11 to
21 February 2008, and requests the Ad Hoc Committee to comply with the mandate
contained in Human Rights Council decision 3/103;5
37. Acknowledges the centrality of resource mobilization, effective global
partnership and international cooperation in the context of paragraphs 157 and 158
of the Durban Programme of Action for the successful realization of commitments
undertaken at the World Conference, and to this end emphasizes the importance of
the mandate of the group of independent eminent experts on the implementation of
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, especially in mobilizing the
necessary political will for the successful implementation of the Declaration and
Programme of Action;

_______________
9
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/63/53/Add.1),
chap. I.

6

A/RES/63/242

38. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the necessary resources for the
effective fulfilment of the mandates of the Intergovernmental Working Group on the
Effective Implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, the
Working Group of Experts on People of African Descent, the group of independent
eminent experts on the implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action and the Ad Hoc Committee on the Elaboration of Complementary Standards;
39. Expresses its concern at the increasing incidence of racism in various
sporting events, while noting with appreciation the efforts made by some governing
bodies of the various sporting codes to combat racism, and in this regard invites all
international sporting bodies to promote, through their national, regional and
international federations, a world of sport free from racism and racial discrimination;
40. Welcomes, in this context, the initiative of the Fédération internationale
de football association to introduce a visible theme on non-racism in football, and
invites the Fédération to continue with this initiative at the 2010 soccer World Cup
tournament to be held in South Africa;
41. Calls upon those States that have not yet done so to consider signing and
ratifying or acceding to the instruments enumerated in paragraph 78 of the Durban
Programme of Action, including the International Convention on the Protection of
the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families of 1990; 10
9F

IV
Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance and follow-up to his visits
42. Expresses its appreciation for the work done by the former Special
Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance, and welcomes Human Rights Council resolution 7/34 of
28 March 2008, 11 by which the Council decided to extend the mandate of the
Special Rapporteur for a period of three years;
10F

43. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Special Rapporteur, 12
and encourages Member States and other relevant stakeholders to consider
implementing the recommendations contained in his report;
1F

44. Reiterates its call to all Member States, intergovernmental organizations,
relevant organizations of the United Nations system and non-governmental
organizations to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur, and calls upon States
to consider responding favourably to his requests for visits so as to enable him to
fulfil his mandate fully and effectively;
45. Recognizes with deep concern the increase in anti-Semitism,
Christianophobia and Islamophobia in various parts of the world, as well as the
emergence of racial and violent movements based on racism and discriminatory
ideas directed against Arab, Christian, Jewish and Muslim communities, as well as
all religious communities, communities of people of African descent, communities
of people of Asian descent, communities of indigenous people and other
communities;

_______________
10

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2220, No. 39481.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53),
chap. II.
12
See A/63/339.
11

7

A/RES/63/242

46. Encourages closer collaboration between the Special Rapporteur and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in particular
the Anti-Discrimination Unit;
47. Urges the High Commissioner to provide States, at their request, with
advisory services and technical assistance to enable them to implement fully the
recommendations of the Special Rapporteur;
48. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Special Rapporteur with
all the human and financial assistance necessary to carry out his mandate efficiently,
effectively and expeditiously and to enable him to submit a report to the General
Assembly at its sixty-fourth session;
49. Requests the Special Rapporteur to continue giving particular attention to
the negative impact of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance on the full enjoyment of civil, cultural, economic, political and social
rights by national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, immigrant
populations, asylum-seekers and refugees;
50. Invites Member States to demonstrate greater commitment to fighting
racism in sport by conducting educational and awareness-raising activities and by
strongly condemning the perpetrators of racist incidents, in cooperation with
national and international sports organizations;
V
Convening of the Durban Review Conference
51. Welcomes the reports of the Preparatory Committee for the Durban
Review Conference on its organizational session2 and its first3 and second4
substantive sessions, and endorses the decisions contained therein;
52. Calls upon all Member States to participate in the Durban Review
Conference;
53. Expresses its appreciation for the convening of the regional preparatory
meeting for the Durban Review Conference for Latin America and the Caribbean in
Brasilia from 17 to 19 June 2008 and the regional preparatory meeting for Africa in
Abuja from 24 to 26 August 2008;
54. Takes note of the contributions by Member States, regional groups and
all other relevant stakeholders consistent with the objectives of the Durban Review
Conference, in accordance with decision PC.1/10 of the Preparatory Committee; 2
55. Reaffirms that the Durban Review Conference will be undertaken on the
basis of and with full respect for the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action1
and that there will be no renegotiation of the existing agreements therein, and that
the issues raised will be in conformity with the contents of the Declaration and
Programme of Action;
56. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights to undertake initiatives to encourage contributions to the
voluntary fund established pursuant to decision PC.1/12 of the Preparatory
Committee,2 including the decision to appeal for contributions from extrabudgetary
resources to cover the costs of participation of representatives of the least developed
countries in the Durban Review Conference;

8

A/RES/63/242

VI
General
57. Recommends that the meetings of the Human Rights Council focusing on
the follow-up to the World Conference and the implementation of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action1 be scheduled in a manner that allows broad
participation and that avoids overlap with the meetings devoted to the consideration
of this item in the General Assembly;
58. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report with recommendations
on the implementation of the present resolution to the General Assembly at its
sixty-fourth session;
59. Decides to remain seized of this important matter at its sixty-fourth
session under the item entitled “Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance”.
74th plenary meeting
24 December 2008

9
