Decisions

Resolution 839 (1993)
of 11 June 1993

In a letter dated 7 July 1993! 0 the President of the Security Council
informed the Secretary-General as follows:

The Security Council,

"I have the honour to inform you that your report of I July 1993
on your mission of good offices in Cyprus 11 has been considered by
the members of the Council.

Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus of9 and 10 June 1993,9
Noti11g the recommendation by the Secretary-General that the
Security Council extend the stationing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus for a further period of six months,

"The members of the Council have asked me to convey to you
their full support for your current efforts. They have noted with
appreciation the work undertaken during the extensive preparatory
phase in Nicosia and the joint meetings in New York on the package
of confidence-building measures related in particular to Varosha and
Nicosia International Airport. They agree with your assessment that
the implementation of this package would not only significantly
benefit both communities, but would also have a dramatic impact on
overcoming the existing mistrust and in facilitating an overall
settlement of the Cyprus problem. They fully share your disappointment that Mr. Den~ has not yet adhered to the agreement of 1
June 1993, in which he undertook to promote the acceptance of the
package on Varosha and Nicosia International Airport, and that he
failed to return to New York, which prevented the resumption of the
joint meetings on 14 June. The members of the Council are
convinced that once this package is fully presented its significant
benefits will be recognized.

Noting also that the Government of Cyprus has agreed that, in view
of the prevailing conditions in the island, it is necessary to keep the
Force in Cyprus beyond 15 June 1993,
Recalling its resolution 831 (1993) of27 May 1993, in particular its
paragraphs 2 to 4 on financing, as well as its paragraphs 5 and 7 on the
restructuring of the Force and the comprehensive reassessment which
is to be conducted in December 1993,
Reiterating in particular its call to both sides to cooperate with the
Force in order to extend the unmanning agreement of l 98~ to all areas
of the United Nations-controlled buffer zone where the two sides are in
close proximity to each other,
Reaffirming the provisions of its resolution 186 ( 1964) of 4 March
1964 and other relevant resolutions,

"The members of the Council wish to underline the obligation of
both parties to cooperate with you fully and without further delay in
reaching promptly an overall framework agreement on the Cyprus
problem and, in the first instance, to arrive at an agreement on the
proposals related to Varosha and Nicosia International Airport which
will create a climate more conducive to engaging in negotiations on
the basis of the set of ideas.

1. Extmdsot1ce more the stationing in Cyprus of the United Nations
Peace-keepinf Force established under resolution 186 (1964) for a
further period ending on 15 December 1993;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his mission of good
offices, to keep the Security Council informed of the progress made and
to submit a report on the implementation of the present resolution by 15
November 1993 as part of the report called for in its resolution 831
(1993);

"The members of the Council welcome your decision to send your
Special Representati ,e to Cyprus, Greece and Turkey in the next few
weeks. The members of the Council would like you to submit a full
report to the Council in September 1993 on the outcome of your
efforts to make progress in your mission of good offices, in particular
in achieving an agreement on the proposals related to Varosha and
Nicosia International Airport and, if necessary, your recommendations for action by the Council."

3. Supportsthe recommendation of the Secretary-General expressed
in paragraph 48 of his report9 that both sides take reciprocal measures
to lower the tension, including mutual commitments, through the
Force, to prohibit along the cease-fire lines live ammunition or weapons
other than those which are hand-held and to prohibit also firing of
weapons within sight or hearing of the buffer zone, and requests the
Secretary-General to negotiate the necessary agreements between the
parties to implement those measures;

In a letter dated 20 July 1993,1 2 addressed to the President of the
Security Council for the information of the members of the Council, the
Secretary-General referred to Security Council resolution 831 ( 1993)
of 27 May 1993, in which the Council decided to deploy a limited
number of military observers as part of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus. The Secretary-General stated that having
completed consultations with potential contributors, he proposed that
the group of 12 military observers, to be deployed in the first week of
August 1993, be composed of elements from the following States:
Austria, Hungary and Ireland.

4. Calls upon all the parties concerned to continue to cooperate with
the Force on the basis of the present mandate;
5. Calls on both parties to carry forward expeditiously and in a
constructive manner the intercommunal talks under the auspices of the
Secretary-General, and requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council on progress in the current round of talks.

Adopted unanimously at the 3235th meeting.

10

S/26050

11
Official Records of the Sec11rity Council, Forty-eighth
Year, Supplement for July, Aug11st and September 1993, document
S/26026.

12

Ibid., documents S/25912 and Add. I.
)06

S/26178
